European Union 
10 February 2022 
www.niras.com 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
EU Justice and Legal Empowerment Programme 
in Vietnam (EU JULE) Mid-term evaluation  
 
Final Report 
  
 
 
SIEA-2018-5354 
  
 
 
THE EUROPEAN UNION DELEGATION TO  
VIETNAM 
  
 
 
10 FEBRUARY 2022 
  
 
 
  
Funded by 
the European Union 

 
European Union 
10 February 2022 
www.niras.com 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The Final Report was drafted by the Evaluation Team composed of the following international and 
national experts: 
 
 Ms Bunafsha Gulakova, LLM, Team Leader, Senior Expert, Justice and Rule of Law. 
                         Ms Nguyen Thi Minh Hai, LLM, Legal and Judicial Reform Specialist. 
 Dr Giao Vu Cong, Good Governance, Human Rights and Civil Society Specialist. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This publication was produced with the financial support of the 
European Union. Its contents are the sole responsibility of NIRAS A/S 
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the European Union. 
 

 
European Union 
10 February 2022 
www.niras.com 
 
 
ABBREVIATIONS 
 
Abbreviations 
ACDC 
Action to the Community Development Center 
AEPD 
Association for Empowerment of Persons with Disabilities 
CCLPHH 
Center for Consulting on Legal and Policy on Health and HIV/AIDS 
CED 
Center for Research and Education of the Deaf and Hard of Hearing 
CELA 
Center for Legal Advice 
CIRD 
Centre for Indigenous Knowledge Research and Development 
CSOs 
Civil Society Organizations 
CSWD 
Center for Social Work Skills and Knowledge Development 
 
DRD 
Disability Research and Capacity Development Center 
EQs 
Evaluation Questions  
ET 
Evaluation Team 
EU JULE 
European Union Justice and Legal Empowerment Programme in Vietnam 
FGD 
Focus Group Discussion  
F&JC 
Family and Juvenile Courts 
HCMC 
Ho Chi Minh City 
HCMCACR 
Ho Chi Minh City Association for Protection of Child Rights 
ICCPR 
International Covenant of Civil and Political Rights  
IDEA 
Center of Research and Inclusive Development Action 
IPs 
Implementing Partners 
JIFF 
Justice Initiative Facilitation Fund  
LAC 
Legal Advice for Poor People and Community Development 
LACEW 
Legal Consulting and Legal Aid for Women and Children 
LF 
Logical Framework  
M&E 
Monitoring and Evaluation 
MOJ 
Ministry of Justice 
MPS 
Ministry of Public Security 
MSD 
Management and Sustainable Development Institute 
MTE 
Mid-Term Evaluation 
NHRI 
National Human Rights Institute 
OO 
Overall Objective 
PMU 
Project Management Unit  
PSC 
Programme Steering Committee  
PwD 
Persons with Disabilities 
QBWDF 
Quang Binh Women's Development Fund 
RDPR 
Rural Development and Poverty Reduction Fund 
RIC 
Research Center for Initiatives in Community Development 

 
European Union 
10 February 2022 
www.niras.com 
 
 
Abbreviations 
SC 
Steering Committee 
SEDS 
Social and Economic Development Strategy  
SDTC 
Social Development Training Center 
SDGs 
Sustainable Development Goals 
SHRC 
Social Sciences and Humanities Research Center 
SPC 
Supreme People’s Court  
SPP 
Supreme People’s Procuracy 
UN 
United Nations 
UPR 
Universal Periodic Review mechanism 
UNDP 
United Nations Development programme 
UNICEF 
United Nations United Nations Children's Fund 
VACR 
Vietnam Association for Protection of Child's Rights 
VAE 
Vietnam Association of the Elderly 
VAVETSOW 
Vietnam Association for Vocational Education Training and Social Work Profession 
VBA 
Vietnam Blind Association 
VBF 
Vietnam Bar Federation 
VLA 
Vietnam Lawyers Association 
VFD 
Vietnam Federation for Persons with Disabilities 

 
1 
 
Table of Contents 
Executive Summary 
3 
1 
Context and background 
12 
2 
Introduction of the Mid-Term Evaluation of EUJULE 
15 
2.1 
Objectives and results of the evaluation. 
15 
2.2 
The scope of MTE 
16 
2.3 
Project Background 
16 
3 
Evaluation methodology and framework 
18 
3.1 
Approaches 
18 
3.2 
Ethical standards 
19 
3.3 
Evaluation’s data collection tools 
19 
3.3.1 
Desk review 
20 
3.3.2 
On-site assessment through meetings and interviews with key informants 
20 
3.3.3 
Focus Group Discussion (FGD) 
20 
3.3.4 
Key informant interview (KII) 
20 
3.3.5 
Direct observation 
21 
3.3.6 
Evaluation Questions 
21 
3.4 
Evaluation Matrix 
22 
4 
Phases of the evaluation 
22 
4.1 
Inception Phase - October 2021 
22 
4.2 
Field Phase - 29 November to 18 December 2021 
23 
4.3 
Synthesis Phase – 18 December 2021 to 10 February 2022 
25 
4.4 
Dissemination Phase – February 2022 
25 
5 
Intervention Logic 
25 
6 
Key findings/answers 
27 
6.1 
Relevance 
27 
6.2 
Efficiency 
31 
6.3 
Coherence 
35 
6.4 
Effectiveness 
37 
6.5 
Impact 
45 
6.6 
Sustainability 
47 
6.7 
EU-added value 
48 
6.8 
Cross-cutting Issues 
48 
6.9 
Visibility 
50 
6.10 
Lessons Learned 
51 
7 
Conclusions 
56 

 
2 
 
Conclusion 1. 
56 
Conclusion 2. 
56 
Conclusion 3. 
56 
Conclusion 4. 
57 
Conclusion 5. 
57 
8 
Recommendations 
58 
9 
Annexes 
62 
9.1 
The Terms of Reference 
62 
9.2 
Best practices 
106 
9.3 
The names of the evaluations and their presentations 
118 
9.4 
Evaluation Matrix 
119 
9.5 
Logical framework matrices 
126 
9.6 
Relevant geographic map where the intervention took place 
1 
9.7 
List of interviewed stakeholders during the Field Phase 
1 
9.8 
List of documentation and literature consulted 
13 
 

 
3 
 
Table of Figures 
 
Figure 1 Map of the physical and online meetings visits in Vietnam ...................................... 24 
Figure 2 The reconstructed ToC of the EUJULE .................................................................... 26 
Figure 3 Presentation of the Result Chain ............................................................................... 34 
Figure 4 timeline of important milestones and factors that caused significant delays ............ 40 
 
 
 

 
4 
 
 
Executive Summary  
 
EU JULE is the project supported by the EU for the Government of Vietnam to enhance the 
justice services for the people. The relevant agencies of Vietnam and the EU had been 
negotiating for the project since 2013, and the Agreement of the project was signed on 
02/12/2015. The Project document was discussed and started being implemented after approval 
in 08/2017. The Appendix to the Project Agreement was signed in May 2020 to extend the 
project's implementation period to December 2022. Thus, the EU Justice and Legal 
Empowerment (EU JULE) Programme (2017-2022) was formulated, and at present, has been 
implemented by the MOJ as the project owner responsible before the Government. UNDP, 
UNICEF, and Oxfam are in charge of the project implementation. The total amount of EU 
budget contribution is: EUR 14,000,000, the UN contribution: EUR 700,000 and the 
Government of Vietnam indicative contribution is EUR 1,400,000 (cash and in-kind). 
The evaluation is focused on assessing achievements, the quality, and the results of EU Justice 
and Legal Empowerment Programme in Vietnam (EU JULE) interventions in the context of an 
evolving cooperation policy with an increasing emphasis on result-oriented approaches and the 
contribution towards the implementation of the SDGs. 
The main users of this evaluation will be the EU Delegation to Vietnam, the Ministry of Justice, 
the Ministry of Public Security, the Supreme People’s Court, the Supreme People’s Procuracy, 
UNDP, UNICEF, Oxfam, Justice Initiative Facilitation Fund (JIFF) grantees as well as 
stakeholders. 
 
The scope of the evaluation is limited to the EU JULE PROGRAMME that includes two 
contracts subject to this Mid-Term Evaluation, namely: 
ACA/2015/372-239-Agreement with UNDP- PAGoDA- (including working with UNICEF) to 
support government institutions. 
ACA/2017/382-51- Justice Initiatives Facilitation Fund: Establish a basket fund for civil 
society organisations managed by OXFAM Novib.  
The evaluation is based on the six standard DAC evaluation criteria: relevance, coherence, 
effectiveness, efficiency, sustainability, and impact. In addition, the evaluation will assess one 
EU specific evaluation criterion: the EU added value (the extent to which the Intervention 
brings additional benefits to what would have resulted from Member States' interventions 
only). 
The evaluation team shall furthermore consider whether gender, environment, digitalisation 
and climate change were mainstreamed; the relevant SDGs and their interlinkages were 
identified; the principle of Leave No-One Behind and the rights-based approach methodology 
was followed in the identification/formulation documents and the extent to which they have 
been reflected in the implementation of the Intervention, its governance and monitoring. 
The geographical scope of the evaluation is stakeholders in Hanoi, Ho Chi Minh City, the 
beneficiaries in the four provinces of the programme that were included in the design based on 
poverty rate, socio-economic conditions, the prevalence of ethnic minorities, remote 
mountainous areas: Dong Thap, Nghe An, Hoa Binh, Quang Binh. 

 
5 
 
This Evaluation is qualitative because of the participative approach but quantitative data 
was collected when it was available. The capitalisation of existing knowledge and information 
is based on primary data collection methods, including structured and semi-structured 
interviews, online surveys, case studies, field observations and focus group interviews on 
investigating thematic questions in-depth.  
 
Secondary data was collected from documents, reports and studies. The Evaluation Team 
created a designated folder on Google Drive. The Implementing Partners (IP) and the 
evaluators had access to all necessary documents and the possibility to upload and download. 
The information collected from the different sources has been aggregated and analysed. The 
on-site meetings and interviews, and desk review of the documents are modalities by which 
most information data was collected. A detailed description of the used tools is provided 
hereunder. 
 
A summary of key lessons and findings from the responses to 23 evaluation questions and the 
OECD DAC is presented in this part of the evaluation report. Furthermore, every conclusion 
provided in the present section has been cross-referenced to the relevant findings and lessons.  
Conclusion 1.  
The EUJULE’s goals and implementation are aligned with the beneficiary and stakeholder 
needs. Moreover, beneficiaries' priorities shaped the planning and implementation of the 
Programmes in PAGoDA and JIFF. As a result, action has contributed to meeting the needs of 
the disadvantaged and marginalized in six provinces of Vietnam with regard to access to 
justice. The design of the EUJULE is supported with adequately defined, realistic and feasible 
objectives. However, the design could benefit from strengthening the Result Framework and 
introducing indicators that could measure the outcome of each Result Area (4) from the 
perspective of the impact of their functioning. Therefore, given EUJULE’s highly distinctive 
and local character, such indicators are best designed through a country-led consultative 
process, including stakeholders of state and non-state justice systems. 
Conclusion 2. 
The PAGoDA component has activated a significant and critical mass of legal professionals in 
this ongoing implementation. As a result of a collaboration between the UN agencies and the 
MoJ, the EU JULE Programme produced strategic documents and tools which will serve to 
inform the development of targeted public awareness of legal right interventions, enhance the 
capacity of legal and judicial officials and strengthen law implementation, increased the 
transparency of law-making and law-implementing institutions, as well as strengthened a 
justice sector that is more accessible and inclusive to all in Vietnam, leaving no one behind. 
Thus, the current environment is conducive to developing interventions in support of the State’s 
international human rights obligation and endorsed recommendations from the Universal 
Periodic Review and UN Treaty Bodies mechanisms. 
Conclusion 3.  
PAGODA contributed to improvement of legal aid system, the provision of child-friendly 
judicial proceeding and gender-sensitive grassroot mediation, and the availability of 
specialized justice institution. The EUJULE was pivotal in supporting the juvenile justice 
system and other child-friendly initiatives. Thanks to the joint contribution of the Supreme 

 
6 
 
Court and PAGoDA, the geographical map of the courts is expanding. In parallel, the higher 
legal education system that engaged with PAGoDA successfully institutionalised a course on 
juvenile justice; thus, these new branches of the justice system will be staffed with a generation 
of specialized child-friendly justice system lawyers. However, to fully finalise the circle of 
necessary elements of the juvenile justice reforms, the development of the probation system 
and adequate social and psychological services is necessary. Thus, the reforms should include 
these important elements. We also conclude that the perception of the impact could be more 
balanced across the main stakeholders to ensure a mutual understanding of the EUJULE's goal 
and how this success and change should be measured towards the end of the Programme.  
Conclusion 4.  
The JIFF component performed efficiently and effectively despite the short period of the grants 
and the systemic challenges that the implementation team and its grantees faced through the 
delays, pandemic-related restrictions, and natural disasters affecting the final beneficiaries of 
the grants.  
JIFF and its grantees ensured that 58,924 people had benefited directly from the Action in this 
challenging environment. The scope of legal rights protection was broad, including economic 
and social rights. The supported grantees advanced the adherence of and awareness of national 
and international laws concerning children, people with disabilities, gender equality, marriage 
and family, domestic violence prevention, elderly, child protection, and other related legal 
documents and international conventions to which Vietnam is a signatory. JIFF’s third call for 
proposals distributed grants to address environmental rights, and by this intervention, lack of 
activities on the necessary cross-cutting issues of the environment was balanced. We 
concluded, however, that an 18 months extension of the JIFF component is necessary to finalise 
the planned firth call for proposals and to balance further the necessary cross-cutting issues of 
gender and environment in the ongoing implementation.  
Conclusion 5. 
The EUJULE as EU-funded Action would have benefited from more relevant best practices in 
legal aid, legal compensation, legal awareness, and juvenile justice system from the EUMS 
(Croatia, Slovenia, Poland, etc.) or countries with similar geopolitical, multi-ethnic 
representation and legal system with adequate anti-corruption and justice index record 
(Georgia, Lithuania,). The PAGoDA component could have also engaged experts from the 
European Commission for the Effectiveness of Justice (CEPEJ) of the Council of Europe 
(CoE)1, specifically relevant to Result Area 4. The PAGoDA component may need a no-cost 
extension to complete all planned activities and develop its exit strategy. In addition, to sustain 
the wealth of the knowledge and research developed and leverage the coherence among the 
development partners and beneficiaries, there is a need to systematically document the 
developed training tools and research publications. Such digitalised library could be developed 
with the help of the Human Rights Institute that could serve as a custodian and sustain the use 
of these resources. The institute is the Party‘s academic institution for research and teaching in 
the field of the state system, the political theory of human and fundamental rights and other 
related issues. Among its essential tasks are consulting the academy’s president, conducting 
 
1 https://www.coe.int/en/web/cepej 

 
7 
 
teaching events and courses on protecting human rights for party-members and government 
staff of all levels, preparing surveys for the government, cooperating with international and 
regional academic research institutions for human rights issues and scientific research projects 
on the protection of human and fundamental rights, as well as publishing and distributing 
materials and reference books on the protection of human and fundamental rights. In 2014 the 
master’s course “Human Rights Law” was established. In 2021 the Institute launched the first 
PhD program on Human rights law and an academic journal titled “Vietnam Journal of Human 
rights Law.”  
Conclusion 6. 
We concluded that the work with the larger scope of CSOs should be continued under different 
EU funding instruments for advancing human rights and democracy, including addressing the 
impact of global challenges, such as climate change and environmental degradation, digital and 
new technologies, or the COVID-19 pandemic. The approach, however, should secure result-
oriented implementation of the planned interventions that includes grant scheme for the CSOs.  
Conclusion 7 
The request from the PAGoDA beneficiaries to support automation/digitalization of the court 
system, specifically the case management system, is justified. It is also in line with the EU 
priorities that promotes the digital sector to promote human development reconciling economic 
prosperity and efficiency, peaceful societies, social inclusion, and environmental 
responsibility2. Furthermore, if implemented promptly, the automated system can promote the 
transparency of the justice system and ensure expeditious justice for all. Thus, the EU should 
consider this avenue of collaboration with the State on automation of legal services across the 
system of justice. 
  
Recommendations 
 
Table 1 Recommendations table with targets, references and order of priorities 
Reference 
Recommendations 
Target 
Order 
of 
priority 
Recommendations pertaining to the ongoing implementation of EUJULE 
Conclusion 1 
Ch. 
Relevance  
Strengthen the result framework by including relevant 
indicators to ensure more result-oriented implementation, 
and monitor outcome results. 
 
PAGoDA 
HIGH 
Conclusion 3 
Ch. Impact 
Ensure that the perception of the impact is balanced across 
the main stakeholders, ensuring that there is a mutual 
understanding of what the goal of the EUJULE is and how 
this success and change should be measured towards the 
end of the Programme. 
PAGoDA 
HIGH 
 
2 Reference to ICT can be found explicitly as a target under SDG 9 "Build resilient infrastructure, promote inclusive and sustainable 
industrialization and foster innovation", while ICT is also referenced in the targets related to climate change (SDGs 13, 14 and 15), gender 
equality and women empowerment (SDG 5), private sector development (SDG 8), education (SDG 4) and health (SDG 3). 
 

 
8 
 
Reference 
Recommendations 
Target 
Order 
of 
priority 
Conclusion 4 
Ch. 
Efficiency  
Consider 18 months extension of the JIFF component to 
finalise the planned fourth call for proposals and further 
balance the necessary cross-cutting issues of gender and 
environment in the ongoing implementation. 
Consider the extension for the PAGoDA component to 
ensure complementary between the two components of the 
programme.  
EUDEL 
JIFF 
HIGH 
Conclusion 5 
Ch. 
Efficiency 
Ch. 
EU-
added Value 
Consider introducing relevant best EUMS or EU and CoE 
best practices to leverage the EU-added value.  
PAGoDA 
HIGH 
Conclusion 5 
Ch. 
Efficiency 
Discuss with the Human Rights Institute the possibilities of 
creating a digital Human Rights Library to sustain the 
wealth of the knowledge and research developed within the 
EUJULE. The Human Rights Institute could serve as a 
custodian and sustain the efficient, effective, and sustained 
use of these resources. Once established, the development 
partners could consult the digital library and update the 
necessary tools instead of duplicating the efforts.  
PAGoDA 
JIFF 
Human 
Rights  
Institute 
HIGH 
Recommendation pertaining to the follow-up phase (EQ 23) 
Programmin
g 
of 
any 
future 
EU-
funded 
intervention 
(EQ 23) 
A) Identification and Formulation Mission for the next 
phase comprised of a team of experienced legal experts 
specializing in justice reforms, Human rights (international 
normative HRs frameworks), gender equality/gender and 
justice, administration of the justice processes, ICT in the 
modernization of justice institutions, probation system (if 
this topic is considered).  
 
B) Ensure that representatives of the concerned ministries 
and justice institutions, ad local legal experts are involved 
in the design and consultation to reach a broader consensus 
on the outcomes that all parties should deliver jointly. 
 
C) Ensure that the following objectives are included in the 
ToR for the team as mentioned above: 
• 
To assess the level of political will of the 
beneficiaries in accordance with the international 
standards of human rights, access to justice, gender 
equality – the relevant UPR and UN TB 
EUDEL 
HIGH