Programme Geographic Coverage 
 Programme Logic Model 
 1 

 Final EvaluaƟon Team 
 Title/PosiƟon in the Team 
 Name 
 Team Leader 
 Yodi ChrisƟani 
 Team Member 
 Leya CaƩleya 
 Disclaimer:  This  is  a  product  of  the  independent  review  by  the  above  team  and  the  content,  analysis  and  recommendaƟons  of  this  report  do  not 
 necessarily  reﬂect  the  views  of  the  United  NaƟons  PopulaƟon  Fund  (UNFPA),  United  NaƟons  Children’s  Fund  (UNICEF)  and  their  ExecuƟve  CommiƩees 
 or Member States. The report is not professionally edited. 
 2 

 Table of Contents 
 AbbreviaƟons and Acronyms 
 6 
 ExecuƟve Summary 
 10 
 Key Facts Table (Indonesia and the current indicators related to SRHR) 
 14 
 Structure of report 
 16 
 Chapter 1: IntroducƟon 
 17 
 1.1 Purpose and ObjecƟve of the EvaluaƟon 
 17 
 1.2 Scope of EvaluaƟon 
 17 
 1.3 EvaluaƟon Criteria 
 17 
 1.4 Methodology and Process 
 18 
 1.4.1 Desk Review 
 19 
 1.4.2 Primary Data CollecƟon 
 20 
 1.4.3 Analysis and TriangulaƟon 
 20 
 1.4.4 LimitaƟons 
 21 
 Chapter 2: Country and programme Context 
 22 
 Humanitarian context 
 23 
 2.1 Development Challenges and NaƟonal Strategies 
 23 
 Sexual and ReproducƟve Health (SRH) 
 23 
 Adolescent Sexual and ReproducƟve Health (ASRH) 
 25 
 Gender-based Violence (GBV) 
 27 
 Child Marriage 
 29 
 Female Genital MuƟlaƟon/Cuƫng (FGM/C) 
 31 
 Chapter 3: Strategic Response and programme 
 33 
 3.1 BERANI Strategic Response 
 33 
 3.2 BERANI Response 
 34 
 BERANI programme of Support to the Government of Indonesia 
 34 
 BERANI IntervenƟon Geographical Coverage and the programme Structure 
 38 
 BERANI Financial Structure 
 39 
 CHAPTER 4: Findings 
 41 
 4.1 Sexual and ReproducƟve Health 
 41 
 Knowledge generaƟon and Evidence based advocacy: Research, SituaƟon Analysis and Policy Brief 
 (Outcome 1110, Output 1113) 
 42 
 Midwifery AssociaƟon (IBI) Capacity Strengthening (Outcome 1110, Output 1112) 
 44 
 Midwifery EducaƟon Quality Improvement (Outcome 1110, Output 1111) 
 45 
 NaƟonal Midwifery EducaƟon Standard 
 45 
 Center of Excellence (CoE) 
 46 
 Family Planning (FP) 2020 (Outcome 1110, Output 1114) 
 46 
 Pathways to Outcomes 
 48 
 3 

 Sexual and ReproducƟve Health 
 48 
 Family Planning 
 49 
 SRH programme EvaluaƟon against the EvaluaƟon Criteria 
 50 
 4.2 Adolescent Sexual and ReproducƟve Health (ASRH) 
 54 
 UNALA: Youth-friendly SRH InformaƟon and Service Model (Outcome 1130, Output 1131) 
 55 
 Technical assistance on the Comprehensive Sexuality EducaƟon (CSE) (Output 1221) 
 57 
 Pathway to Outcomes 
 58 
 ASRH programme EvaluaƟon against the EvaluaƟon Criteria 
 59 
 Relevance (EQ1) 
 59 
 EﬀecƟveness (EQ2-4) 
 60 
 Eﬃciency (EQ5) 
 61 
 Coherence (EQ6-7) 
 61 
 Sustainability (EQ8) 
 62 
 Coverage and Connectedness (EQ9) 
 63 
 4.3 Gender Equality and Women’s Empowerment (GEWE) 
 63 
 PrevenƟon of GBV (Outcome 1120, Output 1121, Output 1122) 
 63 
 Pathway to Outcome 
 67 
 PrevenƟon of GBV Against EvaluaƟon Criteria 
 71 
 PrevenƟon of Child Marriage - (Outcome 1200,  Immediate Outcome 1210,  Output 1211, Output 
 1212, Output 1213) and (Immediate Outcome 1220, Output 1222, Output 1223) 
 76 
 Pathway to Outcomes 
 82 
 PrevenƟon of Child Marriage -Against EvaluaƟon Criteria 
 85 
 PrevenƟon of Female Genital MuƟlaƟon/Cuƫng (FGM/C) - (Outcome 1220, Output 1211, Output 
 1222) 
 92 
 Pathway to Outcome 
 97 
 The PrevenƟon of Female Genital MuƟlaƟon/Cuƫng  Againts EvaluaƟon Criteria 
 98 
 Gender ConsideraƟons in the Overall BERANI programme : AdopƟon of Feminist InternaƟonal 
 Assistance Policy (FIAP)  and the GAC’s Gender Coding Framework 
 102 
 Chapter 5: Conclusion 
 104 
 Chapter 6: RecommendaƟons 
 107 
 General RecommendaƟon for Joint programming 
 107 
 Strategic RecommendaƟon by Theme 
 108 
 Sexual and ReproducƟve Health 
 108 
 Adolescent Sexual and ReproducƟve Health 
 108 
 Gender Equality and Women Empowerment 
 109 
 programmaƟc RecommendaƟons 
 111 
 Sexual and ReproducƟve Health 
 111 
 Adolescent Sexual and ReproducƟve Health 
 112 
 Gender Equality and Women Empowerment 
 114 
 4 

 List of Figures 
 Figure 1 EvaluaƟon Process 
 19 
 Figure 2 Number of Reported Cases of Violence Against Women and Children from 2008 to 2020 
 27 
 Figure 3 Child Marriage by Province 
 30 
 Figure 4 Number of Reported ApplicaƟon for Geƫng DispensaƟon of Child Marriage to BADILAG 
 31 
 Figure 5 Maps IllustraƟng BERANI IntervenƟon Sites including COVID-19 Response 
 38 
 Figure 6 Maps IllustraƟng COVID-19 cases in Indonesia 
 38 
 Figure 7 programme Structure of BERANI 
 39 
 Figure 8 Overview of the budget (for BERANI Components) including COVID-19 response budget, in USD 
 40 
 Figure 9 Key intervenƟon within SRH theme 
 42 
 Figure  10  Pathway  of  BERANI  SRH  intervenƟon  to  programme  immediate,  intermediate,  and  ulƟmate 
 outcomes  (printed  in  orange:  BERANI’s  intervenƟons,  immediate,  intermediate  and  ulƟmate  outcomes). 
 Developed based on references 65 and 66 
 49 
 Figure  11  Pathway  of  assumpƟon  from  two  BERANI’s  intervenƟons  in  family  planning  to  intermediate  and 
 ulƟmate outcomes. IntervenƟons and outcomes are printed in orange. Developed based on reference 66. 50 
 Figure  12  Pathway  of  assumpƟon  from  two  BERANI’s  programmes  in  ASRH  to  intermediate  outcomes  (SRH 
 service)  and  ulƟmate  outcome.  IntervenƟons,  outcomes  and  ulƟmate  goals  are  printed  in  orange.  Developed 
 based on reference 66. 
 59 
 Figure  13  Elements  of  Health  System  and  Healthcare  Response  to  address  GBV,  adapted  from  a  Colombini 
 and Claudia García-Moreno et ALL’s Model 
 68 
 Figure 14 The BERANI programme’s intervenƟons on HSR to GBV using the above reference 
 69 
 Figure 15 Prevalence of Child Marriage and Approved Child Marriages in Indonesia 
 82 
 Figure 16 Pathway to Outcomes on the Child Marriage’s PrevenƟon 
 83 
 Figure 17 Model for EﬀecƟve IntervenƟons Designed to Prevent or Respond to FGM/C 
 94 
 Figure 18 Pathway to Outcomes for PrevenƟng FGM/C 
 96 
 List of Table 
 Table 1. Summary of knowledge products on SRH 
 43 
 5 

 AbbreviaƟons and Acronyms 
 ARM 
 Annual Review MeeƟngs 
 ASRH 
 Adolescent sexual and reproducƟve health 
 AWP 
 Annual Work Plan 
 Bappenas 
 NaƟonal Development Planning Agency 
 Bappeda 
 Regional Development Planning Agency 
 BKKBN 
 NaƟonal PopulaƟon and Family Planning Board 
 BPS         
 BPS StaƟsƟcs - Indonesia 
 CCA 
 Country Common Assessment  
 CEDAW 
 ConvenƟon on the EliminaƟon of DiscriminaƟon against Women 
 CO 
 Country oﬃce 
 COAR 
 Country oﬃce annual report 
 CoC 
 ConƟnuum of Care 
 CoP 
 Community of PracƟce 
 COVID-19 
 CoronaVirus Disease 2019 
 CP 
 Country programme 
 CPAP 
 Country programme acƟon plan 
 CPD 
 Country programme document 
 CPE 
 Country programme evaluaƟon 
 CSE 
 Comprehensive Sexuality EducaƟon 
 CPR 
 ContracepƟve prevalence rate 
 CoE 
 Center of Excellence 
 CSO 
 Civil Society OrganizaƟon 
 DAC                
 Development Assistance CommiƩee of the OECD 
 DHS 
 Demographic and health survey 
 DIS 
 District InformaƟon System 
 FGD 
 Focus Group Discussion 
 FGM/C 
 Female Genital MuƟlaƟon/Cuƫng  1 
 FP 
 Family Planning 
 GAC 
 Global Aﬀairs of Canada 
 GBB 
 Guru Belajar dan Berbagi  (Teacher Learning and  Sharing) 
 1  The  term  ‘female  genital  muƟlaƟon/cuƫng’  (FGM/C)  is  used  in  this  document  instead  of  ‘female  genital 
 muƟlaƟon’ (FGM) based on the agreed term to be used by the Government of Indonesia. 
 6 

 GBV 
 Gender-based violence 
 GEDSI 
 Gender Equality, Disability and Social Inclusion 
 GSHS 
 Global School Health Survey 
 HMIS 
 Health management informaƟon system 
 IANYD 
 Interagency Network for Youth Development 
 ICPD 
 InternaƟonal Conference on PopulaƟon and Development 
 ICT 
 InformaƟon and communicaƟon technology 
 IDHS 
 Indonesian Demographic and Health Survey 
 INGO 
 InternaƟonal non-governmental organizaƟon 
 Kemdikbudristek 
 Kementerian  Pendidikan,  Kebudayaan,  Riset  dan  Teknologi  (Ministry  of  EducaƟon, 
 Culture, Research and Technology - MoECRT) 
 Kemenkes 
 Kementerian Kesehatan (Ministry of Health - MoH) 
 Kemenpora 
 Kementerian Pemuda dan Olahraga (Ministry of Youth and Sport - MoYS) 
 LPA 
 Lembaga Perlindungan Anak  (Child ProtecƟon  InsƟtute) 
 LPP Bone 
 Lembaga Pemberdayaan Perempuan  in Bone  ( Centre for Women's Empowerment) 
 LPSDM 
 Lembaga Pengembangan  Sumber Daya Mitra 
 M&E 
 Monitoring and evaluaƟon 
 MIC 
 Middle-income Country 
 MMR 
 Maternal Mortality RaƟo 
 MoH 
 Ministry of Health 
 MoECRT 
 Ministry of EducaƟon, Culture, Research and Technology 
 MoHA 
 Ministry of Home Aﬀairs 
 MoWECP 
 Ministry of Women’s Empowerment and Child ProtecƟon 
 MNH 
 Maternal and neonatal health 
 MSS- SPM 
 Minimum Service Standard 
 MSS  VAWC 
 Minimum  Service  Standards  for  Integrated  Services  to  VicƟms  of  Violence  against 
 Women and Children 
 MTR 
 Mid-term review 
 NAB 
 NaƟonal Advisory Board 
 NAP 
 NaƟonal AcƟon Plan 
 NCVAW 
 NaƟonal Commission on Violence against Women 
 NGO 
 Non-governmental organizaƟon  
 OECD 
 OrganizaƟon for Economic Co-operaƟon and Development 
 PEDUM 
 Pedoman Umum /programme Management ImplementaƟon  Guideline 
 PoA 
 Plan of AcƟon (for ICPD) 
 7 

 PKBI 
 Indonesia Planned Parenthood AssociaƟon 
 PMME 
 Planning Matrix for Monitoring and EvaluaƟon 
 P2TP2A 
 Pusat Pelayanan Terpadu Pemberdayaan Perempuan dan Anak, Integrated  
 Services for Women Empowerment and Child ProtecƟon  
 Puskesmas 
 Primary Health Center (managed by Government – MoH) 
 PUSPAGA 
 Pusat Pembelajaran Keluarga, Family based Learning Center 
 RRF 
 Results and resources framework 
 RBM 
 Results-based management 
 RH 
 ReproducƟve health 
 RPJMN 
 NaƟonal Mid Term Development Plan 
 RPJPN             
 NaƟonal Long Term Development Plan 
 SCM 
 Supply Chain Management 
 SISN                
 NaƟonal Social Security System 
 SGBV 
 Sexual and gender-based violence 
 SKPD 
 Local government task force 
 SP 
 Strategy Plan 
 SPR 
 Standard Progress Report 
 SRHR 
 Sexual and ReproducƟve Health and Rights 
 STRADA 
 Strategi Daerah, Regional Strategy 
 STRANAS 
 Strategi Nasional, the NaƟonal Strategy 
 SWAP            
 Sector-wide assistance programme 
 TA 
 Technical assistance 
 TOR 
 Terms of reference 
 TWG 
 Technical Working Group 
 UNALA 
 The name of a youth-friendly SRH informaƟon and services model 
 UNCT 
 United NaƟons Country Team  
 UNDAF 
 United NaƟons Development Assistance Framework 
 UNDP 
 United NaƟons Development programme 
 UNPDF       
 United NaƟons Partnership for Development Framework 2016-2020 Indonesia 
 UNEG 
 United NaƟons EvaluaƟon Group 
 UNICEF 
 United NaƟons Children’s Fund 
 UNFPA 
 United NaƟons PopulaƟon Fund 
 UNSCDF 
 United NaƟons Sustainable Development CooperaƟon Framework Guidance 
 UNWomen 
 United NaƟons on Women 
 8 

 UPT/D 
 Unit Pelaksana Teknis (Daerah), Technical Unit at the Regional Government  
 Level 
 VAW 
 Violence against Women 
 WHO 
 World Health OrganizaƟon 
 LPSDM 
 Lembaga Pengembangan Sumber Daya Mitra  
 YDI 
 Youth Development Index  
 YFS 
 Youth Friendly Services 
 YSSI 
 Yayasan Siklus Sehat Indonesia 
 9 

 ExecuƟve Summary 
 Background 
 UNFPA  and  UNICEF  Indonesia  jointly  commissioned  an  independent  ﬁnal  evaluaƟon  of  “BeƩer  ReproducƟve 
 Health  and  Rights  for  All  in  Indonesia”  (BERANI)  programme  (2018-2022).  Managed  jointly  by  UNFPA  and 
 UNICEF,  this  evaluaƟon  is  an  external,  independent  exercise  conducted  by  a  team  of  evaluators  based  on 
 UNFPA  guidelines  on  programme  EvaluaƟons,  ethical  norms,  and  The  United  NaƟons  EvaluaƟon  Group 
 (UNEG) standards. 
 The  BERANI  joint  programme  focuses  on  enhancing  quality  of  care  of  Skilled  Birth  AƩendants  (SBA)  through 
 midwifery  educaƟon  and  pracƟces  and  its  regulaƟon;  improving  the  maternal  death  surveillance  and 
 response  system;  providing  youth-friendly  services  (YFS)  and  informaƟon;  working  together  with  as  many 
 youth  groups  as  possible  as  a  means  of  creaƟng  a  large  “youth  community”  and  reﬂecƟng  the  needs  of 
 youth;  strengthening  CSE;  and  advocacy  and  community-based  programing  for  the  prevenƟon  of  GBV,  child 
 marriage, and FGM/C across development and humanitarian conƟnuum. 
 The Purpose and objecƟves of the EvaluaƟon 
 The  ﬁnal  evaluaƟon  aims  at  assessing  the  results  of  the  BERANI  programme  in  achieving  its  intended  goals 
 and  overall  achievements  hence  it  could  be  uƟlized  for  the  basis  to  improve  the  implementaƟon  of  future 
 programming.  The  ﬁnal  evaluaƟon  examines  the  implementaƟon  approaches,  progress  made,  and 
 challenges  encountered,  idenƟfy,  and  document  the  lessons  learnt  and  good  pracƟces  as  speciﬁed  below 
 under speciﬁc objecƟves, and make speciﬁc recommendaƟons for future courses of acƟon. 
 Scope and Methodology 
 The  evaluaƟon  covered  the  period  March  2018-December  2022;  and  included  all  acƟviƟes  planned  and/or 
 implemented  under  the  programme  at  a  naƟonal  level  and  in  selected  target  districts  during  this  period 
 within  each  project  component  (sexual  and  reproducƟve  health  and  rights,  Adolescent  Sexual  and 
 ReproducƟve  Health  (ASRH),  and  gender  equality  and  women’s  empowerment).  As  the  previous  mid-term 
 review  (MTR)  has  been  conducted  to  cover  the  period  of  March  2018-December  2021,  this  evaluaƟon  is 
 built  upon  that  to  avoid  duplicaƟon.  It  includes  its  recommendaƟons  where  applicable,  and  how  the  project 
 has  responded  to  the  recommendaƟons  post-MTR.  Further,  sustainability  aspects  are  also  emphasized  in 
 this evaluaƟon. 
 EvaluaƟon  applied  qualitaƟve  study,  by  performing  document  review  and  primary  data  collecƟon  through 
 interviews  and  FGDs.  The  primary  data  collecƟon  conducted  only  when  the  literatures  reviewed  are  not 
 suﬃcient  to  provide  informaƟon  sought  in  this  evaluaƟon.  The  Theory  of  Change  is  reviewed  and  compared 
 with  project  implementers’  understanding  on  how  the  intervenƟons  are  in  line  and  can  contribute  to  the 
 intended  outcomes.  Structured  around  seven  evaluaƟon  criteria:  Relevance,  EﬀecƟveness,  Eﬃciency, 
 Sustainability,  Coherence/CoordinaƟon,  and  speciﬁc  to  humanitarian  sector,  Coverage  and  Connectedness. 
 TriangulaƟon  mechanism  was  done  through  method  triangulaƟon  (document  review  –  primary  qualitaƟve 
 survey), and evaluator triangulaƟon (2 team members). 
 Main Conclusions 
 Based  on  the  ﬁndings  from  the  MTR  and  addiƟonal  data  analysis,  the  evaluaƟon  draw  the 
 following conclusions: 
 1.  UNFPA  and  UNICEF  have  followed  up  most  of  the  recommendaƟons  made  in  the  MTR  report.  One 
 of  the  crucial  aspects  being  simpliﬁcaƟon/streamlining  of  the  logic  model  in  accordance  with  the 
 10 

 GAC  monitoring  framework.  By  doing  so,  the  logic  pathway  is  becoming  clearer  than  the  iniƟal 
 developed one. 
 2.  Relevance :  The  overall  BERANI  programme  (and  each  component)  is  relevant  with  the  current  GoI 
 prioriƟes.  The  programme  has  supported  government  and  related  stakeholders  (naƟonal  and 
 subnaƟonal)  in  generaƟng  evidence,  facilitaƟng  policy  dialogue,  contribuƟng  to  policy/programme 
 design, including establishing a governing body, and criƟcal capacity building.  
 3.  EﬀecƟveness:  BERANI  has  achieved  the  intended  targets  at  the  output  level.  Meanwhile 
 contribuƟons  of  output  to  the  outcome  level  can  solely  be  qualitaƟvely  jusƟﬁed,  as  the 
 programme’s scope is fairly small compared to the naƟonal-joint or GoI eﬀort. 
 4.  Eﬃciency:  UNFPA  and  UNICEF  have  eﬀecƟvely  uƟlized  their  established  internaƟonal  and  naƟonal 
 networks  in  implemenƟng  the  BERANI  programme.  This  is  a  key  success  factor  leading  to  the 
 programme’s  acceptability  by  stakeholders,  hence  contribuƟng  largely  to  its  achievements.  In 
 addiƟon,  this  has  also  enabled  BERANI  to  provide  the  required  technical  experƟse,  internaƟonal 
 and naƟonally.  
 5.  Coherence:  While  BERANI  is  designed  as  a  joint-programme,  the  coherence  across  themaƟc 
 components,  and  between  overlapping  issues  addressed  by  UNFPA  and  UNICEF,  are  sƟll  lacking. 
 Each  component  of  the  BERANI  programme  has  diﬀerent  pilot  sites  and  partners  despite  having 
 similar target groups (e.g. health service providers). 
 6.  Sustainability:  Numbers  of  pilot  project  innovaƟons  have  been  replicated  (fully  or  parƟally)  by 
 subnaƟonal  and  naƟonal  governments,  hence  increasing  its  odds  of  sustainability.  Among  others,  it 
 includes  MoH  funding  commitment  to  Poltekkes  as  Midwifery  CoEs,  adaptaƟon  of  UNALA  module 
 for  posyandu  remaja,  translaƟon  of  STRANAS  to  Prevent  Child  Marriage  into  STRADA  and  replicaƟon 
 of Bone’s child marriage Model into Wajoo and Luwu Utara District by the local government. 
 7.  Coverage  and  Connectedness:  During  the  COVID-19  pandemic,  BERANI  has  managed  to  act  in  an 
 adapƟve  manner,  puƫng  notable  eﬀort  in  alternaƟng  the  approach  (to  online  or  hybrid  models) 
 and  responding  to  the  naƟonal  agenda  on  pandemic  response  (series  of  COVID-19  webinars,  PPE 
 provisions).  Regardless  of  the  pandemic’s  impact  on  the  programme,  the  era  has  also  brought  an 
 opportunity  for  the  programme  to  be  innovaƟve,  being  one  is  the  use  of  digital  technology  for  GBV 
 services, and CoP iniƟaƟon for COVID-19, later expanded for ASRH.  
 8.  The  Joint  programme’s  design  and  implementaƟon  has  idenƟﬁed  and  incorporated  the  needs  of 
 women  and  girls,  including  vulnerable,  marginalized  ones,  and  those  with  disabiliƟes  in  ASR,  GBV 
 and  harmful  pracƟces’  prevenƟons.  GEDSI  transformaƟve  approach  in  SRH  components  is  idenƟﬁed 
 as  male’s  involvement  in  FP,  and  improvements  are  sƟll  needed  in  SRH  capacity  building,  including 
 disability friendly SRH services.  
 General RecommendaƟons for Future Joint programming 
 The  following  general  recommendaƟons  are  proposed  based  on  the  lessons  learned  from  BERANI 
 programme  implementaƟon.  These  recommendaƟons  are  not  made  speciﬁcally  for  the  conƟnuaƟon  of  the 
 BERANI  programme  rather  for  mulƟ-themaƟc  programming.  In  principal,  it  is  recommended  that  future 
 joint-programming to:  
 1.  Maximize  the  use  of  each  agency's  experƟse,  and  extend  collaboraƟon  beyond  proposal  stage 
 development. 
 2.  Strengthen  the  high-level  engagement  in  the  future  joint-programming  to  achieve  a  greater  policy 
 impact and potenƟal for sustainability 
 3.  Promote  gender  transformaƟve  approaches  in  the  future  joint-programme  to  achieve  gender 
 equality  and  sexual  reproducƟve  health  and  rights  by  explicitly  addressing  the  underlying  causes  of 
 11