Multi-country evaluation of UNICEF’s response  
to the Venezuela outflow crisis (2019-2021) 
 
 
© Virginia Thomas / DARA 
 
Colombia Country Case Study 
 October 2022 
 
Virginia Thomas – Team Leader 
Ricardo Sole – Senior Health Specialist 
Silvia Hidalgo – Deputy Team Leader 
Tim Morris – Editor 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Disclaimer 
 
 
 
 
The views presented in this document are the authors’ and do not necessarily represent those of  
UNICEF. 
 
The data collection for this country case study was conducted in October 2021, and the reporting phase was 
finalised in October 2022. Although findings were not updated, recommendations were workshopped with the 
Colombia Country Office and regional office in September 2022. 
 

 
 
Abbreviations & Acronyms 
AAP 
Accountability to Affected Populations 
AGD 
Age, Gender and Diversity 
ACH 
Acción Contra el Hambre (Action Against Hunger) 
ALNAP 
Active Learning Network for Accountability and Performance 
AOR 
Area of Responsibility 
C4D 
Communication for Development 
CBI 
Cash-Based Intervention 
CCCs 
Core Commitments for Children in Humanitarian Action 
CEAP 
Corporate Emergency Activation Procedure 
CEDAW 
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women
CENAF 
Centros Nacionales Fronterizos (National Border Centres) 
CERF 
Central Emergency Response Fund 
CFS 
Child-friendly Spaces 
CIDEMOS 
Corporación para la Investigación y Desarrollo de la Democracia 
CMEU 
Child Marriage and Early Unions 
CO 
Country Office 
CONPES 
El Consejo Nacional de Política Económica y Social 
CP 
Child Protection 
CPD 
Country Programme Document 
CRAS 
Reference Centre for Social Assistance 
CWC 
Communication with Communities 
CWD 
Children with Disabilities 
DFID 
Department of International Development (now Foreign, Commonwealth & 
Development Office (FCDO) 
DSE 
Departmental Secretariat of Education 
DTM 
Displacement Tracking Matrix 
EA 
Espacio de Apoyo (Support Centre)  
ECHO 
European Commission Humanitarian Aid  
EMOPS 
Office of Emergency Programmes 
EPP 
Emergency Preparedness Platform 
EQ 
Evaluation Question 
ERIC 
Ethical Research Involving Children 

 
 
ET 
Evaluation Team 
ETP  
Estatuto Temporal de Protección (Temporary Protection Status)  
FO 
Field Office 
GBV 
Gender-Based Violence 
GIFFM 
Grupo Inter agencial sobre Flujos Migratorios Mixtos (Interagency Group on 
Mixed Migratory Flows) 
GoC 
Government of Colombia 
HAC 
Humanitarian Action for Children appeal 
HACT 
Harmonized Approach to Cash Transfers  
HCT 
Humanitarian Cash Transfer 
HPD 
Humanitarian Programme Document 
HPM 
Humanitarian Performance Monitoring 
ICBF 
Instituto Colombiano de Bienestar Familiar 
IOM 
International Organization for Migration 
IP 
Implementing Partner 
IPPDH 
Instituto de Políticas Públicas en Derechos Humanos (Institute of Human 
Rights Public Policy)  
IR 
Inception Report 
IRB 
Interview Review Board 
IYCF  
Infant and Young Child Feeding 
JNA 
Joint Needs Assessment 
KI 
Key Informant 
KII 
Key Informant Interview 
LACRO 
Latin American and Caribbean Regional Office 
LCs 
Learning Circles (círculos de aprendizaje) 
LGBTIQ+  
Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, Trans, Intersex and Queer 
MEN 
Ministerio de Educación de Colombia (Colombian Ministry of Education) 
NRC 
Norwegian Refugee Council 
NYHQ  
UNICEF New York Headquarters 
OECD 
Organisation for Economic Co-Operation and Development  
ORR  
Other Regular Resources 
PAHO 
Pan American Health Organization 
PARD 
Proceso Administrativo de Restablecimiento de Derechos (Administrative 
Process for the Re-establishment of Rights) 

 
 
PCA 
Project Cooperation Agreement 
PDET 
Programas de Desarrollo con Enfoque Territorial 
PPE 
Personal Protective Equipment 
BPRM 
 Bureau of Population, Refugees and Migration 
PSEA 
Prevention of Sexual Exploitation and Abuse 
R4V 
Response for Venezuelans 
RCCE 
Risk Communication and Community Engagement 
RMRP 
Regional Migration Response Plan 
SDEs 
Secretarías departamentales de educación 
ToC 
Theory of Change 
ToR 
Terms of Reference 
TPS 
Temporary Protection Status 
UASC 
Unaccompanied and Separated Children 
UNCRC 
UN Convention on the Rights of the Child 
UNEG 
United Nations Evaluation Group 
UNFPA 
United Nations Population Fund 
UNHCR 
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees 
UNICEF 
United Nations International Children’s Emergency Fund  
UNOCHA 
UN Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs 
UNV 
United Nations Volunteer 
VMC 
Venezuela Migration Crisis 
WASH 
Water, Sanitation and Hygiene 
 
 
 

 
 
Table of Contents 
Executive Summary 
2 
1. 
Background and context of UNICEF Colombia’s response to the Venezuelan Migration Crisis (VMC) 
7 
1.1 Rights holders and duty bearers 
7 
1.2 Object of the evaluation and country case studies 
8 
2. 
Purpose, objectives and scope of Colombia CO case study 
12 
2.1 Purpose 
12 
2.2 Objectives 
12 
2.3 Scope 
12 
2.4 Stakeholders 
13 
3. 
Evaluation criteria and questions 
13 
4. 
Methodology of the Colombia country case study 
14 
4.1 Document and literature review 
14 
4.2 Context analysis and timeline 
15 
4.3 Country visit 
15 
4.4 Semi-structured key informant interviews (KIIs) 
15 
4.5 Engagement with families of children on the move and host communities 
15 
4.6 Feedback loops and validation process of the case study 
15 
5. 
Limitations of the case study 
16 
6. 
Ethical and gender considerations 
16 
7. 
Findings 
17 
7.1 Appropriateness 
17 
7.2 
Effectiveness 
28 
7.3 Coverage 
55 
7.4 Coherence and Coordination 
59 
7.5 Efficiency 
62 
7.6 Connectedness 
64 
7.7 Cross-cutting: gender, equity, conflict sensitivity and accountability 
66 
8. 
Good practices and lessons learned 
67 
8.1. Good practices 
67 
8.2. Lessons learned 
68 
9. 
Conclusions 
68 
10. Recommendations 
71 
 
 
Table of figures  
Table 1. Timeline of the Emergency and Response in Colombia ............................................................................ 10 
Table 2. Funding Requirements and Gaps by Sector – 2019 (US$ millions) ........................................................... 11 
Table 3. Funding Requirements and Gaps by Sector – 2020 (US$ millions) ........................................................... 11 
Table 4. Funding Requirements and gaps by sector – 2021 (US$D millions) ......................................................... 11 

 
 
Table 5. Stakeholders ............................................................................................................................................... 13 
Table 6. Protection targets and indicators (2019, 2020, 2021) ............................................................................... 31 
Table 7. Education Targets and Indicators (2019, 2020, 2021) ............................................................................... 36 
Table 8. Health Indicators and Targets (2019, 2020, 2021) .................................................................................... 41 
Table 9. Nutrition Indicators and Targets (2019, 2020, 2021) ................................................................................ 43 
Table 10. WASH Indicators and Targets (2019, 2020, 2021) ................................................................................... 44 
Table 11. C4D Indicators and Targets (2019, 2020, 2021) ....................................................................................... 47 
 
 
 

2 
Executive Summary  
The Government of Colombia (GoC) requested international assistance to address the Venezuelan Migration Crisis 
(VMC) in 2018. It is estimated that more than a million Venezuelans transited through Colombia in 2018 and 2019 
en route to other countries. Approximately 42,000 pendular migrants enter the country daily for work, study, 
medical care, business or other activities. By October 2021, the number of Venezuelans crossing the Colombian 
border had risen to 1,842,390. Some 500,000 Colombians have returned from Venezuela in recent years due, 
among other things, to the labour force disruptions and employment generated by the COVID-19 pandemic and 
associated public health restrictions. In February 2019, UNICEF activated the Level 2 (L2) VMC emergency 
response, which coincided in 2020 with the unprecedented COVID-19 Level 3 (L3) emergency activation, which 
heavily impacted all the countries in the region. 
All these population movements – transit, pendular, returnee and intention to take up residence in Colombia – 
present specific vulnerabilities to migrant children and their families and require a protective, rights-based 
approaches. GoC has maintained an open-door policy and implemented various mechanisms for socio-economic 
integration and access to rights and services for both migrants and host communities. Most recently the Estatuto 
Temporal de Protección (ETP)1 was created with the intention of allowing Venezuelan migrants access to a range 
of government services. 
This Country Case Study considers UNICEF’s Response to the VMC in Colombia from both a humanitarian and long-
term development perspective. As part of the humanitarian response, UNICEF participates in the Grupo Inter 
agencial sobre Flujos Migratorios Mixtos (the Interagency Group on Mixed Migratory Flows, GIFMM), it monitors 
the situation of children and families on the move, provides humanitarian assistance and channels efforts and 
resources to strengthen Colombia's capacities both as a transit country and one in which migrants are intending 
to remain. Over the period covered by the L2 Emergency (February 2019-June 2020) and well into 2021, UNICEF 
Colombia provided direct humanitarian assistance and sector coordination for populations on the move. Taking a 
long-term perspective, it also provided technical assistance to the GoC at various levels and through a number of 
key institutions to develop policies and capacities to receive and integrate this massive migrant population.  
Evaluation purpose, objective and intended audience 
The purpose of the evaluation and its five country Case Studies is to account for the results achieved by UNICEF’s 
Response to the L2 Emergency activation, and draw out lessons learned and recommendations to guide UNICEF 
future strategic and programmatic priorities for children on the move. The primary objective is to provide evidence 
on whether the response to the VMC of the UNICEF Colombia Country Office(CO) has been appropriate, effective, 
coherent, adequately coordinated, efficient and connected. It seeks to understand the enabling and constraining 
factors and lessons learned t. The primary users of this evaluation are the UNICEF Offices in which country case 
studies were carried out (Brazil, Colombia, Ecuador, Peru, Trinidad and Tobago); UNICEF staff supporting the 
response in the Latin America and Caribbean Regional Office (LACRO) and in Headquarters (HQ); key partners, 
government counterparts and affected populations.  
Evaluation methodology 
The analytical framework of the evaluation was constructed combining the criteria used by the Development 
Assistance Community of the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD DAC) a with the 
international human rights framework. In terms of quality standards, the evaluation refers to UNICEF’s 2020 Core 
Commitments for Children2 as well its Six-Point Agenda for Children on the Move.3 It is utilisation-focused, 
participatory and forward-looking with a view to shedding light on the results achieved so far and the approaches 
to enhance UNICEF’s strategic and programmatic effectiveness for children on the move. The methodology 
consists of mixed methods including document and literature review, semi-structured interviews with key 
informants at national and local level, and field visits to consult with UNICEF field teams, partners, and 
representatives of both migrant and host communities. A country visit was carried out from 25-30 October 2021, 
allowing the evaluation team to take a route-based approach, visiting migrant settlements, host communities and 
service Centres for those migrants en route in key areas most affected by the VMC: Barranquilla, Norte de 
Santander, Arauca and La Guajira. For those stakeholders who could not be interviewed in the field, remote 
interviews were organised using a hybrid research approach.  
 
 
 
1 https://www.migracioncolombia.gov.co/visibles 
2 https://www.unicef.org/emergencies/core-commitments-children 
3 https://www.unicef.org/documents/global-programme-framework-children-move 

3 
Key findings and conclusions 
UNICEF Colombia has participated in a complex response to the VMC, which has unfolded in a context of diverse 
and multiple humanitarian needs and issues, not the least of which has been the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic. 
During this period, UNICEF Colombia has appropriately adapted to the increasing VMC influx by extending its 
presence, including by adding field offices, without which it could not have delivered a humanitarian response on 
such scale. UNICEF’s emergency, sectoral and field teams must be given credit for their enormous efforts under 
very difficult circumstances – handling two emergencies simultaneously. At a regional level, the evaluation has 
questioned the overall rationale for a nationality-based response to the Venezuelan outflow. For ethically and 
practically, there have been other migrant populations in need of the same humanitarian response, services and 
advocacy from UNICEF. Using a gender analysis and gender equality lens it becomes clear UNICEF Colombia is 
lacking in staff resources to address the breadth and scope of the VMC from a gender perspective. The VMC raises 
specific challenges for children and adolescent girls and boys. While staff are doing their best, they are stretched 
to the maximum and there are many programming areas where UNICEF could improve. 
Appropriateness 
Overall, UNICEF Colombia has developed and adapted a number of response strategies, objectives and 
implementation modalities, which have been appropriate and relevant to the changing needs of migrant children 
and their families along the migration route and which have included adaptations to the pandemic. UNICEF 
significantly expanded its territorial presence through new field and satellite offices and engaging new staff to 
meet the needs of the emergency and enhance its ability to actively participate in the GIFMM`s Response for 
Venezuelans (R4V) in key border and transit areas. Working within the framework of the GIFMM-R4V platform, it 
has invested in vital services, in particular around water, sanitation and hygiene (WASH) at the border, transit sites 
and rural settlements. Aligned with the GoC policies, it has provided support to those Venezuelans who want to 
remain in Colombia to register for the ETP, thus providing a pathway to local integration through access to work 
permits, health coverage and other key entitlements and rights.  
In the context of the pandemic, UNICEF Colombia’s extensive WASH expertise helped bridge two parallel 
humanitarian responses (L2 VMC and L3 COVID-19) as well as a straightforward bridge between responses in rural 
and urban settlements. However, in a number of cases, the appropriateness of and relevance of UNICEF strategies, 
objectives and implementation modalities could be reviewed and revised, at both national and regional level, in 
light of the scale and complexity of the VMC. As will be explored further in the Regional Synthesis report, in 
Colombia, as in all five Country Case Studies, the evaluation notes a lack of a fully operationalised, overarching 
regional strategy to address what was clearly a regional emergency. In its absence the Humanitarian Action for 
Children (HAC) appeal has been the main tool for harmonising implementation approaches between COs 
addressing the VMC. 
UNICEF incorporated its policy on Accountability to Affected Populations (AAP) in all project cooperation 
agreements with its implementing partners. Yet, the evaluation found limited opportunities for affected 
populations to participate in programmes which affect their lives, and limited opportunities for UNICEF staff to 
validate the needs and priorities of affected populations in a way not mediated by its partners. UNICEF Colombia 
included migration as a key risk factor in its Emergency Preparedness Platform. However, in practice preparedness 
measures would be greatly enhanced by creating a regional early warning system to inform UNICEF teams along 
the migration route of significant population movements, giving them time to prepare. UNICEF’s internal 
arrangements, including staffing, training, contracting, fundraising and managerial capacity could be strengthened 
with a view to better reflect the scale and complexity of the VMC. 
Effectiveness 
At the output level, UNICEF Colombia achieved many of its intended targets and in 2019 was able to exceed 
expectations in some areas. UNICEF and GIFMM-R4V partners were also able to show key results in terms of 
supporting and promoting social inclusion, through providing technical support to operationalise the open-door 
policy of the GoC. To a lesser extent, and somewhat unequally, some long-term results are also emerging in terms 
of access to rights and protection, empowerment of migrant children, adolescents, and their families and access 
to needed information and opportunities on their migratory journey. The evaluation team finds wide variations in 
the capacity of UNICEF Colombia to achieve its targets. The response has been under-resourced and hence spread 
thin, over many regions, many sectors, many different types of migrant and host populations, including Venezuelan 
migrants, Colombian returnees as well as a handful of migrants from other countries. It needs to be recognised 
that UNICEF Colombia has made strategic choices to focus its efforts on certain key border regions where it is able 
to show greater effectiveness. UNICEF Colombia contributed at the national level to put in place the pre-requisites 
for Venezuelan refugee and migrant children to enjoy their rights – in particular through the campaign to combat 
statelessness, measures to ensure accessible birth registration in hospitals, and the roll out of the ETP. UNICEF also 

4 
supported positive messaging around respect for the rights of Venezuelan migrant children in order to challenge 
xenophobic attitudes, which may have indirectly resulted in less targeting and discrimination against Venezuelan 
refugees and migrants. However, efforts at the international (regional) level of the Quito Process (the name given 
to the meetings and commitments established between Latin American countries to coordinate the VMC response) 
to ensure a regional child protection protocol have stalled. Local efforts to operationalise effective child protection 
monitoring and case management require strengthening. 
Concerning education, UNICEF has not achieved the sector result formulated in its HAC 2019 or 2020 and, with 
current funding levels, will not achieve the sector result of full integration into the national education system. Data 
suggest that many children—both migrant and Colombian —continue to lack practical access to the national 
education system. While the main intervention, círculos de aprendizaje, Learning Circles (LCs)4, has had many 
positive aspects, it has not overcome systemic obstacles to access to formal schooling for children on the move. 
This is one example where humanitarian investments and policy advocacy are needed to ensure the rights of 
children on the move are respected. In the social protection sector, UNICEF rolled out a Humanitarian Cash 
Transfer (HCT) in the second half of 2020 in response to the extreme vulnerability of migrant families to the 
confinement and public health measures to control the spread of the COVID-19 pandemic. Future work on HCTs 
in Colombia can build effectiveness and efficiencies by working more closely and in coordination with other GIFMM 
partners also rolling out HCTs. In terms of long-term integration of children on the move, the Programas de 
Desarrollo con Enfoque Territorial (PDET) or the Territorios Amigos de la Niñez approach have been promising but 
need to be carefully monitored and evaluated to assess effectiveness for enhancing local integration and 
empowerment of migrant children and adolescents in UNICEF-prioritised municipalities. 
WASH has been the most visible face of UNICEF during the VMC response, overlapping with the COVID-19 L3 
Emergency response. WASH actors led a strong response in terms of both sector coordination and programmatic 
response, while linking humanitarian and development objectives. It was the bedrock upon which many other 
UNICEF and R4V services and measures relied, as well as the spearhead for entry into new communities and 
institutional relationships. Regarding health and nutrition, a common one package delivery strategy appears to be 
both effective and efficient, and mobile clinics enhanced outreach to vulnerable groups from both migrant and 
host communities. There could be stronger focus on Child Protection and gender-based violence (GBV) prevention 
and response. The GIFMM-R4V platform ensured the availability of primary health services to refugees/migrants 
at key border and transit points.  
The Core Commitments for Children (CCCs) are one of the main UNICEF standards for measuring the effectiveness 
of humanitarian response. A finding from the evaluation is that the CCSs are difficult to apply in some sectors in 
Colombia and other UNICEF country responses as these operations align themselves with standards set by other 
actors and those of national governments, not necessarily or fully consistent with the CCCs. This suggests the need 
in Colombia and other countries in the region both for more training on how to locally apply the CCCs and 
clarification at LACRO and HQ levels about the extent to which UNICEF expects the CCCs to be applied where these 
are not aligned with existing national capacities and standards. In addition to the migration outcome indicators, 
Communication for Development (C4D) indicators suggest a good progress from short-term activities towards the 
longer-term sector result established in the 2019 HAC. The C4D/Communications strategy adopted by UNICEF 
Colombia appears appropriate for the scale and nature of the emergency. 
Coverage 
The evaluation explored the internal and external factors that enabled or constrained UNICEF’s ability to provide 
the most vulnerable Venezuelan migrants and refugee children, their families and host communities with needs-
based protection and assistances. Enabling factors were found to be UNICEF’s territorial presence in the areas 
most highly affected by the VMC, and the quality of its staff and partners. Constraints include relatively low levels 
of funding given the scale of the emergency, failure to form key vulnerability profiles and lack of strategies and 
models designed to address vulnerabilities at scale given the geographical dispersion of children on the move. 
Coverage is found to be the weakest aspect of the UNICEF Colombia and wider regional response: challenges of 
resource mobilisation did not allow UNICEF to address vulnerabilities in line with the scale of the VMC.  
The main factors affecting donor perceptions and willingness to fund UNICEF’s appeal and projects include: 1) the 
ability to come up with innovative humanitarian initiatives and projects that address the needs of the most 
vulnerable; 2) the ability to involve more donors (the US, sees itself as having given a disproportionate share of 
VMC humanitarian financing); and 3) competition from other actors meaning that UNICEF has needed to 
demonstrate its value for money as a UN agency. Donors have considered that UNICEF in some cases lacks specific 
data and analysis needed to adequately target its programming towards those most vulnerable migrants and 
 
4 For more information see section 7.1 

5 
children on the move, and to address serious protection risks, particularly those facing adolescent girls who fall 
victim to trafficking and networks of sexual exploitation. 
Coherence and coordination 
UNICEF Colombia played a key role in engaging local and national actors on children on the move, and built new 
capacities to address the rights of migrant children. Among the wide range of UNICEF VMC implementation 
partners, 25 are Colombian organisations and 11 are community-based. This constitutes a positive contribution to 
strengthening national capacity to address future emergencies and migration situations. The response continued 
to be closely tied to the priorities of various national ministries and institutions, such as the Ministerio de 
Educación de Colombia (Colombian Ministry of Education, MEN) and the Instituto Colombiano de Bienestar 
Familiar (ICBF) and their requests for assistance. The extension of UNICEF’s presence through the opening of field 
office, enabled UNICEF to better balance national priorities with local needs. Going forward, it will be important 
for UNICEF to feed back to national institutions the gaps and barriers created by efforts to implement national 
policies at the local level, and to generate creative solutions to overcoming these.  
Two key gaps are noted: one in information gathering/management, the other in coordination. The two go hand 
in hand. Effective coordination should put in place the mechanisms needed to generate information on 
vulnerabilities. This information in turn should allow additional actors, funds and programmatic response to be 
generated to provide complementary services to meet needs. In the VMC both functions are a patchwork - both 
by sector and by geographic area. UNICEF’s field presence, while it has expanded, remains limited overall since the 
scale of the VMC is national. This can generate significant information gaps in terms of UNICEF’s ability to perform 
its coordination role. 
Efficiency 
UNICEF’s value added in the L2 response, and more generally for children on the move, is its mandate to defend 
and advocate for child rights, regardless of nationality and migration status. VMC donors and other actors look to 
UNICEF to set and uphold humanitarian standards for children on the move and their families while also providing 
technical advice to government and other agencies around issues that particularly affect children. UNICEF’s multi-
sectoral mandate is an advantage, but also leads to its resources being spread very thin on the ground. UNICEF’s 
value added also manifested itself in strengthening the capacity of its implementing partners in the area of 
migration, which is a new issue which many civil society organisations have needed support to address. In general, 
UNICEF’s programmatic interventions were designed based on its own mandate, strategic partnerships, including 
those with UN, central and local government, civil society and NGOs. Only a few cases of duplication were detected 
that should be easily corrected in the future. However, in a humanitarian situation like the VMC, it appears that 
gaps are unavoidable until UNICEF and other partners can develop more strategic, scalable approaches and attract 
needed donor support. 
Connectedness 
UNICEF Colombia’s strength is building on long-term partnerships with the GoC, long-term models and favourable 
government policies to work on longer-term integration and capacity building. This is clearly articulated in UNICEF 
Colombia’s new Country Programme, which identifies migration as one of its three components and adapts pre-
existing strategies to include migration as an additional protection risk facing children and adolescents in Colombia. 
This is valid and well connected to UNICEF’s longer-term work to build capacity of Colombian institutions to ensure 
inclusion and integration of migrant children and adolescents into national systems, social policies and protective 
mechanisms. However, as migration is a dynamic phenomenon and UNICEF has not fully invested in its 
humanitarian response capability, it is not clear that lessons learned from the VMC, including the importance of 
paying attention to the conditions of those returning to Venezuela, will lead to UNICEF Colombia being better 
prepared for future influxes and movements of returnees. 
Good practices and lessons learned 
Good practices noted in the UNICEF Colombia Case Study include: 
 
National roll-out of the ETP providing a multi-service registration opportunity for children and families 
 
The role of WASH as a strategic entry point to launch UNICEF’s work in communities impacted by migration 
 
UNICEF supported a localisation agenda by selecting and building capacity of local, regional, and national NGOs 
without prior experience on migration issues 
 
Building Prevention of Sexual Exploitation and Abuse (PSEA) capacity among UNICEF partners 
 
Working with indigenous organisations in indigenous languages 
 
COVID-19 humanitarian cash transfer benefited families at a critical moment. 

6 
Lessons learned include: 
 
Field presence developed by UNICEF requires adequate consultation and engagement in the generation of 
new proposals, identification of partners and a stronger advocacy agenda. 
 
Field teams and implementing partners who are new to UNICEF and humanitarian work should be provided 
with training and support, particularly around the CCCs. 
 
UNICEF and GIFMM partners are learning that they need to invest adequately in information management 
systems that will help to pinpoint the most vulnerable groups and develop strategies to address their 
vulnerabilities. 
Recommendations 
Overarching recommendations at regional level 
OR1- Senior management should go through an institutional reflection on whether nationality-based 
migration policies are here to stay for UNICEF and the UN system as a whole. 
OR2- Since mass population movements are not likely to go away, but rather to increase in the future, 
UNICEF at country, regional and global level need to build capacity to ensure Early Warning Systems and 
Preparedness measures are in place. 
Country-specific recommendations 
CS1- Ensure adequate tools and processes for AAP beyond the currently established delegation to 
implementing partners (IPs).  
CS2- Support the MEN and Departmental Secretariats of Education (DSEs) to develop a strategy to 
identify out-of-school children and provide adequate response resources.  
CS3- Advocate for and promote the rights and empowerment of adolescents on the move in all its 
interventions, using a gender perspective and other differential factors to achieve better empowerment 
and integration outcomes. 
CS4- Invest in data and evidence on situation analyses, needs assessments and mapping key gaps in 
coverage across sectors as a basis for future programming, while urgently addressing the gaps identified.  
CS5- Update UNICEF Colombia’s advocacy strategy through a solid, SMART advocacy plan to ensure that 
data and evidence generated from the field on the gaps in coverage and non-enjoyment of rights is 
translated into verifiable advocacy actions with authorities at appropriate levels.