EVALUATION REPORT
October 2022
Evaluation of the UNICEF Response 
to the Level 3 Humanitarian Crisis
in Syria

2
Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the Level 3 Humanitarian Crisis in Syria
Cover Photo: © UNICEF/UN0603139/Belal

EVALUATION REPORT
October 2022
Evaluation of the UNICEF Response 
to the Level 3 Humanitarian Crisis
in Syria

Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the Level 3 
Humanitarian Crisis in Syria
© United Nations Children’s Fund, New York, 2022
United Nations Children’s Fund 
Three United Nations Plaza 
New York, New York 10017 
October 2022 
The purpose of publishing evaluation reports produced by the UNICEF Evaluation Office is to fulfil 
a corporate commitment to transparency through the publication of all completed evaluations. The 
reports are designed to stimulate a free exchange of ideas among those interested in the topic and 
to assure those supporting the work of UNICEF that it rigorously examines its strategies, results, and 
overall effectiveness. 
The report was prepared by James Darcy (team leader), Enrico Leonardi, Francesca Ballarin, Jeff 
Duncalf and Laura Olsen. Jane Mwangi managed and led the overall evaluation process with active 
engagement and support from UNICEF staff in various headquarters divisions, regional offices and 
country offices. 
The purpose of the report is to facilitate the exchange of knowledge among UNICEF personnel and its 
partners. The contents of the report do not necessarily reflect the policies or views of UNICEF. The text 
has not been edited to official publication standards and UNICEF accepts no responsibility for error. 
The designations in this publication do not imply an opinion on the legal status of any country or 
territory, or of its authorities, or the delimitation of frontiers. 
The copyright for this report is held by the United Nations Children’s Fund. Permission is required 
to reprint/reproduce/photocopy or in any other way to cite or quote from this report in written 
form. UNICEF has a formal permission policy that requires a written request to be submitted. For 
non-commercial uses, the permission will normally be granted free of charge. Please write to the 
Evaluation Office at the address below to initiate a permission request. 
For further information, please contact: 
Evaluation Office United Nations Children’s Fund 
3 United Nations Plaza New York, New York 10017 
evalhelp@unicef.org 
This report is available online at: https://www.unicef.org/evaluation/reports#/detail/18406/
UNICEF, 2022. Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the Level 3 Humanitarian Crisis in Syria. 
UNICEF Evaluation Office, New York.

i
Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the Level 3 Humanitarian Crisis in Syria
TABLE OF CONTENTS
PREFACE
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
TABLE OF ACRONYMS
1.	
BACKGROUND AND OVERVIEW	
1.2  Evaluation purpose, scope and intended users	
1.3  Evaluation approach and methodology	
1.4  Evaluation questions	
2.	
THE SYRIA CRISIS AND THE HUMANITARIAN RESPONSE	
2.1  The Syria crisis and its effects	
2.2  The international humanitarian aid context since 2018	
3.	
UNICEF ROLE AND STRATEGY IN RESPONSE TO THE SYRIA CRISIS	
3.1  The organization’s evolving role and strategy	
3.2  How should the UNICEF role in humanitarian action be understood?	
4.	
EVALUATING THE UNICEF PROGRAMME 	
4.1  Introduction	
4.2  Programme relevance, appropriateness and adaptation to context	
4.3  Programme strategy, logic and consistency with the CCCs	
4.4  Programme coverage and targeting	
4.5  Balance and coherence of UNICEF programme	
4.6  Programme delivery and effectiveness	
iii
v
xxi
1
3
5
10
11
11
25
30
30
34
39
39
42
49
56
59
62

ii
Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the Level 3 Humanitarian Crisis in Syria
5.	
WORKING WITH OTHERS: LEADERSHIP, COORDINATION, PARTNERSHIPS
5.1  UNICEF leadership and coordination roles
5.2  UNICEF collaboration with GoS, ministries and other authorities
5.3  UNICEF collaboration with United Nations agencies, SARC and NGOs
5.4  Accountability to and engagement with affected populations
6.	
MANAGEMENT AND OPERATIONAL SUPPORT
6.1  Whole of Syria management and support arrangements
6.2  Finance and risk management	
6.3  Staffing and human resources	
6.4  Supply and the procurement of goods and services	
6.5  Programme monitoring, quality assurance and beneficiary feedback
6.6  Knowledge and information management	
6.7  Fundraising	
6.8  Communications and public advocacy	
7.	
CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS	
7.1  Overall conclusions	
7.2  Programme, coordination and partnership conclusions	
7.3  Management and support function conclusions	
7.4  Cross-cutting issues	
7.5  Recommendations	
ANNEXES	
Annex 1.  Terms of Reference	
Annex 2.  Evaluation Matrix	
Annex 3 . List of Words Cited	
66
66
69
73
77
79
79
85
87
90
91
93
93
95
97
97
105
111
115
116
127
127
140
157

iii
Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the Level 3 Humanitarian Crisis in Syria
PREFACE
Since the outbreak of conflict in Syria over a decade ago, UNICEF has been responding to the 
needs of Syrian children and their families both inside and outside the country. This report 
focuses on the UNICEF response inside Syria over the last four years. It asks whether UNICEF 
has found the right roles for itself, given the challenging and evolving context, and assesses 
how well UNICEF performed those roles. 
This evaluation contains lessons for UNICEF and for the wider humanitarian community. 
Its recommendations, many of which have been already acted upon, take into account 
the current context and its likely future directions, and I am confident that this report will 
contribute to improving the organization’s work to serve children in Syria and around the 
world.
The Evaluation Office assembled a specialized team of independent consultants to conduct 
this exercise. I am grateful to James Darcy, the team leader, for his insight, professionalism 
and commitment to this exercise. I am also grateful to the team members, Francesca Ballarin, 
Jeff Duncalf, Enrico Leonardi, and Laura Olsen for their excellent work. This evaluation would 
not have been possible without the support of UNICEF staff at all levels of the organization, 
and I would like to express sincere thanks to Adele Khodr, Bo Viktor Nylund, Ghada Kachachi, 
Michiru Sugi Mita, Olivia Roberts, Mohamad Abbsi, Aya Elbizem, Melinda Young, Robert 
Stryk, Alhaji Bah and Jamilya Jusaeva. Finally, many thanks to colleagues in the UNICEF 
Evaluation Office, namely, Jane Mwangi, Laura Olsen, Dalma Rivero and Geeta Dey. 
Robert McCouch 
Director of Evaluation 
UNICEF

iv
Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the Level 3 Humanitarian Crisis in Syria
Note on terminology used in this report
We use the phrase ‘Syria crisis’ primarily to refer to the direct and indirect effects of the 
conflict (in humanitarian and development terms) on children and their families. It does, of 
course, have wider political, economic and social connotations.
We use the term ‘humanitarian’ in the relatively broad sense that it is used in humanitarian 
response plans, to encompass emergency work and work with highly aid-dependent popu-
lations (e.g., internally displaced persons), work on early recovery, urgent rehabilitation and 
support to essential service provision.
We use the following non-standard abbreviations in the report:
•    GCAs for Government of Syria-controlled areas
•    Non-GCAs for areas of Syria not under government control
•    NWS (non-GCA) for non-government-controlled areas of northwest Syria
•    NES (non-GCA) for non-government-controlled areas of northeast Syria 
•    ‘Cross-line’ to describe aid or services provided from GCAs to non-GCAs in NWS
•    ‘Cross-zone’ to describe aid or services provided from GCAs to non-GCAs in NES

v
Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the Level 3 Humanitarian Crisis in Syria
Summary finding
In spite of an extraordinarily challenging context, the UNICEF response to the crisis 
in Syria, while variable across sectors and locations, has been strong overall. The 
evaluation finds that UNICEF managed to identify the right roles for itself over the 
evaluation period, although it has sometimes struggled (often for reasons beyond 
its control, including the political complexity of the context) to fulfil those roles, 
particularly its system-wide roles of sector coordination and leadership. In common 
with other agencies, it has also struggled to mount a response proportionate to the 
scale of needs and to monitor those needs, given often very limited direct access 
to communities. Despite this, the hard work and commitment of UNICEF staff and 
partners have helped protect millions of children across all parts of Syria from 
the worst effects of the crisis over the past four years. Those consulted for the 
evaluation noted the commitment, professionalism and expertise of UNICEF staff, the 
organization’s generally strong relations with other actors, including with governing 
authorities, local partners, sister United Nations agencies and donors, and its strong 
reputation in the region. 
EXECUTIVE 
SUMMARY

vi
Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the Level 3 Humanitarian Crisis in Syria
The evaluation also finds that UNICEF needs to develop a more coherent approach to 
its work across the whole of Syria. In particular, it needs a better-defined approach to 
the wider humanitarian agenda in order to address the acute and pervasive threats 
to children’s well-being and development. While support to direct service delivery 
remains crucial, UNICEF should continue to demonstrate the case for more systematic 
and sustainable approaches to meeting needs in a context of protracted recovery, while 
pursuing opportunities to help strengthen child-related policy and systems. Resourcing 
this in the face of diminishing donor funding will require prioritization, a phased 
approach and greater programmatic focus, and it will require new forms of partnership 
and collaboration. 
Evaluation scope and purpose
Commissioned by the UNICEF 
Evaluation Office, this evaluation 
concerns the UNICEF response to 
the Level 3 (L3) humanitarian crisis 
in Syria over the period 2018–2021. It 
has both a learning and accountability 
purpose, and while it is largely 
summative in nature, it makes 
recommendations for strengthening 
the organization’s approach in light of 
the current situation and likely future 
developments in the country.
The evaluation is strategic rather 
than technical or operational in its 
focus: it asks whether UNICEF has 
found the right roles for itself in Syria 
over the past four years given the 
evolving context, and how well it 
performed in those roles. This includes 
consideration of UNICEF interventions 
across the whole of Syria, managed 
from three main ‘hubs’ (Damascus, 
Gaziantep, Amman), including how 
well these interventions have been 
harmonized. It takes an ‘outside-in’ 
approach, assessing the value of 
UNICEF interventions with respect 
to the priorities for children and their 
families, the organization’s mandate 
and core functions, the roles played 
by other actors and the needs of the 
wider response system. These in turn 
are considered against the backdrop 
of an evolving political, institutional, 
economic and demographic context 
across the country.
1

vii
Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the Level 3 Humanitarian Crisis in Syria
Evaluation questions, 
methodology and process
The focus of the evaluation has been 
on questions of the relevance and 
coverage of the UNICEF response, its 
quality and effectiveness, its coherence 
across sectors and geographic areas, 
and its connectedness and balance 
between short- and longer-term 
agendas. These questions are reviewed 
with respect to the UNICEF programme 
and in relation to its wider role within 
the United Nations family and the 
humanitarian system.
Evidence was gathered from a variety 
of sources, including documentation 
and key informants from both 
within and outside UNICEF. Around 
180 interviews were conducted in 
total. During field visits in October/
November 2021, in-person interviews 
were conducted in Gaziantep, Amman, 
Damascus, Aleppo and Deir-ez-Zor. For 
operational reasons, the evaluation 
team was not able to travel in the areas 
of northwestern and northeastern 
Syria (NWS/NES) outside government 
control. These in-person interviews 
were supplemented by remote 
informant interviews and by online 
surveys of staff and partners. 
The evolving context and 
priorities for children
The humanitarian situation in Syria 
since 2018 has been different to that 
prevailing in earlier periods of the 
crisis, and yet equally demanding 
of UNICEF engagement. On some 
metrics, notably food security, the 
situation continues to deteriorate, as 
reflected in the most recent United 
Nations-led Humanitarian Needs 
Overview (HNO) for 2022. Needs 
now relate less to the direct effects 
of conflict than to its indirect effects: 
continuing mass displacement, steep 
economic decline, damaged or lost 
infrastructure, inoperative systems, 
loss of professional capacities, and 
related loss of access to basic services. 
Over half of the pre-conflict population 
remains displaced, of which around 
6.9 million are internally displaced 
(a further 5.6 million are refugees). 
Greater stability has allowed increased 
humanitarian access in some areas, 
although access remained limited 
throughout the evaluation period, 
particularly in areas of the country 
outside government control. High 
levels of insecurity continue to 
characterize some areas, particularly
in NWS.
2
3

viii
Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the Level 3 Humanitarian Crisis in Syria
While the Government of Syria 
controls around 70 per cent of the 
state’s territory, large areas in the 
northwest and northeast of the 
country remained outside government 
control over the evaluation period. 
From a humanitarian perspective, 
the result has been three main 
geographic regions of concern: the 
areas controlled by government, 
and the areas of NWS (in Idlib and 
Aleppo Governorates) and NES (in 
Deir-ez-Zor, Ar-Raqqa, Al-Hasakah and 
parts of Aleppo Governorate) that 
lie outside its control. The latter are 
characterized by high levels of internal 
displacement, general lack of services 
and restricted access for international 
humanitarian actors. But humanitarian 
needs, increasingly linked to economic 
hardship, are prevalent across almost 
the entire country. 
The evaluation suggests that the wider 
humanitarian agenda encompasses 
three priority agendas for children 
across the whole of Syria. The 
first (Agenda A) concerns specific 
emergency or high aid-dependency 
situations that pose severe, acute 
threats to child health, well-being 
and safety. The second (Agenda B) 
relates to less acute but widespread, 
severe and persistent threats to child 
health, security or well-being. The third 
(Agenda C) concerns critical threats to 
child development and life chances, 
including lack of access to basic 
education and lack of opportunities for 
adolescents. These agendas overlap 
and are causally inter-related: failure 
to address one risks exacerbating 
the others. Each agenda requires a 
different approach. The first typically 
requires (sustained) direct service 
delivery, while the second and third 
require support to existing or new 
systems of basic service provision. The 
challenge of achieving scale, quality 
and complementarity of services is 
increasingly likely to require area-
based, multi-sector and multi-agency 
approaches.
4