Formative Evaluation of the Girls’ Access through Female 
Teacher Education (GATE) Scholarship Programme 
Afghanistan: 2015 – 2019 
 
Final Report 
July 2021 
 
Dr Rosaria Kunda Marron 
Education and Development Solutions 
 
 
 

 
 
 

i 
 
Contributors 
This formative evaluation of the GATE Programme commissioned by UNICEF Afghanistan's Country Office was 
conducted by Education and Development Solutions (EADS) with support from Assess, Transform and 
Reach (ATR) Consulting. The lead evaluator was Dr Rosaria Kunda Marron, and she was supported by Dr 
Pauline Lyseight-jones, and the EADS quality assurance team. 
 
The purpose of this evaluation was to facilitate the mutually reinforcing purposes of both accountability 
and learning for UNICEF and implementing partners, and the copyright for this report is held by UNICEF. 
 
Acknowledgements 
EADS would like to acknowledge the support of the team from UNICEF who supported and assisted in the 
design and execution of the evaluation, particularly Simon Peter Aturia, Kadijah Bahram, Ivan Ssenkubuge, 
Minaa Ryan and Stanley Gwavuya. EADS also thanks ATR Consulting in Afghanistan who provided 
invaluable support throughout the entire process. Specifically, EADS thanks Mr. Fayaz Amiri (ATR 
Consulting) for the overall coordination of the field work, and the entire team from ATR for their time and 
support in collecting and analysing the data.  
 
EADS also thanks the officials from the Afghanistan Ministry of Education,particularly officials from the 
national Teacher Education Directotate and the participating Provincial and District Education 
Directorates for their support and interest in the evaluation. EADS particularly thanks the participating 
Teacher Training Colleges for their assistance in facilitating the evaluation at field level.  
 
EADS also thanks all the students and graduates of the GATE Scholarship Programme, the principals in the 
TTCs, the headteachers and teachers who are working with graduates of the GATE Programme, the School 
Management Shuras who support the GATE Students and the pupils taught by the GATE Programme 
graduates for their time and substantial input during the data collection for this evaluation.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

ii 
 
Abbreviations and Acronyms 
ALCS 
Afghanistan Living Conditions Survey 
ALC  
Accelerated Learning Centre 
ATR 
 
Assess, Transform and Reach Consulting 
 
BEGE 
Basic Education and Gender Equality 
CADE 
Convention against Discrimination in Education 
CBS 
 
Community Based School 
CEDAW            Convention on the Elimination of all forms of Discrimination against  
 
 
Women 
CFS 
 
Child Friendly School 
CPAP 
 
Country Programme Action Plan 
CRC 
 
Convention on the Rights of the Child 
EADS 
 
Education and Development Solutions 
EFA 
 
Education for All 
EQRA  
Education Quality Reform in Afghanistan 
GIZ 
 
Gesellschaft für Internationale Zusammenarbeit 
GPE 
 
Global Partnership for Education 
MDG 
 
Millenium Development Goals 
MoE 
 
Ministry of Education 
NESP 
 
National Education Strategic Plan 
NGO 
 
Non-Governmental Organisation 
SDG 
 
Sustainable Development Goals 
SMS 
 
School Management Shuras 
TED 
 
Teacher Education Directorate 
ToC 
 
Theory of Change 
ToR 
 
Terms of Reference 
TTC 
 
Teacher Training College 
UNGEI  
United Nations Girls Education Initiative 
WASH  
Water, Sanitation and Hygiene 

iii 
 
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 
vii 
1.0 INTRODUCTION 
1 
   1.1 Context: Gender in Education 
1 
   1.2 Girls Access through Teacher Education (GATE) Programme Overview 
6 
   1.3 Programme Alignment 
11 
   1.4 Formative Evaluation of the GATE Programme 
14 
   1.5 Structure of the Report 
16 
2.0 EVALUATION DESIGN 
16 
   2.1 Evaluation Questions 
17 
   2.2 Evaluation Methodology 
19 
   2.3 Data Analysis 
27 
   2.4 Limitations 
28 
   2.5 Ethical Issues 
29 
3.0 EVALUATION FINDINGS 
31 
   3.1 Relevance 
31 
   3.2 Coherence  
37 
   3.3 Efficiency 
41 
   3.4 Effectiveness 
45 
   3.5 Sustainability 
56 
4.0 CONCLUSIONS: RESPONDING TO EVALUATION PRIORITIES 
59 
   4.1 Relevance 
59 
   4.2 Coherence 
60 
   4.3 Efficiency 
60 
   4.4 Effectiveness 
61 
   4.5 Sustainability 
62 
   4.6 Integration of Gender, Human Rights, and Equity 
63 
5.0 LESSONS LEARNED 
64 
6.0 RECOMMENDATIONS 
66 
BIBLIOGRAPHY 
70 
APPENDICES 
73 
   Appendix 1: GATE Programme Draft Theory of Change (UNICEF Afghanistan, 2020) 
73 
   Appendix 2: Terms of Reference: (Request for Proposal), 9th April 2020 
74 
   Appendix 3: Evaluation Matrix 
87 
   Appendix 4: Data Collection Instruments 
112 
   Appendix 5: Evaluation Team 
162 
   Appendix 6: Evaluation Mission Schedule 
164 
   Appendix 7: UNICEF Research Ethics Approval Certificate 
167 
   Appendix 8: Proposed Reconstructed Components for the GATE Programme ToC 
168 
   Appendix 9: Key Informants - Meetings via Zoom 
170 
   Appendix 10: Documents Reviewed 
171 
   Appendix 11: Consent/Assent Forms 
173 

iv 
 
   Appendix 12: Snap Survey Data 
179 
   Appendix 13: Stories of Transformation 
199 
 
 
 
FIGURES 
Figure 1: Gender Parity Index (GPI) for student enrolment 
3 
Figure 2: Culturally Responsive Evaluation Framework  
17 
Figure 3: Schematic depiction of Theory of Change 
32 
Figure 4: Sources from where scholarship recipients first heard about the GATE Programme 
45 
Figure 5: Percentage distribution of contract types 
47 
Figure 6: Perceptions of scholarship recipients on an increase in number of girls in schools  
52 
Figure 7: Scholarship recipients' perceptions (in numbers) of lecturer support 
185 
Figure 8: Age range of mentors 
189 
Figure 9: Graduate teacher perceptions of how supportive headteachers are in their schools 
197 
 
GRAPHS 
 
Graph 1: Trends of public teachers by gender (EMIS/MoE: 2018) 
5 
Graph 2: Female primary school teachers in Afghanistan  
6 
Graph 3: Student enrolment onto the GATE Programme between 2015 - 2020 
8 
Graph 4: Number of organisations supporting girls’ education in Afghanistan 
39 
Graph 5: Perceptions on how active PED and DED are in supporting the GATE Programme 
42 
Graph 6: Percentage of students enrolled during 2015 - 2019 
46 
Graph 7: Number of pre-service scholarship recipients between 2015 – 2019 
47 
Graph 8: Percentage graduates by type of school they are teaching in 
48 
Graph 9: Percentage of graduates for different durations before being retained on 
government payroll after graduation 
48 
Graph 10: Percentage of scholarship recipients hoping to work in hard-to-reach areas after 
graduation 
49 
Graph 11: Perceptions of scholarship recipients on increase in number of female teachers in 
schools in their communities 
50 
Graph 12: Perceptions of scholarship recipients on increase in number of female teachers in 
their communities by province 
50 
Graph 13: Community attitudes towards female participation in school activities outside the 
classroom 
55 
Graph 14: Perceptions of scholarship recipients on whether females participate in activities 
outside school 
56 
Graph 15: Percentage of scholarship recipients in different age ranges 
180 
Graph 16: Percentage of age distribution of scholarship recipients in seven provinces 
180 
Graph 17: Teaching experience of scholarship recipients prior to being awarded the GATE 
scholarship 
181 
Graph 18: Scholarship recipients ranking of six scholarship support components 
182 
Graph 19: Number of recruited lecturers each year from 2015 – 2019 
183 
Graph 20: Number of male and female lecturers in seven provinces 
183 

v 
 
Graph 21: Highest qualifications of lecturers (in numbers) in seven provinces 
184 
Graph 22: Scholarship recipients’ perceptions of lecturer support 
184 
Graph 1: Perceptions of gender responsiveness (in numbers) of teaching and learning 
materials by province 
186 
Graph 24: Satisfaction with five aspects of pedagogy  
186 
Graph 25: Satisfaction with five aspects of inclusiveness/participation  
187 
Graph 26: Number of male and female mentors in each of the seven provinces  
188 
Graph 27: Number of students and mentors in each of the seven provinces 
189 
Graph 28: Highest qualifications of mentors by province 
190 
Graph 3: Perceptions of mentorship support on three aspects 
191 
Graph 30: Percentage of scholarship recipients and frequency of meeting with their mentors 
191 
Graph 31: Percentage of scholarship recipients visited by mentors after graduation 
192 
Graph 32: Percentage of lecturers who reported that they have/have not received training 
as part of the GATE Programme 
193 
Graph 33: Number of students in GATE Programme classes observed 
194 
Graph 34: Adequate physical environment in classes observed  
195 
Graph 35: Female students and number of female toilets in each TTC observed 
195 
Graph 364: Graduate teacher perceptions about the quality of their relationships with other 
teachers in their schools 
198 
 
 
 
TABLES 
Table 1: Gross Enrolment Ratio (EMIS, 2018) 
3 
Table 2: Notable indicators for education (including primary and secondary)  
4 
Table 3: Outcome components of projects included in formative evaluation 
8 
Table 4: Focus of Questions in ToR 
19 
Table 5: GATE Evaluation Sampling Frame 
20 
Table 6: KII Respondents 
22 
Table 7: FGD Respondent groups 
23 
Table 8: Field Researchers 
26 
Table 9: Recommendation Priority, Timeframe and Accountability 
69 
Table 10: Number of direct beneficiaries of GATE Programme by province 
179 
 
 
 
 

vi 
 
 
Map of Afghanistan highlighting provinces with GATE Programme Beneficiaries 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

vii 
 
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 
Overview of the context 
The right to education is recognised by the Government of Afghanistan in its constitution,1 and gender 
has been identified as one of the main disparities particularly impacting the education sector (Ministry of 
Education, 2019, p. 33). Gender inequality in Afghanistan’s education sector is further reflected in the 
presence or absence of female teachers. The shortage of teachers—particularly female teachers—has 
been identified as a major bottleneck for access, attendance and retention of girls in learning spaces. Rural 
areas are most affected by the shortfall of female teachers with some provinces having less than 5%  of 
teachers being female and half of the districts having no female teachers at all (UNICEF Afghanistan, 2014). 
 
Overview of the intervention 
UNICEF has been providing financial and technical support to the MoE’s Teacher Education Directorate 
(TED) through the GATE Programme to complement to the government’s initiatives and to develop a 
sustainable strategy for increasing female teachers in rural areas. Practically, the programme is 
implemented by the TED at provincial and district levels (as primary duty bearers) and participating 
Teacher Training Colleges (TTC) (as secondary duty bearers). It provides an opportunity for a two-year 
scholarship on a teacher training programme based in a TTC for both pre-service and in-service female 
teachers who have Grade 12 as their highest qualification to achieve a Grade 14 qualification, which is the 
minimum requirement for teachers in Afghanistan.  
 
Scholarship recipients are drawn from provinces with the lowest numbers and percentages of female 
teachers and low enrolment rates for girls, and they are supported by mentors and lecturers who receive 
training (as part of the programme) around gender responsive teaching and coaching skills (UNICEF 
Afghanistan, 2014). The GATE Programme was initially implemented as a standalone initiative between 
2014 - 2017, but was subsequently subsumed as part of an integrated programme (UNICEF Afghanistan, 
2020, p. 6) comprising two interventions as discussed in section 1.2.1.  
 
Evaluation purpose, objectives and intended audience 
This evaluation sought to respond to two overarching dimensions (UNICEF Afghanistan, 2020, p. 5): 
• 
Assess progress of the programme in relation to increasing female teacher presence in hard to 
reach areas, girls participation in learning spaces and retention; and 
• 
Identify gaps along the results chain and recommend remedies to improve and inform scale up 
of the programme 
As a formative evaluation, this assignment looked at the GATE programme to explore possibilities of 
improving and/or strengthening it using the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development 
(OECD) Development Assistance Committee (DAC) criteria including relevance, coherence, effectiveness, 
efficiency and sustainability. The evaluation also provided an independent platform for stakeholders to 
 
1 Articles 17, 43 and 44 

viii 
 
contribute towards programme design and implementation through their experiences, thoughts and 
recommendations.  
 
Findings from the evaluation will be used for accountability, programme improvement and learning. 
Primary users are UNICEF and the MoE who will use the findings to assess and report on the programme’s 
performance and results that have been achieved so far. The findings will also be used as a learning tool 
by providing insight into  programme achievements and lessons learned that are based on evidence to 
inform strategic decision making.  Secondary users will include other key stakeholders and implementing 
partners including the Local Education Group (LEG).  
 
Evaluation Methodology 
The evaluation questions have been addressed through both quantitative and qualitative research, 
complemented by an analysis of key programme documents as secondary data sources. This approach 
consolidates the findings from qualitative and quantitative evidence gathered from multiple sources to 
cover the breadth and depth of the evaluation in a comprehensive and rigorous manner.  
The evaluation team comprised 2 international consultants and a national consultant based within a local 
research company to help administer the data collection tools. Data collection was organised in a tiered 
approach to mitigate logistical challenges.  
 
In total, 577 people were interviewed either individually or in groups during the inception and data 
collection phases. This included 346 surveys, 226 key informant interviews, 27 focus group discussions 
and several meetings via zoom. As suggested in the ToR, the seven participating provinces were 
purposively selected by UNICEF—Badghis, Helmand, Khost, Laghman, Nangarhar, Paktia, and Wardak—
on the basis of them having high numbers of GATE Programme active students and graduates.  
 
Key findings  
Programme Processes 
• 
Value and demand for the GATE Programme: There appears to be significant demand for the 
scholarship programme and the need to provide scholarships to females for teacher training may 
be substantively greater than the current demand. The findings of this evaluation attest to the 
motivation by females to study to become teachers as well as the programme’s contribution to 
an increased number of qualified female teachers. The high programme retention rates, 
graduation rates and the low drop out rates all speak to this. 
• 
Adequacy and relevance of the GATE Programme components:The programme has very 
practical strategies and components which encourage potential students to enrol onto the 
programme and also those already on the programme to continue and complete their training. 
Overall, the transport allowance was highlighted as the most important aspect of the programme 
by all respondents because of the large distances that students often need to travel to access the 
TTC’s and presumably the expenses incurred as a result. 
 

ix 
 
• 
The existence of an enabling environment for programme graduates to teach: The graduates 
who are teaching are working in enabling and supportive environments, and have no major 
bottlenecks affecting their work as teachers.  
Programme Performance 
• 
Programme targets: The programme exceeded its targets in terms of numbers of scholarship 
recipients, qualified lecturers to teach the students, and mentors to support the scholarship 
recipients. 
• 
Short Term Outcome: The qualitative evidence suggests that the programme has increased the 
number of female teachers in hard-to-reach areas. During the period under evaluation 1,105 
(68%) of the scholarship recipients had graduated from the programme including 366 (33%) pre-
service students who had been recruited as teachers after graduation. 
• 
Linking two projects into one programme has been strategic: The evaluation noted that the GATE 
Programme was initially implemented as a standalone initiative (UNICEF Afghanistan, 2020, p. 6). 
It later combined two projects (Refer to Section 1.2) to strategically focus on girls education within 
Outcome 5 of UNICEF’s Country Programme Action Plan, 2015 – 2021. This strategic shift re-
aligned the GATE Programme within UNICEF ACO’s overall education strategy by re-framing it as 
an exit strategy for the Community Based Education (CBE) Programme that would catapult girls 
and female teachers into the formal education system in Afghanistan. It also aligned the 
programme with the intent of the Girls’ Education Policy to ‘co-ordinate interventions, avoid 
duplication and position girls’ education as a priority in the planning and strategic actions to 
contribute to the NESP III objectives’ (UNICEF Afghanistan, 2020, p. 8). 
• 
Collaboration and coordination with stakeholders is an effective strategy for the programme: 
UNICEF’s partnership approach to programming with the MoE provides a good foundation for 
programme implementation— and potentially scale up —which could be leveraged further to 
respond to the need for more females to be trained as teachers. The findings from this evaluation 
also show that the various GATE Programme interventions are complementary and harmonized 
with those of other relevant stakeholders or donor agencies, other UN agencies, NGOs, and 
government education departments at central, provincial and district levels.  
• 
Significance of community support for the programme: The evaluation found that community 
members and leaders are supportive of the GATE Programme in spite of the absence of deliberate 
engagement component, and that they play an important role in their communities to promote 
awareness of the importance of education and to support girls’ education and female teacher 
training. With complex issues including religious and cultural dynamics, communication and 
engagement with communities is an important approach to ensure that the programme remains 
relevant and adaptable.  
Gaps along the results chain 
• 
Female graduates are not supported or guaranteed recruitment on completion of training: The 
GATE Programme does not specifically support the recruitment of programme graduates as 
teachers in any way despite the intent in the ToC to do so through graduate networks.  
• 
None of the mentors on the programme have been trained: None of the mentors on the 
programme have been trained.  
• 
Feedback mechanisms need stregthening: The evaluation did not find any evidence of the 
involvement of the programme beneficiaries in providing feedback to the programme. 

x 
 
• 
Programme monitoring can be strengthened: Despite UNICEF’s exeptional outreach and 
presence in the targeted provinces through the zonal offices, the evaluation did not come across 
an M&E strategy for the programme. Where available, the information/data were fragmented, 
out of date or incomplete.  
Existing Theory of Change 
• 
The Draft ToC is moderately descriptive, and portrays a reasonable, defensible, and sequential 
order from implementation strategies or activities and on to outputs, outcomes, and impacts. It 
also includes clear indicators at output level and outcome level. 
• 
Applicable assumptions and risks at the various stages are not outlined clearly and it is difficult to 
link relevant considerations for outputs, outcomes and impact or to monitor, track and/or act 
upon potential and emerging issues that may affect the achievement of outputs, outcomes and 
impact.  
 
Extent to which cross-cutting issues (gender, equity, human rights) are integrated into the programme 
• 
As a gender in education initiative, the GATE Programme intentionally focused on female students 
as the scholarship recipients. 
• 
In terms of equity and the realisation of human rights, the GATE Programme was designed to 
target and impact areas with low attendance and participation rates for girls and very low 
numbers of female teachers. 
Conclusion 
The programme is effective in training female teachers and increasing the number of female teachers in 
Afghanistan, which in turn contributes  to an increase in the number of girls in learning spaces. The GATE 
programme has established itself as a key intervention to address some of the needs and priorities of 
Afghanistan’s education sector. Through the scholarship components, female students are provided with 
the opportunity to train as teachers and they are supported to do so. Programme beneficiaries also 
indicated that the number of girls’ in schools has been increasing though progress is minimal. The 
evaluation concluded that the GATE Programme has potential to increase the number of female teachers 
in hard-to-reach areas.  
Recommendations 
Based on the results of this study, the evaluation provides several recommendations2 to strengthen the 
quality of the GATE Programme. These are outlined below in order of proposed priority; 
1. Reconstruct the (draft) Theory of Change to include specific assumptions and risks between the 
strategic activities, outputs, outcome and impact, streamline the conceptualisation of the 
programme, and make it more self-explanatory and predictive. 
2. Revise, outline and clarify the targeting in the recruitment focus between pre-service and in-
service teacher training scholarship recipients: The GATE Programme aims to recruit more 
female teachers and also to upskill female teachers who do not have the G 14 qualification. The 
ToC does not clearly spell out the two intentions and does not appear to be deliberate in recruiting 
specific numbers of pre-service and in-service teachers. 
 
2 Refer to Table 12 which outlines all the recommendation priorities and proposed timeframes for action