1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Final Evaluation Report 
 
Evaluation of the Inclusive Education Programme Model UNICEF is implementing in Public Schools 
 
RFP no. 2020-9157988 
 
UNICEF Jordan Country Office 
MENA Region 
2022 
 
 
 
Evaluation Team 
 
Edvise ME  
info@edvise-me.com  
 
Submitted by Edvise ME 
on 10th of May, 2022 

2 
 
     TABLE OF CONTENTS 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
2 
TEXT BOXES 
3 
LIST OF TABLES 
3 
LIST OF GRAPHS 
3 
LIST OF FIGURES 
4 
ACRONYMS 
5 
SECTION 1:  EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 
6 
SECTION 2: CONTEXT AND BACKGROUND 
11 
2.1 
COUNTRY CONTEXT 
11 
2.2 
OBJECT OF THE EVALUATION 
13 
SECTION 3: PURPOSE, OBJECTIVES AND SCOPE OF THE EVALUATION 
15 
3.1 
PURPOSE 
15 
3.2 
SCOPE OF THE EVALUATION 
15 
3.3 
THEORY OF CHANGE (TOC) 
17 
SECTION 4: EVALUATION DESIGN AND METHODOLOGY 
18 
4.1 
OVERVIEW 
18 
4.2 
EVALUATION PROCESS 
18 
4.3 
DETAILED METHODOLOGY 
19 
SECTION 5: EVALUATION FINDINGS 
27 
5.1 
RELEVANCE 
27 
5.2 
EFFECTIVENESS 
35 
5.3 
COST EFFICIENCY & EFFECTIVENESS 
48 
5.4           IMPACT LONG-TERM 
50 
5.5 
SUSTAINABILITY 
51 
5.6 
COVERAGE 
53 
SECTION 6: EVALUATION CONCLUSIONS AND LESSON LEARNED 
54 
SECTION 7: RECOMMENDATIONS 
55 
SECTION 8: ANNEXES 
58 
8.1 
LIST OF PEOPLE INTERVIEWED (KII) 
58 
8.2 
SCHOOL VISIT SCHEDULE 
59 
8.3 
OOSC FOCUS GROUP DISCUSSION SCHEDULE 
60 
8.4 
DATA COLLECTION PROTOCOLS 
61 
8.5 
TEAM COMPOSITION 
68 
8.6 
LIST OF DOCUMENTS CONSULTED 
70 
8.7 
ASSISTIVE DEVICES AVAILABLE 
73 
8.8 
ACHIEVEMENT OF PROGRAMME OBJECTIVES 
75 
8.9 
SHADOW TEACHER JOB DESCRIPTION 
77 
8.10 
SURVEY RESULTS AND ANALYSIS 
81 
8.11 
FGD PARTICIPANTS SIGNED CONSENT FORMS 
81 
8.12 
FIELD WORK RECORDINGS 
81 
8.13 
FIELD WORK NOTES 
81 
8.14 
EVALUATION MATRIX  
81 
8.15 
TERMS OF REFERENCE 
81 
8.16 
DATA COLLECTION TOOLS  
81 
 

3 
 
TEXT BOXES 
Box 1: Evaluation Summary – Relevance 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Box 2: Resource Room Definition  
Box 3: Evaluation Summary – Effectiveness 
Box 4: IEP Definition  
Box 5: Shadow Teacher Definition  
Box 6: Evaluation Summary – Cost Efficiency & Effectiveness 
Box 7: Evaluation Summary – Impact Long – term 
Box 8: Evaluation Summary – Sustainability 
Box 9: Evaluation Summary – Coverage 
 
LIST OF TABLES 
Table 1: Critical and Strategic Recommendations  
Table 2: Evaluation Criteria and Associated Questions  
Table 3: Relevance - Evaluation Questions  
Table 4: Areas of Alignment from NIES  
Table 5: Areas of Divergence from NIES  
Table 6: Effectiveness – Evaluation Questions 
Table 7: Students with disabilities enrolment rates in Public Schools  
Table 8: Students with disabilities retention rates in Intervention Schools 
Table 9: Facilitating Factors for the IE Programme 
Table 10: Cost Efficiency & Effectiveness - Evaluation Questions  
Table 11: Impact Long - term - Evaluation Questions  
Table 12: Sustainability - Evaluation Questions  
Table 13: Coverage - Evaluation Questions 
 
LIST OF GRAPHS 
Graph 1: School accessibility according to Educators 
Graph 2: Use of Assistive Technology Devices according to Educators 
Graph 3: Effectiveness of the IE programme according to Educators  
Graph 4: Should students with disabilities be included in school? According to Educators. 
Graph 4.1: By Job Title  
         
27 
29 
35 
46 
47 
48 
50 
51 
53 
        
9 
16 
27 
31 
32 
35 
37 
37 
44 
48 
50 
51 
53 
 
 
 
 
      
29 
30 
36 
39 
39 
 
 

4 
 
Graph 4.2: By School Type 
Graph 4.3: By Enrolment in the IE programme 
Graph 4.4: By Enrolment in the IE programme Training  
Graph 5: Student’s acceptance of children with disabilities in school,  
according to Educators 
Graph 6: Parent’s acceptance of children with disabilities in schools,  
according to Educators 
Graph 7: Barrier’s students with disabilities encounter according to Educators 
Graph 8: Did you benefit from the training? 
Graph 9: Was the training effective in building your knowledge of working with  
students with disabilities? 
Graph 10: Did the training provide you with the necessary skills to accommodate 
 students with disabilities in your classroom? 
Graph 11: Did you apply what you learned during training in your classroom? 
Graph 12: Integration of children with disabilities in IE programme  
school, according to Educators 
 
 
LIST OF FIGURES 
Figure 1: Evaluation Timeline 
Figure 2: Description of Evaluation Phases 
Figure 3: Overview of Survey Respondents 
 
 
 
 
 
39 
39    
39 
40 
 
40 
 
43 
45 
45 
 
46 
 
46 
47 
 
 
 
 
 
         
18 
19 
22 
 
 
 

5 
 
ACRONYMS 
 
CRC 
Convention on the Rights of the Child 
CRPD 
Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities 
ESP 
Education Strategic Plan 
FGD 
Focus Group Discussions 
HCD 
Higher Council for the Rights of Persons with Disabilities 
HRB 
Human Rights Based 
IE 
Inclusive Education 
IEP 
Individual Education Plan 
KII 
Key Informant Interviews 
MC 
Mercy Corps 
MoE 
Ministry of Education 
NIES 
National Inclusive Education Strategy 
OOSC 
Out-of-School Children  
SDGs 
Sustainable Development Goals 
UNESCWA 
the United Nations Economic and Social Commission for 
Western Asia 
UNESCO 
The United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural 
Organisation 
UNICEF 
The United Nations Children's Fund 
ERfKE 
Education Reform for the Knowledge Economy  
GIZ 
Deutsche Gesellschaft für Internationale Zusammenarbeit 
GmbH  
SOP 
Standard Operating Procedure 
FCDO 
Foreign, Commonwealth and Development Office 
AAI  
Accelerating Access to Education Initiative 2.0 

6 
 
SECTION 1:  EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 
Background: Inclusive education is not a new concept. It is a transformative way of 
progressing towards more equitable education systems and in 2015, inclusive 
education became a means to achieving the Sustainable Development Goal (SDG) 
4 - “ensure inclusive and equitable quality education and promote lifelong 
opportunities for all” 1. The Ministry of Education (MoE) in Jordan has made significant 
strides, with the support of its partners and donors, toward providing children with 
disabilities with access to schools and will continue to make progress with its 
endorsement of the ten-year National Inclusive Education Strategy (NIES).  
Despite the MoE commitment to inclusive education, there remains significant room 
for improvement in providing children with disabilities with access to education.  In the 
2018/2019 school year, 1,396,868 students were enrolled in schools, out of which 21,859 
were students with disabilities (approximately 1.5% of the total school population, 
compared to the 10-15% global average of people with disabilities).  
The object of this evaluation is The United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF) Jordan 7-
year IE (Inclusive Education) Programme (hereinafter referred to as the IE 
Programme), implemented by Mercy Corps (MC), that aimed to ensure children with 
disabilities have equal access to quality education in public schools. 
 The specific objectives of the Inclusive Education (IE) Programme were: 
1) Improve the accessibility of schools;  
2) Provide children with disabilities rehabilitation sessions and assistive devices;  
3) Improve the quality of education available to children with disabilities;  
4) Develop a referral and tracking system for children with disabilities;  
5) Raise awareness and acceptance of parents and the community on the 
importance of IE.  
Objective: The evaluation aimed to inform UNICEF of the progress made towards 
achieving the programme’s purpose and objectives, more specifically on 1) The 
adequacy of UNICEF's IE Programme delivered by MC; 2) The adequacy of UNICEF’s 
support to the MoE at the central level, and how it aligns to the NIES as well as to good 
global practices.  
The scope of the evaluation covered access, quality, demand, and system 
strengthening. The evaluation questions (and sub-questions) were developed based 
on the OECD/DAC “Guidelines for Project and Programme Evaluations”. Thus, the 
criteria were relevance, effectiveness, cost efficiency and effectiveness, long-term 
impact, sustainability, and coverage. For each criterion, the Evaluation Team 
collected data as agreed each question and sub-questions. 
The evaluation methodology was based on the United Nations principles of a Human 
Rights-Based (HRB) approach to development: integrity, accountability, respect, and 
beneficence. All relevant stakeholders participated in the evaluation, protocols on 

7 
 
safety, confidentiality and data were put in place, and protocols were developed to 
ensure everyone’s safety and health during the current pandemic situation. 
Data was collected through a variety of means. In total, data were collected in/from: 
● Literature review 
● An electronic survey sent to principals and teachers 
● 9 Key Informant Interviews (KII) with key entities 
● 10 school visits which entailed conducting interviews with the principals, Focus 
Group Discussions (FGDs) with teachers and students, school tours, and 
classroom observations. 
● FGDs with Out-of-School Children (OOSC) with disabilities  
Once raw data was collected, cleaned, and identified by data source, it was 
organised according to each sub-question in the evaluation matrix. Each set of data 
was analysed separately, and patterns in responses were identified.  
The Evaluation Team identified three main limitations to this evaluation. The most 
critical of which is the lack of institutional memory in every entity involved or 
concerned with the programme, particularly at the MoE. Second, was the timing of 
the data collection which took place after schools were closed for 1.5 years due to 
Covid-19, which undoubtedly affected the evaluation participants’ ability to recall 
important details. Third, there is a lack of consistent and reliable data on children with 
disabilities which is often challenging to interpret because there are several definitions 
of “children with disabilities” across the main stakeholders.  
The Evaluation Team found that, to date, the IE Programme operated in a total of 102 
schools in both host communities across all 12 governorates, as well as within the Syrian 
refugee camps. As a result, according to the programme documents provided by 
MC, the programme has integrated 4,695 children with mild to moderate disabilities 
into schools, trained 2,191 educators, and raised awareness of 23,088 parents and 
community members through awareness-raising sessions. In 2021, the IE Programme 
has initiated its exit strategy, and 37 schools were handed over to the MoE. The 
program generally achieved its set outcome level targets. However, predominantly 
due to program design, limited funding, short funding cycles, and weaknesses in the 
sector, the programme was not as successful in achieving its higher-level set 
objectives.  
The above accomplishments are significant breakthroughs for Jordan, specifically 
regarding providing more children with disabilities with better access to public schools 
and improving public schools’ capacity to accommodate students with disabilities. 
While these are critical, they are insufficient without the provision of more adequate 
resources (both financial and human) at the MoE in support of inclusive education.  
Findings: In terms of relevance, the IE Programme is conceptually considered in line 
with inclusive practices, except regarding one of its main features - reliance on the 

8 
 
concept of the resource rooms. This implies integration and not inclusion, even if 
children spend most of their school days in the regular classroom.   
Regarding effectiveness, most interventions were found effectiveness to a certain 
degree but could be improved in order to achieve more success. Some of the 
shortfalls include the absence of building consistent and standardised processes for 
the awareness-raising efforts and training a small number of educators per school. 
In terms of cost efficiency and effectiveness, the evaluation found consensus on the 
limited capacity of the MoE – both financial and technical - to take over the 
responsibility of the IE Programme or roll the programme out to more schools.  
As mentioned, the IE Programme played a crucial contributing role to changing 
perceptions surrounding students with disabilities, as well as raising awareness and 
acceptance of children with disabilities- at least among those within the IE 
Programme schools and their communities. The change in perception is considered 
a long-term impact. However, to achieve sustainability, more effort and investment 
are required to build the capacity of the MoE; institutionalise materials and processes; 
develop strong measures to ensure the continuous transmission of capacity, expertise, 
tools, and materials from the programme to the MoE. 
When looking at coverage, the IE Programme targets children who are indeed 
vulnerable, a historically underserved population. The programme also reached both 
male and female schools, schools that are in underserved communities, Syrian 
refugees within the host communities as well as the refugee camps- all showing reach 
to populations that are considered “vulnerable”.   
The Evaluation Team reached three overarching conclusions, which are: 
1. More substantial investment from MoE and its partners is critical. 
2. The definition of “children with disabilities” needs to be made consistent with 
more reliable data and decision making. 
3. Awareness-raising efforts are needed nationwide, focusing on representing 
children with disabilities and highlighting their strengths, abilities, and potential.  
The lessons learned as a result of the evaluation are:      
● Schools need to be enabled to meet the learning needs of ALL children, and in 
turn, support students to realise their potential- academic and otherwise.  
● IE is the shared responsibility of several stakeholders, both public and private, in 
support of the MoE through stable, reliable long-term partnerships and shared 
accountability. 
● It is critical, in any programming, to consider scalability, replicability and 
institutionalisation to ensure the proper mechanisms and needed financial 
allocations are in place toward sustainability. 

9 
 
The following evidence based critical and strategic recommendations were informed 
by the evaluation findings and derived from the extensive data that was collected 
from the key stakeholders and analysed. The Evaluation Team listened carefully to all 
individuals who participated in the evaluation; and in the formation of the 
recommendations paid specific attention to the shared successes, barriers and 
bottlenecks, perceived weaknesses and strengths of the programme and 
accordingly devised the recommendations. This ensured taking the perspectives of 
the duty bearers and right holders in the formation of the recommendations for 
improvement.  
The findings indicate the need for UNICEF, and other donors, to continue supporting 
the MoE in its plan and progress towards IE and its sustainability. The MoE and its 
partners need to develop a long-term sustainability roadmap that plans out the 
gradual and reasonable transition of responsibility (both technical and financial) from 
the donors to the MoE. This plan should consider governance, policy, and institutional 
capacity- both human and financial.  
Furthermore, the table below organizes the more specific recommendations at two 
levels- the system level and the programme level recommendations.  
 
Table 1: Critical and Strategic Recommendations 
 
 
Recommendation 
 
Timeframe 
 
Responsibility 
 
1. Strengthen IE data organisation- better 
documentation on enrolment and retention, 
including monitoring of attendance and progress. 
This data should be centrally recorded and updated- 
based on a consistent definition- in the OpenEMIS 
and on which all partners rely in their decision-
making. 
Medium 
Term 
MoE with 
UNICEF in 
collaboration 
with UNESCO 
and USAID-
funded JTAP 
2. Institutionalize the investments made under the IE 
Programme such as the approval and systemic 
utilisation of the programme developed manuals, 
awareness raising kits, and Standard Operating 
Procedures (SOP’s) pertaining to IE including the 
development and implementation of the IEP’s. 
Additionally, advocating toward institutionalising the 
“shadow teacher” job description and capacity 
building (pre-service as well as in-service).  
Short-Term 
MoE with 
support of 
UNICEF 
 
 
3-Require stronger project management and 
monitoring and evaluation functions and processes 
to ensure consistent and reliable data to inform 
programme decisions and continuous learning and 
improvement.  
Immediate 
UNICEF 
4-Refine the capacity building efforts through: a) 
More tailored trainings should be developed and 
Short to 
medium 
term 
UNICEF’s 
Implementing 
Partner 
System Level 

10 
 
delivered to ALL relevant MoE staff (at central, Field 
directorates and school levels) in order to equip 
them with the necessary knowledge, skills and 
attitudes to feel confident serving ALL students. b) a 
larger number of teachers need to be trained 
toward proper and effective inclusion of all students 
(including those with disabilities) in the classroom- 
moving away from the reliance on resource rooms 
and resource teachers.  
5-Develop a mechanism through which teachers, 
parents and other professionals work collaboratively 
on the development and implementation of 
Individual Education Plans (IEP’s) for students with 
disabilities.  
Short to 
Medium 
term 
UNICEF’s 
Implementing 
Partner 
6-Systemize the awareness raising interventions: 
materials and sessions for awareness raising need to 
reach all schools. Awareness raising should focus on 
recognising the abilities and strengths of children with 
disabilities beyond acceptance. 
Medium 
Term 
UNICEF with 
the assistance 
of the 
Implementing 
Partner  
7-Develop a comprehensive list of assistive 
technology and devices (with specifications) so that 
schools are instructed and can procure the needed 
resources in order to accommodate any and all 
disabilities.  
Medium 
Term 
UNICEF’s 
Implementing 
Partner 
8-Mobilise existing structures (such as the SDDP school 
or directorate level committees) toward leveraging 
comprehensive and sustainable resources and 
services to students with disabilities (including but not 
limited to physical infrastructure improvement for 
accessibility, rehabilitation sessions and psycho-social 
support). 
Medium 
term 
UNICEF and 
MoE  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Programme Level (through longer term 
programme cycles 

11 
 
SECTION 2: CONTEXT AND BACKGROUND 
 
2.1 
Country Context                        
The Jordanian Education system is now halfway through the implementation of its 
2018- 2022 (ESP), which heavily relied on the previous decade-long Education Reform 
for the Knowledge Economy (ERfKE)1 and its achievements. The ESP development also 
aligned its components with the Human Resources Development Strategy that was 
developed in 2016- which stressed the priority of providing access to quality education 
to ALL children in Jordan. Regarding inclusion, many efforts have been exerted, the 
recent effort being the development of the ten-year NIES. The NIES has been endorsed 
by the MoE, and many of its objectives and components are expected to be 
incorporated within the ESP considering the currently underway mid-term review. 
 
The total number of people with disabilities -according to the latest report by UN 
ESCWA in Jordan in 2020- is 251,499 individuals. The majority (92%) live in urban settings 
while only (8%) live in rural areas. Of them, (46%) are females and 54% are males, but 
more importantly (6%) are children between the age of 10-14 and (5.5%) between the 
age of 15 to 19. Disaggregating the statistics in terms of gender shows that there is a 
higher percentage of male people with disabilities in Jordan (aged 5-14) than 
females, (14.3%) compared to (11.2%) respectively. (78%) of male people with 
disabilities do not receive any form of schooling, compared to (62.7%) of females2.  
  
1. Jordan Progress toward IE 
 
Access 
In line with international agendas, Jordan has taken major steps towards inclusion of 
children with disabilities in its schools. According to the MoE’s statistics for 2018/2019, 
1,396,868 students were enrolled in schools, out of which 21,859 are students with 
disabilities. This constitutes about 1.5% of the total school population, compared to 
the 10-15% international average. 
   
Jordan is expected to achieve better results in enrolling children with disabilities into 
the public school system and accommodating those children as it commences the 
implementation of the 10-year NIES with the generous support of several partners and 
donors, including UNICEF.      
 
 
 
1 The Education Reform for the Knowledge Economy Program (ERfKE) is a multi-donor sector program designed to deliver 
education's national vision which is derived from the documents of Jordan's 2020 Vision and 2002 Vision Forum for the Future 
of Education in Jordan. 
2 UN ESCWA, Data Studio, Disability Dashboard,  2020: https://datastudio.google.com/reporting/0479429c-b7f6-4f67-a3ee-
27b89a131ef9/page/e34q  

12 
 
● National Inclusive Education Strategy 
 
The MoE has developed the 10-year NIES in collaboration with the Higher Council for 
the Rights of People with Disabilities (HCD) and an advisory committee, representing 
key entities and partners of the MoE, such as UNICEF, MC, QRTA, NCCD, QRF, among 
others.  
 
The strategy lists a total of nine components covering a variety of areas aiming to 
enable children with disabilities with the “enjoyment of education” and access to all 
programmes, services, and facilities in educational institutions. According to the 
strategy, children with disabilities must have access to quality education in an 
environment that accepts diversity and provides a supportive learning environment 
for all.  
 
The components are as follows: 
- 
Component 1: Policies and legislation. 
- 
Component 2: Awareness, Media, and Advocacy 
- 
Component 3: Identification, Diagnosis, Support and Referral Programmes 
- 
Component 4: Accessibility and Reasonable Accommodation  
- 
Component 5: Learning and Teaching ‘Educational Programmes’ 
- 
Component 6: Human Resources and Capacity Building 
- 
Component 7: The Preschool Stage (Nurseries and Kindergartens) 
- 
Component 8: Children who are not Enrolled in Mainstream Schools 
- 
Component 9: Research, Scientific Studies and Databases 
 
HCD and MoE have developed a 3-year action plan to kick-start the implementation 
of the 10-year NIES. Additionally, the PROMISE project- supported by Deutsche 
Gesellschaft für Internationale Zusammenarbeit GmbH (GIZ)- assists the MoE to ensure 
proper implementation of the 10-Year Strategy for Inclusive Education (2020-2030) in 
four key areas: 
1. It enhances national planning and management capacities.  
2. The programme prepares measures for inclusive education in 18 pilot schools 
in three main field directorates. 
3. It capacitates relevant stakeholders, including education authorities, school 
principals, teachers and parents on how to support Inclusive Education. 
4. It raises awareness among relevant stakeholders through community events 
and activities to combat stigma and inform about Inclusive Education. 
 
In support of the MoE efforts and in line with the NIES objectives, there are several other 
interventions and efforts supported by several donors and partners such as:        
● The Inclusive Education Guideline Manual 
In support of the NIES, the MoE and Mercy Corps launched in November 2021, the 
Inclusive Education Guideline Manual for public schools in Jordan. The manual aims 
to support Jordanian and Syrian children with disabilities who attend public schools