1 
 
 
 
 
 
Formative evaluation of the 
UNICEF Love and Care for 
Every Child project – Laos 
PDR 
 
 
 
EVALUATION 
REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
EVALUATION OFFICE 
January 2022 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Formative evaluation of the 
UNICEF Love and Care for 
Every Child project – Laos 
PDR 
 
 
 
External Evaluation Team and 
Authors of the Report 
Dr. Mariette Correa  
Dr. Marta Welander 
Raji Sharma  
Shreya Agarwal 
Sulathin Thiladej 
David Lefor 
Evaluation Manager: 
Oscar Huertas 
Evaluation Specialist 
UNICEF Lao PDR  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
EVALUATION 
REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
EVALUATION OFFICE 
January 2022 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
0 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Formative evaluation of the UNICEF Love and Care for Every Child project 
Final Report 
 
© United Nations Children’s Fund, UNICEF Lao PDR, 2022 
 
Final version produced in January 2022  
 
The purpose of publishing evaluation reports produced by the UNICEF Evaluation Function is to fulfil a 
corporate commitment to transparency through the publication of all completed evaluations. The reports are 
designed to stimulate a free exchange of ideas among those interested in the topic and to assure those 
supporting the work of UNICEF that it rigorously examines its strategies, results, and overall effectiveness.  
 
The contents of the report do not necessarily reflect the policies or views of UNICEF. 
 
The text has not been edited to official publication standards and UNICEF accepts no responsibility for error. 
 
The designations in this publication do not imply an opinion on the legal status of any country or territory, or of 
its authorities, or the delimitation of frontiers. 
 
The copyright for this report is held by the United Nations Children’s Fund.  Permission is required to 
reprint/reproduce/photocopy or in any other way to cite or quote from this report in written form. UNICEF has a 
formal permission policy that requires a written request to be submitted. For non-commercial uses, the 
permission will normally be granted free of charge. Please write to the Evaluation Office at the address below 
to initiate a permission request.  
 
 Please cite the work as follows: UNICEF. 2022. “Formative evaluation of the UNICEF Love and Care for Every 
Child project”. UNICEF Evaluation Office, New York. 
 
For further information, please contact: 
 
UNICEF Lao PDR 
Thadeua Rd, Vientiane, Laos 
E-mail: eapro@unicef.org or asia.pacific.evaluate@unicef.org 
www.unicef.org/eapro 
 

 
 
 
1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
FINAL REPORT 
Formative evaluation of the 
UNICEF Love and Care for Every 
Child project 
January 2021 
 
 
 
 
 
 
www.includovate.com 
info@includovate.com 
Includovate Pty Ltd  

 
 
 
2 
 
 
 
Acknowledgements 
 
Includovate gratefully acknowledges the invaluable support of the entire UNICEF Laos team, 
notably Maria Fernandez, Risa Kojima, Khavi Homsombath, and Maryam Abdu. Special thanks to 
UNICEF Evaluation Specialist Oscar Huertas for his unwavering support throughout the evaluation. 
The contributions of the members of the Lao Women’s Union are highly appreciated. In particular, 
sincere thanks to Dr. Ninpaseuth Xayphonesy and Ms. Vanmany Dittaphong for all in-country 
coordination efforts related to data collection.  
Finally, this evaluation would not have been successful without the time and input from the 
participants of the key informant interviews, focus group discussions, case studies, and the online 
survey. Our sincere thanks to all those involved.  
 
 
 

 
 
 
3 
 
 
Executive Summary 
Background  
A landlocked, mountainous country in Southeast Asia, Lao PDR has experienced sustained 
economic growth in the past decade, bringing down the rate of poverty from 34% to 23% and lifting 
half a million people out of poverty.1 Despite achievements, significant economic disparities 
continue to persist across diverse ethnic groups and different geographies of Laos. According to 
the report (SDGs and Children – Measuring Progress on Child Wellbeing in Lao PDR), only 12% of 
children experience no deprivation at all, while about 70% of children under 18 years of age suffer 
at least two deprivations in the areas of nutrition, health, education, Early Childhood Development 
(ECD), child protection, water, sanitation, housing and information.  
As one of the most vulnerable countries to climate change impacts such as cyclones, floods and 
droughts, Lao PDR has been experiencing recurring floods in 2018, 2019, 2020 and 2021. Low levels 
of preparedness and limited response capacity affect thousands of children in Lao PDR each year 
through unreliable and unsafe water and sanitation, inadequate medical services, disrupted 
schools, and unsafe living conditions. Moreover, the outbreak of the COVID-19 pandemic in early 
2020 put a halt on Lao PDR’s economy. The increase in unemployment and reduced family 
incomes put many young children in low-income households at the risk of food insecurity and 
malnutrition. Around 383,000 people were estimated to fall back into poverty due to the pandemic; 
1.7 million children had their education disrupted.2  
Considering that childhood malnutrition is very high, particularly in remote communities, that the 
majority of children under 18 in Lao PDR are multidimensionally deprived, the Love and Care for 
Every Child (LCEC) project, in conjunction with existing country programmes, will play an 
essential role in ensuring that early childhood development in Lao PDR will be enhanced through 
the utilisation of proven behavioural and communication strategies among priority population 
groups.  
Objectives, scope and purpose of the evaluation 
The Love and Care for Every Child programme, begun in 2018 with the Lao PDR Government, 
UNICEF, Lao Women’s Union (LWU), and with line ministries, including the Ministry of Health 
(MOH), the Ministry of Education (MOES), Ministry of Home Affairs (MOHA), Ministry of Information, 
Culture and Tourism (MICT), and the Lao Front for National Development (LFND). The objective of 
the programme is to develop a culturally responsive and gender-sensitive strategy aiming to 
transform parenting practices within families and give opportunities for children under seven years 
(CU7) across the country. The programme builds on assessment findings and existing initiatives in 
early childhood development in Lao PDR while applying proven behavioural and communication 
strategies among priority population groups in four districts within two provinces: Sepon and 
Atsaphone in Savannakhet, and Meung and Pha Oudom in Bokeo. Phase One pilot implementation 
(training of trainers) took place between December 2019 and early 2020, then, with the COVID-19 
outbreak there was a break and it continued in late 2020 and 2021. The project is planned to 
continue through to a broader rollout in 2022 where experience from the pilot will inform and 
strengthen expansion to five further provinces (Phase Two). This evaluation is situated at the end 
of Phase One and will help to inform Phase Two.  
 
The key objectives of the formative evaluation were to: 
 
1 Brinkman, S., Sincovich, A., & Danchev, P. N. 2016. The status of early childhood health and development in northern Lao 
PDR. Accessed October 11, 2021, at: https://documents1.worldbank.org/curated/en/228221488446175113/pdf/113100-WP-
P145544-PULIC-WB-LAO-ECE-BASELINE-FULL-23mb.pdf 
2 UNICEF. 2021. Country Office Annual Report 2020 Lao People's Democratic Republic. Accessed October 6, 2021 at: 
https://www.unicef.org/media/102576/file/Lao-Peoples-Democratic-Republic-2020-COAR.pdf 

 
 
 
4 
 
 
a. Assess the clarity of objectives in each of the programme components, alignment, logic, and 
coherence of the programme, including its Theory of Change; 
b. Assess the adequacy and validity of the indicators, tools, and systems for monitoring, 
measuring, and verifying results; 
c. Document good practices and generate evidence-based recommendations to strengthen 
ongoing efforts towards the expansion of parenting and care practices; and 
d. Identify gaps, critical lessons learned, and main challenges, and provide recommendations 
on how to address these challenges and pursue opportunities and recommend key 
practices that should be incorporated in future phases. 
Methodology and design  
The evaluation followed a participatory, utilization-focused, and theory-based approach, with mixed 
methods (qualitative and quantitative) of data collection and analysis. Participatory approaches 
were adopted to the extent possible within the practical limitations of access, with engagement of 
and consultation with key stakeholders in government, private sector, civil society and partner 
agencies throughout the process.  
 
Data collection methods included: 
1. 
Comprehensive documentation and desk review  
2. Theory of Change workshop with UNICEF staff involved in the conceptualisation and design 
of the LCEC initiative (n=9) 
3. Key Informant Interviews (KIIs) with UNICEF Laos staff members (n=7), a regional UNICEF 
staff member with expertise in early childhood development (n=1), government officials 
(n=7), representatives of CSOs and NGOs (n=3), and a representative sample of trainers at 
the provincial level (n=4) and the district level (n=8) 
4. Focus Groups Discussions (FGDs) with trainers from each of the 4 districts (n=38) 
5. Online survey among trainees across the 4 districts (n=270) 
6. Case studies to illustrate the evaluation findings with trainees in each district (n=8) 
 
The evaluation has prioritized the OECD/DAC evaluation criteria of relevance, efficiency, 
effectiveness, impact, and sustainability. The evaluation criteria and questions have analysed the 
extent to which human rights, child rights, and gender equality and equity have been addressed 
within the programme.  
Key findings  
Relevance: The programme has largely been contextualized to meet the local context, needs and 
priorities from communities. The LCEC pilot began with a comprehensive needs assessment which 
analysed the needs of the parents - a desire for a better life for their children. The assessment 
identified opportunities and channels for reaching and engaging parents and the project was 
designed keeping these in mind. Apart from the assessment, the project also built on the existing 
initiatives in Lao PDR. The priority population groups and communication channels were identified 
in collaboration with the LWU, the Lao PDR Ministry of Health (Centre for Communication and 
Education for Health) – and the Maternal and Child Health, and UNICEF with input from the Ministry 
of Education and Sports (MoES) and other line ministries, including Ministry of Home Affairs (MOHA), 
Ministry of Information, Culture and Tourism (MICT), and the LFND. The LCEC programme is an 
attempt to give more tools to those parents and caregivers so they can develop their skills and 
contribute and promote the development of their children. The programme fits into the overall 
agenda of early childhood development because it addresses almost all the parenting related 
behaviours that are critical in any early childhood development programme.  
Efficiency: Several factors have contributed to the efficiency of the programme. To begin with, the 
collaboration between various government counterparts and mass organisations like the LWU 
allowed for cross-sectoral effort in the designing of the parenting package. However, this 

 
 
 
5 
 
 
collaboration has somewhat slowed down the progress of the programme, as there were delays in 
the early stages while designing the package, which consequently led to delays in further 
implementation. Trainers and facilitators were unable to apply their knowledge owing to delays in 
training sessions. Additionally, the cascade model of the training resulted in transmission loss of 
knowledge to some extent, which led to concerns about the quality of training received at the village 
level being expressed by many stakeholders. Other challenges such as lack of transportation, 
unfavourable weather conditions, poor infrastructure, and shortage of time decreased the efficiency 
of the programme. Among the recipients of the training, lower levels of literacy, unwillingness to 
participate, and unfamiliarity with the official language of the programme (Lao) created hindrances 
in the effective delivery of the programme.  
Effectiveness: Given that the rollout of the programme has not begun at the identified intervention 
sites, the effectiveness of the programme and the extent to which results have been achieved 
cannot be assessed. It is also too early to say whether the monitoring data collection system will 
adequately reflect and inform programme objectives. It should also be noted that there are no 
indicators to measure the effectiveness of the quality of the training. The only measure of success 
or failure is the number of persons trained. The reach of the pilot, however, has been quite extensive. 
The training programme has reached 254 villages (in 2 provinces, 4 districts, 54 village clusters). 1,127 
people have been trained as facilitators at the village level. At the central, 20 master trainers; at the 
provincial level, 8 trainers and at the district level, 73 trainers have been trained thus far. Primary 
data has also revealed that the trainers are satisfied with the IEC material, specifically the posters, 
booklets, bags, and projectors, as they respond to their training and facilitation needs. The posters 
with pictures and videos with messages enabled the participants to understand the lessons easily 
and grasp the messages conveyed. 
Impact: The parenting package has the potential to provide a sort of support framework for parents 
in terms of access to information and how to draw on local resources, and have a more holistic 
community network of support. This programme also has the potential to bring parenting practices 
to the fore, make positive parenting a very real and relatable concept in communities, create 
stronger community norms around positive parenting, and help families and communities 
understand the significant impact of their actions on the life of a child. In addition, the project 
provides an opportunity to show the government and providers how to view children holistically 
rather than as a sum of individual programmes pertaining to health, nutrition, WASH, education, by 
bringing together various sectors and departments within the government and providing evidence 
that such an integrated approach can be efficiently managed and implemented and can save a lot 
of resources. This could possibly be a long-term impact if each of the sectoral teams can feed their 
inputs into the package rather than each delivering different programmes with different 
monitoring requirements.  
Sustainability: The results and activities of the programme are likely to continue after funding has 
been withdrawn due to the nature of the implementing authorities such as the Lao Women’s Union 
and the public health sector. The intervention coincides with the organisations' mandates, plans, 
and objectives and the tools from the programme will be incorporated in the organisations’ 
outreach efforts and activities. The multi-sectoral and multi-stakeholder involvement in the 
programme, and the capacities that have been built at all levels, from the senior government levels 
to the village facilitators, and the IEC material that has been developed will contribute to the 
sustainability of the programme. The results from the intervention are also likely to continue due to 
the benefits that the communities and parents received, the lessons and skills the participants 
obtained, and because the project shared similarities with other public programmes/policies. The 
project has also built a cadre of trainers/trainees at different levels, who can help in continuing the 
project interventions. It is necessary that for some time at least LWU and the other relevant 
authorities continue to disseminate information and convey key messages of the project to local 

 
 
 
6 
 
 
communities. Absence of monitoring and evaluation by the authorities and the lack of a budget, 
however, might hinder the sustainability of the programme.  
The human rights approach and gender equity: The project took into account the principles of 
the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child and the CEDAW report as well as followed 
government policies of non-discrimination and to ‘leave no one behind’. At the inception phase, 
CBM was contracted by UNICEF Australia to provide technical advice on disability inclusion. 
During the preparation of the materials, there was recognition of the need for and some discussion 
about including marginalised language groups. Disability and gender have been addressed in 
each component of the five handbooks. There is also recognition of the fact that several 
beneficiaries (women and mothers) are from ethnic communities who do not speak Lao. There is 
consensus among interviewees of this evaluation that they will be given the opportunity to learn 
from the parenting package in their own language, considering that the facilitators are from their 
communities. There are also mechanisms and tools in place to gather gender- and disability-
disaggregated data under the monitoring framework. However, its realisation is dependent on the 
delivery partners and their level of training for the same.  
Key recommendations  
Recommendations cluster A: Programme design and management  
● 
Ensure to implement lessons learned prior to scaling up: Programmatic gaps to be 
plugged through a survey and/or learning exchanges between districts.  
● 
Ensure a strong contingency plan: The COVID-19 pandemic has warranted the need for a 
contingency plan to deal with future emergencies, factor in provisions for humanitarian aid. 
This should include, but not be limited to, supplying protective equipment, identifying new 
ways to engage parents and the stakeholders in rural areas. 
● 
Develop new indicators: Additional indicators to measure effectiveness and the 
comprehension of the materials across different groups. 
 
Recommendations cluster B: Training and capacity building 
● 
Choose to scale in strategic locations: The LCEC project could be scaled in districts where 
supportive initiatives such as the Early Childhood Education (ECE) (supported by the World 
Bank) already exist. Hence, locations for scaling and roll-out should be selected strategically. 
● 
Strengthen training programmes: Gaps in training programmes can be incorporated into 
the refresher training and for the scale-up. Trainers to fully understand the materials rather 
than focusing primarily on coordination. Capacity building of the relevant officials is also 
necessary, along with increasing the number of trainers in the project. 
 
Recommendations cluster C: Monitoring and reporting systems 
● 
Assess existing indicators: Review the 20 indicators and assess whether they are 
achievable, realistic and measurable in the given context and capacities of the facilitators.  
● 
Consider reporting needs: Consider the reporting needs of the project and set budget aside 
for equipment (e.g., computers, smartphones) to strengthen reporting systems. 
 
Recommendations cluster D: Gender and inclusion 
● 
Women’s empowerment and awareness: Given women’s responsibilities in providing the 
daily meals and meeting the nutritional needs of the family, systems and measurable 
indicators to assess effectiveness of training programmes and collect gender and disability 
disaggregated data is necessary.  
● 
Disability and gender: Sessions should be included in the training programme agenda to 
raise awareness of the necessity of disability and gender issues for behaviour change and 
early childhood interventions. Demystify and address attitudinal barriers about disability. 
● 
Involve parents with disabilities, and parents of children with disabilities: To further 
address stigma, attitudes and social barriers, parents with disabilities and parents of 

 
 
 
7 
 
 
children with disabilities can be involved in the delivery of the package, ensuring that 
reasonable accommodations are made.  
 
Recommendations cluster E: Sustainability 
● 
Ensure efficient resource allocation: Especially in the context of scaling up, efficient 
resource allocation is necessary. This can be achieved through strong resource mobilisation 
strategies. Allocate budget to provincial level work.  
● 
Demonstrate evidence of success: It is essential to show success of the pilot project in 
order to secure additional funding from the government.  
● 
Enhancement of training of trainers: Consider whether the number of days for the training 
should be increased, or reduce training material and the number of survey forms. More 
emphasis should be given on practical activities, going beyond theory.  
● 
Increase the number of trainers at the village and district levels: This can help take the 
pressure off the existing trainers to cover a large geographical area. Per diem budget for 
trainers should moreover take into account the true on-field conditions.  
● 
Collaborate with key persons/groups in each location: This can help increase 
participation, as key persons/groups can help to mobilize the local participants to attend.  
● 
Provide a transport facility: Most trainers at the district used their own motorbikes, which 
is particularly difficult for female trainers due to their attire. If this is not feasible, trainers 
should be reimbursed for their travel costs.  
● 
Conduct the training in local languages: In order to reach as many people as possible, 
specifically women and mothers from ethnic communities, it would be fruitful to conduct 
the training in local languages and increase use of audio-visual material.  
● 
Time budgeting well in advance to ensure sufficiently long timelines are given.   
● 
UNICEF staff to work closely with implementing partners to monitor the implementation 
of the project. Trainers from central levels to go to rural communities and provide feedback 
on implementation to enhance trainees’ capacities. 
● 
Involve community engagement elements to maximise impact and reach wider 
audiences, e.g., mass media campaigns on parenting. 
 
Recommendations cluster F: Addressing capacity needs of project partners implementing and 
monitoring  
● 
Stepping up the supportive supervision and having more support for troubleshooting 
will help create a system of regular feedback on the challenges the women are facing in 
their work. Approaches like peer to peer coaching/ mentoring can be explored where 
women who are performing well could become coaches or mentors for other women.  
● 
Easier qualitative methods to track changes in behaviour at the community level, which 
could include simple pictorial tools which are given to the women to gauge what kind of 
changes are happening at the community level.  
● 
There are some community-based monitoring systems and tools which can also be 
introduced, which are a lot simpler than complex research methods.  
● 
Monitoring tools to be adjusted keeping the capacity of the facilitators in mind because 
one of the really valuable things about this package and the design is that it is intended to 
collect quite consistent data over a number of elements of the nurturing care framework.  
● 
Since facilitators are expected to lead by example and be front-runners in their communities 
on the adoption of the key LCEC behaviours, there could be monitoring systems of 
behaviours against predetermined indicators. 
 
Recommendations cluster G: Strengthening capacity of trainers 
● 
There is also a need to focus on the communication skills of the trainers so that it becomes 
easier for the participants to grasp the contents of the training better. 
● 
Keeping a check on the efficiency of trainers by having a mechanism to judge their skills 
because usually once the master trainers are trained, they then train the trainers, who 
further train the participants and there is no check on how well the trainers are performing. 

 
 
 
8 
 
 
A capacity reinforcement plan for trainers, depending on their skills, would be critical to 
prevent transmission loss.  
● 
Trainees at all levels should be given simple take-home materials to which they can refer 
as a resource.  
● 
More sets of IEC material are needed so that a set can be kept in the pre-primary school, 
at the health centre and in other prominent locations in the villages.  
● 
Materials need to be translated into the local ethnic languages since many people in the 
target areas, especially women, do not understand Lao. 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Contents 
Acknowledgements 
2 
Executive Summary 
3 
Abbreviations and acronyms 
11 
1. Background 
13 
2. Evaluation purpose, objectives and scope 
16 
2.1 Evaluation purpose 
16 
2.2 Evaluation objectives 
16 
2.3 Evaluation scope 
16 
2.4 Budget 
17 
3. Evaluation design and methodology 
18 
3.1 Overall approach 
18 
3.2 Evaluation questions 
18 

 
 
 
9 
 
 
3.2.1 Relevance 
18 
3.2.2 Efficiency 
19 
3.2.3 Effectiveness 
19 
3.2.4 Impact 
19 
3.2.5 Sustainability 
20 
3.2.6 Human Rights approach, Gender equity 
20 
3.3 Sources of data and data collection methods 
20 
3.4 Data analysis and approach 
23 
3.5 Limitations 
24 
4. Evaluation Findings 
27 
4.1 Relevance 
27 
4.1.1 To what extent has the programme been designed to meet the local context, needs 
and priorities from communities? 
27 
4.1.2 Is the ToC for programme components adequately described and is there clarity of 
logic across the results levels? 
34 
4.1.3 To what extent are results, indicators and activities measurable? 
35 
4.1.4 To what extent are cross-cutting priorities (namely: gender, disability and disaster risk 
reduction) and equity measurable against clear targets? 
36 
4.2 Efficiency 
36 
4.2.1 What factors have contributed to increase/decrease the efficiency of the programme?
 
36 
4.2.2 To what extent is the programme timely, and delivered in time? 
40 
4.2.3 To what extent did the programme activities reinforce synergies with other initiatives 
to achieve optimal utilization of available resources? 
40 
4.3 Effectiveness 
41 
4.3.1 To what extent have the expected results been realized through the programme? 41 
4.3.2 What factors have contributed to the programme results achieved? 
42 
4.4 Impact 
44 
4.4.1 What is the likely impact (positive or negative, intended and unintended) on local 
communities and other beneficiaries? 
44 
4.4.2 What is the likely impact (positive or negative, intended and unintended) on partners 
and stakeholders? 
45 
4.4.3 What lessons can be learned from the best practices, achievements, challenges, and 
constraints of the programme? 
46 
4.5 Sustainability 
50 
4.5.1 To what extent are the intervention results likely to continue after the funding has 
been withdrawn? 
50 
4.5.2 To what extent have institutions and stakeholders taken and shown ownership of the 
action objectives? To what extent are they actively engaged in the activities of the action?
 
51 
4.6 Human rights approach, gender equity 
53 
4.6.1 To what extent have human rights, child rights, climate change, disaster risk reduction, 
and gender equality and equity been addressed within the programme? 
53