FINAL REPORT
Evaluation of UNICEF, UNFPA, UNDP project
“Promoting Kyrgyzstan’s youth cohesion 
and interaction towards Uzbekistan”
(2019-2020)
© UNFPA/Kyrgyzstan

Final report
March 2021
The purpose of publishing evaluation reports produced by the UNICEF is to fulfil 
a corporate commitment to transparency through the publication of all completed 
evaluations. The reports are designed to stimulate a free exchange of ideas among 
those interested in the topic and to assure those supporting the work of UNICEF that it 
rigorously examines its strategies, results, and overall effectiveness.
The contents of the report do not necessarily reflect the policies or views of UNICEF.
The text has not been edited to official publication standards and UNICEF accepts no 
responsibility for error.
The designations in this publication do not imply an opinion on the legal status of any 
country or territory, or of its authorities, or the delimitation of frontiers.
The copyright for this report is held by the United Nations Children’s Fund. 
Attribution: Please cite the work as follows: UNICEF (2021) “Evaluation of UNICEF / 
UNFPA / UNDP project ‘Promoting Kyrgyzstan’s youth cohesion and interaction towards 
Uzbekistan’ (2019-2020)”. 
For further information, please contact:
United Nations Children’s Fund 
Chui Avenue 160, 720040
Bishkek, Kyrgyzstan
bishkek@unicef.org 

PROMOTING KYRGYZSTAN’S YOUTH COHESION AND INTERACTION TOWARDS UZBEKISTAN
3
CONTENTS 
CONTENTS
3
TABLES AND FIGURES
4
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
5
ACRONYMS
6
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
7
1. INTRODUCTION
13
2. BACKGROUND
16
2.1 Context and Conflict Analysis
16
2.2  The Youth-Promotion Initiative Project in Support of Peacebuilding on the 
Kyrgyz-Uzbek Border
18
2.3  Theory of Change
20
2.4 Stakeholders
24
3. EVALUATION PURPOSE, OBJECTIVES AND SCOPE
25
3.1 Purpose and Use of the Evaluation
26
3.2 Objectives of Evaluation
26
3.3 Scope of the Evaluation
27
4. EVALUATION METHODOLOGY
28
4.1 Evaluation Criteria
29
4.2 Methods for Data Collection, Analysis, and Sampling
31
4.3 Ethical Issues and Considerations
35
5. EVALUATION FINDINGS
38
5.1 Relevance and Coherence
39
5.2 Effectiveness
55
5.3 Efficiency
71
5.4 Impact
79
5.5 Sustainability
86

EVALUATION OF THE UNICEF / UNFPA / UNDP PROJECT
4
6. EVALUATION CONCLUSIONS & LESSONS LEARNED
92
6.1 Conclusions
93
6.2 Lessons Learned
95
7. RECOMMENDATIONS
97
8. REFERENCES
105
9. ANNEXES
109
ANNEX 1: Evaluation Matrix
109
ANNEX 2: Stakeholder Analysis
115
ANNEX 3: Social Media Analysis
122
ANNEX 4: Sampling
124
ANNEX 5: List of Interviewee categories
125
ANNEX 6: Inception Report
126
ANNEX 7: List of Project Documents
127
ANNEX 8: Information about the Evaluators
137
TABLES AND FIGURES
Figure 1:  Visual reconstruction of the theory of change
21
Table 1: Observance of the UNEG ethical standards by the evaluation team
35

PROMOTING KYRGYZSTAN’S YOUTH COHESION AND INTERACTION TOWARDS UZBEKISTAN
5
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
This report was written by Camille Massey (team leader), Gulnara Asilbekova and Aiganysh 
Isaeva. 
The authors would like to thank UNICEF, UNDP and UNFPA in Kyrgyzstan, both management 
and programme team, as well as Mr. Ozonnia Ojielo, United Nations Resident Coordinator 
in Kyrgyzstan, for their guidance, support and contribution to this evaluation. The evaluation 
team extends its heartfelt thanks to Tolgonai Berdikeyeva for her contributions and for the 
coordination of the evaluation process. 
The authors would further like to thank the State Agency for Youth and Sports of 
Kyrgyzstan, the Municipalities of Kashkar-Kyshtak, Aidarken, Kok-Serek and Kerben, and 
the implementing partners of the project, for their assistance in the evaluation, as well as 
all those who participated in interviews and focus groups. 
Special gratitude goes to the members of the evaluation’s reference group: Mirlan Parkhanov, 
Ulan Shabynov, Aigul Mambetakunova, Christine Jaulmes, Tolgonai Berdikeyeva, Gulnara 
Zhenishbekova, Erkina Urazbaeva, Artur Bukalaev, Nargiza Tashtemirova, Azamat Baialinov, 
Sanzhar Alimzhanov, Akmaral Satinbaeva, Beksultan Rustamov, Nargiza Jenisheva and 
Zhanyshbek kyzy Takhmina, who accompanied the entire process of evaluation.

EVALUATION OF THE UNICEF / UNFPA / UNDP PROJECT
6
ACRONYMS
CRM
Child Rights Monitoring
CSO
Civil Society Organisation
ERG
Evaluation Reference Group
EQ
Evaluation question
EU
European Union
GoK
Government of Kyrgyzstan
HIS
Human interest stories
IP
Implementing Partner
JSC
Joint Steering Committee
KII
Key Informant Interview
KR
Kyrgyz Republic
LIA
Leadership and Innovation Academy
LSG
Local Self-Government
MDG
United Nations Millennium Development Goals
MoF
Ministry of Finance
MoJ
Ministry of Justice
MOU
Memorandum of Understanding
NGO
Non-Governmental Organisation
NHRI
National Human Rights Institution
PBF
UN Peacebuilding Fund
PBSO
United Nations Peacebuilding Support Office
PDA
Peace and Development Advisor (UNDP)
PPP
UN Peacebuilding Priority Plans 2017-2020 (or 2013-2016 if specified)
PSG
Project Steering Group
PVE
Prevention of violent extremism
RUNOs
Recipient UN Organizations
SDGs
Sustainable Development Goals
SMEs
Small and medium-sized enterprises
ToC
Theory of Change
ToR
Terms of Reference
UN
United Nations
UNDP
United Nations Development Programme
UNFPA
United Nations Population Fund 
UNICEF
United Nations Children’s Fund
UNICEF ECARO
United Nations Children’s Fund, Europe and Central Asia Regional 
Office
YoO
Association “Youth of Osh”
YPI
Youth Promotion Initiative 

PROMOTING KYRGYZSTAN’S YOUTH COHESION AND INTERACTION TOWARDS UZBEKISTAN
7
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
This report presents the evaluation of the project “Promoting Kyrgyzstan’s Youth Cohesion 
and Interaction towards Uzbekistan”. The report outlines the evaluation’s background and 
approach, its findings, conclusions, lessons learned and recommendations. The evaluation 
was conducted from October 2020 to March 2021.
OVERVIEW OF INTERVENTION
The fertile Ferghana valley, now split between Kyrgyzstan, Uzbekistan and Tajikistan, has 
long crystallized tensions over access to, and share of, natural resources. After the fall of 
the Soviet Union, the unresolved border delineation has plagued inter-State relations. The 
areas of Kyrgyzstan which border with Uzbekistan feature communities of varied cultural 
background, which rely on resources that are spread across disputed borders. They are 
economically deprived, remote from the country’s capital, and marred by unemployment 
and labour migration. In these areas, cross-border and domestic conflicts among 
communities have erupted regularly since the 1990s.
The United Nations Country Office in Kyrgyzstan and the United Nations Peacebuilding 
Support Office have conducted conflict analysis, materialized in the Peacebuilding Priority 
Plans 2013-2016 and 2017-2020. This analysis acknowledges the importance of social 
cohesion, economic opportunities, civic participation, and the inclusion of all categories 
especially the youth, towards sustainable peacebuilding in these regions. The analysis 
further highlights the mutually reinforcing role of inter-State relations on the one hand, 
and interactions among people on the other hand. 
The project “Promoting Kyrgyzstan’s Youth Cohesion and Interaction towards Uzbekistan” 
echoed this analysis and aimed to support social cohesion in the border areas of Kyrgyzstan, 
and beyond, nationally. To this end, the project built on the National Youth Agency’s strategic 
documents, the existing national strategic documents for rapprochement with Uzbekistan, 
and a favourable diplomatic context, to foster positive interaction of Kyrgyz youth, their 
communities and relevant public authorities, both within multi-cultural communities in 
the country, and towards their counterparts in Uzbekistan. This was done through outputs:
1.	 Young people have improved critical/design thinking and demonstrate support for 
diversity and equal rights by initiating projects that contribute to the implementation of 
plans for local development and positive cooperation of youth between Kyrgyzstan and 
Uzbekistan.
2.	 Parents of young people, community members improve their understanding of 
diversity, have enhanced knowledge and tools to support and participate in youth-led 
initiatives.
3.	 Government representatives have strengthened capacity to provide services in 
cross-border communities and commit to support youth-driven initiatives aiming at 
improving the cross-border cooperation.
The project was implemented jointly by UNICEF, UNFPA and UNDP in Kyrgyzstan, from 
January 2019 to November 2020 for a total budget of 1.5 million USD. The Peacebuilding 
Fund financed this entire budget, as the project was closely based on the conflict analysis 
conducted by the United Nations Country Office and the Peacebuilding Fund and 
corresponded to the Fund’s guidance and Peacebuilding Priorities. 

EVALUATION OF THE UNICEF / UNFPA / UNDP PROJECT
8
The project consisted of a series of small-scale local initiatives mobilizing tried and 
tested youth empowerment tools such as the UPSHIFT and LIA programmes, focused 
respectively on youth participation and on youth leadership through capacity building, 
mentoring and engagement; legal aid initiatives involving youth in local communities; 
mini-grants supporting local projects led by the youth; support to access to local services 
including one-stop-shop in local administration; capacity building for a variety of duty 
bearers in the border areas; and a series of cross-border events involving the youth and 
the representatives of national and local administration. 
With these activities, the project engaged the youth (from 14 to 28 years old) in the border 
areas of Kyrgyzstan, their parents and teachers, local communities, as well as local and 
national duty bearers at central, province and municipal levels. The project selected seven 
implementing partners, including six civil society organisations and one company, who 
conducted the bulk of these activities. Due to the COVID-19 pandemic, from early 2020, the 
project activities moved online. All activities took place on the territory of Kyrgyzstan, with 
a focus on the provinces of Osh, Batken and Jalal-Abad, which border with Uzbekistan.
EVALUATION PURPOSE, OBJECTIVES AND INTENDED AUDIENCE
The purpose of the evaluation is to inform the evaluation users for evidence-based decision 
making on peacebuilding interventions in Kyrgyzstan, based on the learnings from the 
project “Promoting Kyrgyzstan Youth’s Cohesion and Interaction towards Uzbekistan”.
The evaluation objectives are as follows:
•	
Understand the effects of the project on the immediate, and when possible, final 
beneficiaries;
•	
Ensure accountability towards the donor, the UN governance bodies, strategic goals and 
UN system values, and towards the beneficiaries (rights holders and duty bearers) in light 
of the project’s objectives, indicators and targets, and with regard to invested assets;
•	
Provide opportunities for organizational learning;
•	
Inform decision-making about the project’s follow-up with regards to youth and 
peacebuilding.
The primary intended users of the evaluation results are:
•	
the decision-makers from the government, 
•	
implementing partners, 
•	
implementing agencies UNICEF, UNDP, UNFPA, and the Peacebuilding Fund. 
The secondary intended users are:
•	
local self-government staff in project communities, and 
•	
project beneficiaries.
Finally, the evaluation report may be of interest to the public at large, including inhabitants 
of Kyrgyzstan, academics worldwide, and any actor interested in peacebuilding 
intervention designs. 
EVALUATION METHODOLOGY
The evaluation is mostly summative (as relates to understanding the effects of the 
projects and ensuring accountability), but also to some extent formative (as relates to 

PROMOTING KYRGYZSTAN’S YOUTH COHESION AND INTERACTION TOWARDS UZBEKISTAN
9
organisational learning and informed decision making). The evaluation followed a theory 
of change-based methodology: 
•	
The evaluation first examines the chain of changes which the project intended to elicit, 
and the assumptions which the project relied upon for the realization of these changes: 
this constitutes the theory of change of the project;
•	
Then, the evaluation determines what changes actually happened for the project 
beneficiaries and stakeholders. It compares these with the initial theory of change, 
and checks whether the assumptions of the project were realized; 
•	
Finally, the evaluation analyses the actual contribution of the project to these changes, 
with the understanding that other factors have likely played a role in these changes. 
In order to draw findings on these three points, the evaluation team collected data from 
complementary sources, including:
•	
A broad range of documents, both internal (such as project reports, proceeds of project 
events, strategic documents and standards of the United Nations) to the project and 
online (such as academic research, as well as reports and strategic documents of 
public authorities and civil society organisations);
•	
Over 100 semi-structured interviews with project stakeholders representing varied 
points of view, including United Nations officials, implementing partners, duty bearers 
at national, province and local level, young participants and their mentors, parents, 
teachers and other community members;
•	
Focus groups with implementing partners and United Nations officials;
•	
Social media analysis on the project itself as well as on cross-border and interethnic 
relations in the targeted regions. 
The evaluation was conducted by a team of three independent consultants – one international 
and two national, supported by UNICEF Kyrgyzstan Child Rights Monitoring Specialist. 
An Evaluation Reference Group including representatives of implementing partners, of 
UNICEF, UNFPA and UNDP in Kyrgyzstan, and of the Peacebuilding Support Office of the 
Peacebuilding Fund, oversaw the evaluation process and provided comments and advice 
at all stages. 
KEY FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS 
The project approach chose the empowerment of the youth and their communities as the 
key vehicle to elicit positive interactions at grassroot level, leading to improved social 
cohesion. It assumed that social cohesion, along with improved inter-State relations, were 
essential to peacebuilding. The project design corresponded to the priorities of the United 
Nations Peacebuilding Priority Plan and its in-depth and agreed-upon conflict analysis. 
The project further sought to match this robust conceptual framework to the local 
realities, particularly the local drivers of conflict. To this end, the project implementers 
analysed the needs and aspirations of its beneficiaries in a participative manner, which 
enabled to adequately capture the needs and expectations of the targeted communities: 
empowerment of the youth through novel interactions and capacity building, participation 
in local decision making, employability, and creation of social and economic avenues 
locally. Gender equality and empowerment of women were an integral part of the project 
approach, because the theory of change, with social cohesion among its core intended 
impacts, was equity-focused. However, the project did not fully integrate the prominent 
phenomenon of labour migration, especially among the youth beyond school age. During 

EVALUATION OF THE UNICEF / UNFPA / UNDP PROJECT
10
implementation, the project adequately retargeted some activities towards the younger 
share of its intended beneficiaries, who were more present in the selected provinces. 
During the project design phase, and throughout implementation, UNICEF, UNFPA 
and UNDP, along with their implementing partners, analysed the nexus between three 
phenomena: interethnic relations as the pivotal aspect of the conflict; unresolved border 
issues as a key factor fuelling tensions; and the most urgent and unfulfilled needs expressed 
by the beneficiaries, which acts as a catalyst of these tensions. Although the beneficiaries 
themselves did not clearly perceive this nexus, this analysis proved particularly relevant 
and instrumental to the coherence of the project and its theory of change.
The project further engaged the national authorities, particularly the Youth Agency of 
Kyrgyzstan who actively contributed to the project’s strategic approach. This effort secured 
commitment and enabled the activities to dovetail on political will. At the same time, the 
position of Kyrgyzstan’s Executive somewhat disregards the prominence of interethnic 
relations within the country, and the project documents had to find a diplomatic compromise: 
the documents defined the project as a cross-border initiative complemented with local 
community support, but concrete activities mostly aimed at interethnic and social cohesion 
within Kyrgyzstan. Therefore, while the theory of change behind the project was internally 
coherent, its formal expression in the project documents was incomplete. This situation 
demanded adjustments throughout implementation, which materialized in the adaptation 
of the activities and of the project’s monitoring framework.
The United Nations agencies made the most of their assets within the country, particularly 
local offices and their network of CSOs, to reach out to underserved regions with a large 
panel of activities, within a modest budget. There was a good alignment of strategic objectives 
between the project and implementing partners. While the conceptual frameworks of the 
United Nations agencies and the Government were not perfectly aligned, their strategy 
in terms of target groups and actions to be taken were fully compatible. Federated by a 
common peacebuilding approach, UNICEF, UNFPA and UNDP in Kyrgyzstan achieved deep 
cooperation. They pioneered genuine joint implementation, from procurement to monitoring. 
They translated the “delivering as one” approach into concrete processes and procedures. 
While these took lengthy negotiations and slowed down the first phase of the project, 
they constitute worthy precedents that now need to be perfected and reproduced. The 
COVID-19 crisis amplified these delays and created obstacles to the implementation of 
key activities, leading to a final rush, but UNICEF, UNFPA, UNDP and their implementing 
partners proved particularly flexible, committed and creative, and successfully completed 
the project within a reasonable timeframe and with limited resources. Cross-border 
activities proved particularly challenging to organise administratively. The project design 
overlooked valuable synergies with sister projects across the borders of Kyrgyzstan, which 
could have alleviated these difficulties. 
The integration of the local needs and expectation, the robustness of the theory of change, 
and the ability to adapt project design to the circumstances resulted in a relevant and 
efficient project met by the overwhelmingly positive perception of stakeholders. What 
is more, the shift to online activities due to COVID-19-related prevention measures was 
handled swiftly, presenting constraints but also unexpected opportunities.
There is conclusive evidence that the project effectively resulted in increased youth 
empowerment. The share of girls who participated is high, and the transformative results 
of the activities are particularly visible for them. Many participants perceived this project 
as a passage to adulthood, or a self-revealing experience. This happened because the 
project activities created unexpected and new experiences for the participants: travel 
and exposure to high quality training products and venues, new forms of interactions, 
recognition of the leadership role that the youth can play within their community, as well 

PROMOTING KYRGYZSTAN’S YOUTH COHESION AND INTERACTION TOWARDS UZBEKISTAN
11
as mutually respectful relations among peers and with local self-governance bodies. The 
results of the project are therefore very apparent among the direct participants in terms 
of personal and professional development within their community. Beside teachers and 
other coaches, the project remarkably engaged the parents of the participants, which 
proved instrumental to success: they acted as facilitators for the project results to expand 
beyond the youth and to the rest of the community. 
The individual and community-level empowerment efforts of the project were particularly 
effective, and the youth proved a good catalyst for impact. Youth interaction and initiatives 
have outlasted the closure of the project, even though their frequency and intensity have 
diminished. However, there is no guarantee that their broader effects will be sustainable: 
the most significant changes happened at individual level. This is particularly true of 
interethnic relations. There is anecdotal evidence of progress: many participants reported 
new perceptions of their peers across the border or in culturally different communities. 
Social media and interviews showed that the attitudes of the youth and their immediate 
social circles towards cultural diversity may have evolved. However, self-censorship is 
still very prevalent among rights holders and duty bearers alike, which is symptomatic of 
a latent conflict. To overcome these barriers and address the root causes of the conflict, 
the United Nations will need to continue addressing both interethnic and cross-border 
relations – from the national to the community levels.
With its legal aid component and capacity building for local duty bearers, the project 
further created new local venues for peaceful and effective pressing of claims for 
access to services, settlement of disputes and recourse mechanisms. Enhanced service 
delivery in municipalities, as well as enhanced consultation and cooperation with the 
youth, were well received. Success stories emerged from the project activities where 
municipalities supported youth initiatives. National level duty bearers and their province-
level representations became better connected with the final beneficiaries’ aspirations 
and realities. Youth agencies on both sides of the border increased their cooperation. 
However, these components of the project still qualify as pilots: their systematisation 
would require broader reform strategies. Local self-governance units are supportive of 
youth-led initiatives and ready to carry on, but they will require continued support from 
national authorities and from international cooperation partners to sustainably reap the 
benefits of these experiments. With a wide variety of fields and methods, the project was 
exploratory: it will require follow up and prioritization. 
KEY RECOMMENDATIONS
1.	 In order to capitalize on the opportunities created by this project, the peacebuilding fund 
should continue supporting youth empowerment projects as vehicles for peacebuilding 
in Kyrgyzstan along with neighbouring countries. 
2.	 The peacebuilding fund should consider setting up an online community of practice 
on peacebuilding projects accessible to its recipients.
3.	 The United Nations Country Team in Kyrgyzstan (UNICEF, UNFPA, UNDP and any other 
relevant agency such as UN Women) should initiate a regional, modular follow up youth 
empowerment and peacebuilding programme with its peers in Uzbekistan and Tajikistan. 
4.	 The United Nations Country Team in Kyrgyzstan should streamline pilot initiatives into 
systemic, peacebuilding partnerships with key duty bearers.
5.	 The United Nations Country Team in Kyrgyzstan should introduce gender transformative 
results to the successor project, based on gender analysis and in consultation or 
cooperation with UN Women.

EVALUATION OF THE UNICEF / UNFPA / UNDP PROJECT
EVALUATION OF THE UNICEF / UNFPA / UNDP PROJECT
12
6.	 The United Nations Country Team in Kyrgyzstan should re-define target age groups 
of youth empowerment programmes in border areas towards adolescents and very 
young adults (up to 20 years) in addition to the original target group (up to 28 years), 
with emphasis on women/girls and vulnerable groups, and tailor activities accordingly.
7.	 The United Nations Country Team in Kyrgyzstan should maintain selected activities online 
beyond the COVID-19 crisis.
8.	 The United Nations Country Team in Kyrgyzstan should anticipate and accelerate joint 
procurement and other administrative processes linked to joint implementation.
9.	 The Government of the Kyrgyz Republic, in particular the State Agency for Regional 
Development should support the decentralisation efforts of the State Registry Service 
of Kyrgyzstan and Ombudsperson’s office. 
10.	The Government of Kyrgyzstan, the Presidential Office, and Ministry of Education 
should facilitate and support systematic involvement of educational institutions in 
peacebuilding initiatives and youth empowerment, especially in border areas. 
11.	 The Government of Kyrgyzstan should consider the creation of a peacebuilding 
national platform.
12.	Implementing partners should continue to develop their capacity to reach out to 
remote, vulnerable groups in border areas.