European Union 10 February 2022 www.niras.com
Funded by
the European Union
EU Justice and Legal Empowerment Programme
in Vietnam (EU JULE) Mid-term evaluation
Final Report
SIEA-2018-5354
THE EUROPEAN UNION DELEGATION TO
VIETNAM
10 FEBRUARY 2022
European Union 10 February 2022 www.niras.com
The Final Report was drafted by the Evaluation Team composed of the following international and
national experts:
Ms Bunafsha Gulakova, LLM, Team Leader, Senior Expert, Justice and Rule of Law.
Ms Nguyen Thi Minh Hai, LLM, Legal and Judicial Reform Specialist.
Dr Giao Vu Cong, Good Governance, Human Rights and Civil Society Specialist.
This publication was produced with the financial support of the
European Union. Its contents are the sole responsibility of NIRAS A/S
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the European Union.
European Union 10 February 2022 www.niras.com
ABBREVIATIONS
Abbreviations
ACDC Action to the Community Development Center
AEPD Association for Empowerment of Persons with Disabilities
CCLPHH Center for Consulting on Legal and Policy on Health and HIV/AIDS
CED Center for Research and Education of the Deaf and Hard of Hearing
CELA Center for Legal Advice
CIRD Centre for Indigenous Knowledge Research and Development
CSOs Civil Society Organizations
CSWD Center for Social Work Skills and Knowledge Development
DRD Disability Research and Capacity Development Center
EQs Evaluation Questions
ET Evaluation Team
EU JULE European Union Justice and Legal Empowerment Programme in Vietnam
FGD Focus Group Discussion
F&JC Family and Juvenile Courts
HCMC Ho Chi Minh City
HCMCACR Ho Chi Minh City Association for Protection of Child Rights
ICCPR International Covenant of Civil and Political Rights
IDEA Center of Research and Inclusive Development Action
IPs Implementing Partners
JIFF Justice Initiative Facilitation Fund
LAC Legal Advice for Poor People and Community Development
LACEW Legal Consulting and Legal Aid for Women and Children
LF Logical Framework
M&E Monitoring and Evaluation
MOJ Ministry of Justice
MPS Ministry of Public Security
MSD Management and Sustainable Development Institute
MTE Mid-Term Evaluation
NHRI National Human Rights Institute
OO Overall Objective
PMU Project Management Unit
PSC Programme Steering Committee
PwD Persons with Disabilities
QBWDF Quang Binh Women's Development Fund
RDPR Rural Development and Poverty Reduction Fund
RIC Research Center for Initiatives in Community Development
European Union 10 February 2022 www.niras.com
Abbreviations
SC Steering Committee
SEDS Social and Economic Development Strategy
SDTC Social Development Training Center
SDGs Sustainable Development Goals
SHRC Social Sciences and Humanities Research Center
SPC Supreme People’s Court
SPP Supreme People’s Procuracy
UN United Nations
UPR Universal Periodic Review mechanism
UNDP United Nations Development programme
UNICEF United Nations United Nations Children's Fund
VACR Vietnam Association for Protection of Child's Rights
VAE Vietnam Association of the Elderly
VAVETSOW Vietnam Association for Vocational Education Training and Social Work Profession
VBA Vietnam Blind Association
VBF Vietnam Bar Federation
VLA Vietnam Lawyers Association
VFD Vietnam Federation for Persons with Disabilities
Table of Contents
Executive Summary 3
1 Context and background 12
2 Introduction of the Mid-Term Evaluation of EUJULE 15
2.1 Objectives and results of the evaluation. 15
2.2 The scope of MTE 16
2.3 Project Background 16
3 Evaluation methodology and framework 18
3.1 Approaches 18
3.2 Ethical standards 19
3.3 Evaluation’s data collection tools 19
3.3.1 Desk review 20
3.3.2 On-site assessment through meetings and interviews with key informants 20
3.3.3 Focus Group Discussion (FGD) 20
3.3.4 Key informant interview (KII) 20
3.3.5 Direct observation 21
3.3.6 Evaluation Questions 21
3.4 Evaluation Matrix 22
4 Phases of the evaluation 22
4.1 Inception Phase - October 2021 22
4.2 Field Phase - 29 November to 18 December 2021 23
4.3 Synthesis Phase – 18 December 2021 to 10 February 2022 25
4.4 Dissemination Phase – February 2022 25
5 Intervention Logic 25
6 Key findings/answers 27
6.1 Relevance 27
6.2 Efficiency 31
6.3 Coherence 35
6.4 Effectiveness 37
6.5 Impact 45
6.6 Sustainability 47
6.7 EU-added value 48
6.8 Cross-cutting Issues 48
6.9 Visibility 50
6.10 Lessons Learned 51
7 Conclusions 56
1
Conclusion 1. 56
Conclusion 2. 56
Conclusion 3. 56
Conclusion 4. 57
Conclusion 5. 57
8 Recommendations 58
9 Annexes 62
9.1 The Terms of Reference 62
9.2 Best practices 106
9.3 The names of the evaluations and their presentations 118
9.4 Evaluation Matrix 119
9.5 Logical framework matrices 126
9.6 Relevant geographic map where the intervention took place 1
9.7 List of interviewed stakeholders during the Field Phase 1
9.8 List of documentation and literature consulted 13
2
Table of Figures
Figure 1 Map of the physical and online meetings visits in Vietnam ...................................... 24
Figure 2 The reconstructed ToC of the EUJULE .................................................................... 26
Figure 3 Presentation of the Result Chain ............................................................................... 34
Figure 4 timeline of important milestones and factors that caused significant delays ............ 40
3
Executive Summary
EU JULE is the project supported by the EU for the Government of Vietnam to enhance the
justice services for the people. The relevant agencies of Vietnam and the EU had been
negotiating for the project since 2013, and the Agreement of the project was signed on
02/12/2015. The Project document was discussed and started being implemented after approval
in 08/2017. The Appendix to the Project Agreement was signed in May 2020 to extend the
project's implementation period to December 2022. Thus, the EU Justice and Legal
Empowerment (EU JULE) Programme (2017-2022) was formulated, and at present, has been
implemented by the MOJ as the project owner responsible before the Government. UNDP,
UNICEF, and Oxfam are in charge of the project implementation. The total amount of EU
budget contribution is: EUR 14,000,000, the UN contribution: EUR 700,000 and the
Government of Vietnam indicative contribution is EUR 1,400,000 (cash and in-kind).
The evaluation is focused on assessing achievements, the quality, and the results of EU Justice
and Legal Empowerment Programme in Vietnam (EU JULE) interventions in the context of an
evolving cooperation policy with an increasing emphasis on result-oriented approaches and the
contribution towards the implementation of the SDGs.
The main users of this evaluation will be the EU Delegation to Vietnam, the Ministry of Justice,
the Ministry of Public Security, the Supreme People’s Court, the Supreme People’s Procuracy,
UNDP, UNICEF, Oxfam, Justice Initiative Facilitation Fund (JIFF) grantees as well as
stakeholders.
The scope of the evaluation is limited to the EU JULE PROGRAMME that includes two
contracts subject to this Mid-Term Evaluation, namely:
ACA/2015/372-239-Agreement with UNDP- PAGoDA- (including working with UNICEF) to
support government institutions.
ACA/2017/382-51- Justice Initiatives Facilitation Fund: Establish a basket fund for civil
society organisations managed by OXFAM Novib.
The evaluation is based on the six standard DAC evaluation criteria: relevance, coherence,
effectiveness, efficiency, sustainability, and impact. In addition, the evaluation will assess one
EU specific evaluation criterion: the EU added value (the extent to which the Intervention
brings additional benefits to what would have resulted from Member States' interventions
only).
The evaluation team shall furthermore consider whether gender, environment, digitalisation
and climate change were mainstreamed; the relevant SDGs and their interlinkages were
identified; the principle of Leave No-One Behind and the rights-based approach methodology
was followed in the identification/formulation documents and the extent to which they have
been reflected in the implementation of the Intervention, its governance and monitoring.
The geographical scope of the evaluation is stakeholders in Hanoi, Ho Chi Minh City, the
beneficiaries in the four provinces of the programme that were included in the design based on
poverty rate, socio-economic conditions, the prevalence of ethnic minorities, remote
mountainous areas: Dong Thap, Nghe An, Hoa Binh, Quang Binh.
4
This Evaluation is qualitative because of the participative approach but quantitative data
was collected when it was available. The capitalisation of existing knowledge and information
is based on primary data collection methods, including structured and semi-structured
interviews, online surveys, case studies, field observations and focus group interviews on
investigating thematic questions in-depth.
Secondary data was collected from documents, reports and studies. The Evaluation Team
created a designated folder on Google Drive. The Implementing Partners (IP) and the
evaluators had access to all necessary documents and the possibility to upload and download.
The information collected from the different sources has been aggregated and analysed. The
on-site meetings and interviews, and desk review of the documents are modalities by which
most information data was collected. A detailed description of the used tools is provided
hereunder.
A summary of key lessons and findings from the responses to 23 evaluation questions and the
OECD DAC is presented in this part of the evaluation report. Furthermore, every conclusion
provided in the present section has been cross-referenced to the relevant findings and lessons.
Conclusion 1.
The EUJULE’s goals and implementation are aligned with the beneficiary and stakeholder
needs. Moreover, beneficiaries' priorities shaped the planning and implementation of the
Programmes in PAGoDA and JIFF. As a result, action has contributed to meeting the needs of
the disadvantaged and marginalized in six provinces of Vietnam with regard to access to
justice. The design of the EUJULE is supported with adequately defined, realistic and feasible
objectives. However, the design could benefit from strengthening the Result Framework and
introducing indicators that could measure the outcome of each Result Area (4) from the
perspective of the impact of their functioning. Therefore, given EUJULE’s highly distinctive
and local character, such indicators are best designed through a country-led consultative
process, including stakeholders of state and non-state justice systems.
Conclusion 2.
The PAGoDA component has activated a significant and critical mass of legal professionals in
this ongoing implementation. As a result of a collaboration between the UN agencies and the
MoJ, the EU JULE Programme produced strategic documents and tools which will serve to
inform the development of targeted public awareness of legal right interventions, enhance the
capacity of legal and judicial officials and strengthen law implementation, increased the
transparency of law-making and law-implementing institutions, as well as strengthened a
justice sector that is more accessible and inclusive to all in Vietnam, leaving no one behind.
Thus, the current environment is conducive to developing interventions in support of the State’s
international human rights obligation and endorsed recommendations from the Universal
Periodic Review and UN Treaty Bodies mechanisms.
Conclusion 3.
PAGODA contributed to improvement of legal aid system, the provision of child-friendly
judicial proceeding and gender-sensitive grassroot mediation, and the availability of
specialized justice institution. The EUJULE was pivotal in supporting the juvenile justice
system and other child-friendly initiatives. Thanks to the joint contribution of the Supreme
5
Court and PAGoDA, the geographical map of the courts is expanding. In parallel, the higher
legal education system that engaged with PAGoDA successfully institutionalised a course on
juvenile justice; thus, these new branches of the justice system will be staffed with a generation
of specialized child-friendly justice system lawyers. However, to fully finalise the circle of
necessary elements of the juvenile justice reforms, the development of the probation system
and adequate social and psychological services is necessary. Thus, the reforms should include
these important elements. We also conclude that the perception of the impact could be more
balanced across the main stakeholders to ensure a mutual understanding of the EUJULE's goal
and how this success and change should be measured towards the end of the Programme.
Conclusion 4.
The JIFF component performed efficiently and effectively despite the short period of the grants
and the systemic challenges that the implementation team and its grantees faced through the
delays, pandemic-related restrictions, and natural disasters affecting the final beneficiaries of
the grants.
JIFF and its grantees ensured that 58,924 people had benefited directly from the Action in this
challenging environment. The scope of legal rights protection was broad, including economic
and social rights. The supported grantees advanced the adherence of and awareness of national
and international laws concerning children, people with disabilities, gender equality, marriage
and family, domestic violence prevention, elderly, child protection, and other related legal
documents and international conventions to which Vietnam is a signatory. JIFF’s third call for
proposals distributed grants to address environmental rights, and by this intervention, lack of
activities on the necessary cross-cutting issues of the environment was balanced. We
concluded, however, that an 18 months extension of the JIFF component is necessary to finalise
the planned firth call for proposals and to balance further the necessary cross-cutting issues of
gender and environment in the ongoing implementation.
Conclusion 5.
The EUJULE as EU-funded Action would have benefited from more relevant best practices in
legal aid, legal compensation, legal awareness, and juvenile justice system from the EUMS
(Croatia, Slovenia, Poland, etc.) or countries with similar geopolitical, multi-ethnic
representation and legal system with adequate anti-corruption and justice index record
(Georgia, Lithuania,). The PAGoDA component could have also engaged experts from the
European Commission for the Effectiveness of Justice (CEPEJ) of the Council of Europe
(CoE)1, specifically relevant to Result Area 4. The PAGoDA component may need a no-cost
extension to complete all planned activities and develop its exit strategy. In addition, to sustain
the wealth of the knowledge and research developed and leverage the coherence among the
development partners and beneficiaries, there is a need to systematically document the
developed training tools and research publications. Such digitalised library could be developed
with the help of the Human Rights Institute that could serve as a custodian and sustain the use
of these resources. The institute is the Party‘s academic institution for research and teaching in
the field of the state system, the political theory of human and fundamental rights and other
related issues. Among its essential tasks are consulting the academy’s president, conducting
1 https://www.coe.int/en/web/cepej
6
teaching events and courses on protecting human rights for party-members and government
staff of all levels, preparing surveys for the government, cooperating with international and
regional academic research institutions for human rights issues and scientific research projects
on the protection of human and fundamental rights, as well as publishing and distributing
materials and reference books on the protection of human and fundamental rights. In 2014 the
master’s course “Human Rights Law” was established. In 2021 the Institute launched the first
PhD program on Human rights law and an academic journal titled “Vietnam Journal of Human
rights Law.”
Conclusion 6.
We concluded that the work with the larger scope of CSOs should be continued under different
EU funding instruments for advancing human rights and democracy, including addressing the
impact of global challenges, such as climate change and environmental degradation, digital and
new technologies, or the COVID-19 pandemic. The approach, however, should secure result-
oriented implementation of the planned interventions that includes grant scheme for the CSOs.
Conclusion 7
The request from the PAGoDA beneficiaries to support automation/digitalization of the court
system, specifically the case management system, is justified. It is also in line with the EU
priorities that promotes the digital sector to promote human development reconciling economic
prosperity and efficiency, peaceful societies, social inclusion, and environmental
responsibility2. Furthermore, if implemented promptly, the automated system can promote the
transparency of the justice system and ensure expeditious justice for all. Thus, the EU should
consider this avenue of collaboration with the State on automation of legal services across the
system of justice.
Recommendations
Table 1 Recommendations table with targets, references and order of priorities
Order
Reference Recommendations Target of
priority
Recommendations pertaining to the ongoing implementation of EUJULE
Strengthen the result framework by including relevant
Conclusion 1
indicators to ensure more result-oriented implementation,
Ch. PAGoDA HIGH
and monitor outcome results.
Relevance
Ensure that the perception of the impact is balanced across
the main stakeholders, ensuring that there is a mutual
Conclusion 3
understanding of what the goal of the EUJULE is and how PAGoDA HIGH
Ch. Impact
this success and change should be measured towards the
end of the Programme.
2 Reference to ICT can be found explicitly as a target under SDG 9 "Build resilient infrastructure, promote inclusive and sustainable
industrialization and foster innovation", while ICT is also referenced in the targets related to climate change (SDGs 13, 14 and 15), gender
equality and women empowerment (SDG 5), private sector development (SDG 8), education (SDG 4) and health (SDG 3).
7
Order
Reference Recommendations Target of
priority
Consider 18 months extension of the JIFF component to
finalise the planned fourth call for proposals and further
Conclusion 4 balance the necessary cross-cutting issues of gender and
EUDEL
Ch. environment in the ongoing implementation. HIGH
JIFF
Efficiency Consider the extension for the PAGoDA component to
ensure complementary between the two components of the
programme.
Conclusion 5
Ch.
Consider introducing relevant best EUMS or EU and CoE
Efficiency PAGoDA HIGH
best practices to leverage the EU-added value.
Ch. EU-
added Value
Discuss with the Human Rights Institute the possibilities of
creating a digital Human Rights Library to sustain the
PAGoDA
wealth of the knowledge and research developed within the
Conclusion 5 JIFF
EUJULE. The Human Rights Institute could serve as a
Ch. Human HIGH
custodian and sustain the efficient, effective, and sustained
Efficiency Rights
use of these resources. Once established, the development
Institute
partners could consult the digital library and update the
necessary tools instead of duplicating the efforts.
Recommendation pertaining to the follow-up phase (EQ 23)
A) Identification and Formulation Mission for the next
phase comprised of a team of experienced legal experts
specializing in justice reforms, Human rights (international
normative HRs frameworks), gender equality/gender and
justice, administration of the justice processes, ICT in the
modernization of justice institutions, probation system (if
this topic is considered).
Programmin
g of any
B) Ensure that representatives of the concerned ministries
future EU-
and justice institutions, ad local legal experts are involved EUDEL HIGH
funded
in the design and consultation to reach a broader consensus
intervention
on the outcomes that all parties should deliver jointly.
(EQ 23)
C) Ensure that the following objectives are included in the
ToR for the team as mentioned above:
• To assess the level of political will of the
beneficiaries in accordance with the international
standards of human rights, access to justice, gender
equality – the relevant UPR and UN TB
8
Order
Reference Recommendations Target of
priority
recommendations accepted by Vietnam. Assess the
political will to develop National Human Rights
Action Plan.
• To identify best EU practices in access to justice,
legal aid, juvenile justice, probation system, human
rights reporting, evaluation and monitoring of UN
recommendations relevant to Viet Nm’s justice
system and thus could be adapted and sustained
within the same governmental structure.
• Stock-taking of the relevant UPR and UN TB
recommendations should be exercised to identify
relevant actions and ensure that these responses
form the core of the result framework. Specifically,
the development of the National Human Rights
Action Plan.
Lesson
The best practices of the JIFFs under the grant scheme Next
Learned and JIFF
should be sustained in the next round of the calls. Phase
best practices
In the next EUJULE phase, design a distinctive component
that supports Vietnam in the implementation of relevant
recommendations from the UPR and UN Treaty Bodies
with the following result areas:
A) Support in the development of National Human Rights
Institutes harmonised with the Paris Principles Support the
development of National Human Rights Institutes,
including National Mechanism on Prevention of torture.
Programmin
B) Support the State in fulfilling the UN Recommendation
g of any
on ratifying the Second Optional Protocol to the MOJ
future EU- Next
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, EUDEL
funded Phase
aiming to abolish the death penalty. UN
intervention
C) Facilitating technical assistance to the State and
(EQ 23)
specifically to the MoJ in reporting on ICCPR. To this end,
intervention could be designed to support reform on the
moratorium or complete eradication of the death penalty
through ratifying its Second Optional Protocol.
D) An inter-agency, comprehensive national mechanism
and action plan across all UN HRs mechanisms that address
HRs implementation and reporting by themes, rather than
by treaty.
9
Order
Reference Recommendations Target of
priority
A) Consider support to Juvenile Justice Reform and Supreme
activation of Juvenile Courts through strengthening the Court
Human Resources Management of the activated courts UNICEF
Programmin
EUDEL
g of any
B) To sustain the operability of the activated juvenile Ha Noi Law
future EU- Next
courts, building the capacity of the administrative staff to School
funded Phase
train, retain and maintain the necessary staff, matching the Judicial
intervention
workload with the workforce, etc. Academy
(EQ 23)
The continuous legal and professional education should be Academy of
part of future engagements, ensuring that relevant courses the Supreme
are mandatory. Court.
A) Support the development of a comprehensive probation
system for the juveniles and humanisation of function to
reduce the prison population.
Programmin B) Conduct thorough identification and formulation
g of any mission by a team of experienced experts (national and EUDEL
future EU- international) to define all determinants and bottlenecks UNICEF Next
funded that could present smooth implementation of the future Supreme Phase
intervention programming. Court
(EQ 23) C) Based on the analyses, consider designing a pilot project
and initiative country-wide study on recidivism among the
children in the areas where juvenile courts are operating or
planning to operate should be considered.
A) Consider launching a wide-scale grant scheme action
under the Global Europe Human Rights and Democracy
programme (2021-2027).
B) Entrust an eligible pillar-assessed development partner
Conclusion to undertake the operation and management of the
Next
6. prospective programme with indirect management aid EUDEL
Phase
modality to ensure flexible, result-oriented and prompt
implementation of grant proposals.
C) Increase the timeframe of the grants to ensure that
prospective grantees have adequate time to implement their
activities and sustain their results.
A) The EU Delegation should engage with the national Supreme
partners and assess the level of interest in Court
Next
Conclusion 7 automation/digitalisation of the justice system. EUDEL
Phase
B) Consider comparative analyses of the normative UNDP
environment on personal data protection to identify gaps
10
Order
Reference Recommendations Target of
priority
with international standards and other determinants and
bottlenecks.
C) Ensure that regulatory impact analyses are conducted to
define the scope of financial resources and technical and
human capacities needed to launch such an ambitious
initiative. We recommend starting within the Result Area
4, Result 2 (Act. 2.6) or Result 3 (act. 3.2) of the ongoing
EUJULE Programme, as digitalisation and innovation of
the court, to some extent, enforced the transparency of the
courts processes and services.
11
1 Context and background
Overview
The current population of Viet Nam is 98,305,1673 distributed over 58 provinces and 5
municipalities, and Viet Nam is a unified country of 54 ethnic groups. The country has shown
recent efforts in the strengthening of the rule of law and has ratified seven out of the nine
fundamental UN international conventions on Human Rights and is considering the signing of
the remaining Conventions: International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from
Enforced Disappearance (CPED) and International Convention on the Protection of the Rights
of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families (ICRMW), as well as Optional
Protocols of the Conventions. These international obligations oblige the State to respect,
protect and promote Human Rights values. In line with these international obligations, 15 years
ago, the State of Viet Nam embarked on a far-reaching and ambitious reform to develop a
comprehensive legal framework to strengthen legal and judicial institutions for a more
effective and accountable justice system. The two cornerstones of the reforms are Resolution
No. 48/NQ-TW on 24/05/2005 on “Strategy for the Development and Improvement of
Vietnam’s Legal System to the Year 2010, with a vision to 2020 (LSDS)” and Resolution No.
49-NQ/TW on the Judicial Reform Strategy to 2020 (Resolution 49). The outcome of the
ongoing reforms has been positively affecting the justice system and the overarching normative
environment. Some noteworthy achievements are the 2013 Constitution that secures citizens'
fundamental rights and obligations, the establishment of Family and Juvenile courts, and the
reform of the Legal Aid system to leverage the professionalism and effectiveness of Family
and Juvenile courts. These progressive changes are supported by the growing political will of
the state actors to endorse principles of effective and efficient justice and gender equality.
Despite these significant achievements, reforms have been hampered by multifaceted
challenges to ensure access to justice for all, including the quality of work conducted by judicial
agencies, remains inadequate; professional ethics of justice professionals need more
development; institutional and human capacity to implement these reforms remains limited;
tasks and projects to reform the organization and judicial activities are lacking coordination
and common consensus between the State’s institutions; the awareness of especially vulnerable
people on their rights to access justice is relatively low; Viet Nam is lacking sufficient
mechanisms for citizens’ participation in law development and implementation; the level of
people’s confidence in the legal, judicial institutions is low; strong legal ambiguities,
inefficiencies and discrepancies among laws, etc.
The European Union and Viet Nam
Over 30 years, Vietnam has become a key partner of the European Union (EU) in Southeast
Asia, and the collaboration has embraced political and security issues, regional and global
challenges, trade and development, cooperation, and humanitarian aid. The two recent focal
sectors of EU-Vietnam cooperation have been Sustainable energy and governance and the rule
of law. The focus of the cooperation gradually encompassed other important but politically
sensitive issues such as human rights and justice. In 2012, the EU and Vietnam signed the
Framework Agreement on Comprehensive Partnership and Cooperation (PCA). In 2016, in
Brussels, the EU and Vietnam held the sixth round of their annual enhanced Human Rights
Dialogue, in the context of the EU-Vietnam Partnership and Cooperation Agreement (PCA).
3 As of Tuesday, August 10, 2021, based on Worldometer elaboration of the latest United Nations data.
12
Discussions focused among other issues on legal and judicial reforms in Vietnam, the
promotion of the rule of law and due process, combatting torture and ill-treatment, arbitrary
detention, capital punishment, support to Vietnamese Civil Society Organisations (CSO) and
Human Rights Defenders, and engagement within the United Nations framework4. The
Dialogue paved the way to a constructive exchange on the human rights situation in Vietnam
and allowed for discussions on best practices and the EU's support to reform efforts. In such a
complex environment, UNDP, UNICEF, and Oxfam implementing the EU Justice and Legal
Empowerment (EU JULE) Programme (2017-2022m. The objectives of the Programme are to
strengthen the rule of law in Viet Nam through a more reliable, trusted and better accessed
justice system. And, to increase access to justice for citizens, especially for vulnerable groups.
Positive Developments in the field of human rights, access to justice and the rule of law
To date, Vietnam is proud to have achieved a number of Sustainable Development Goals
(SDGs) - related results, including: (1) A substantial reduction in the national multi-
dimensional poverty rate from 9.9 per cent in 2015 to less than 7 per cent in 2017; (2) Health
insurance coverage reaching 86.4 per cent in 2017; (3) A primary net enrolment rate of 99.0
per cent; (4) Women’s representation in the National Assembly in the 2016-2021 term reaching
26.7 per cent; (5) The proportion of households having access to safe water reaching 93.4 per
cent in 2016; (6) Access to electricity by more than 99 per cent of Vietnamese households in
2016; (7) Internet use reaching 54.2 per cent; (8) Annual gross domestic product growth rates
at 6.7, 6.2, and 6.8 per cent for 2015, 2016, and 2017 respectively; (9) Improvements in the
protection and management of the environment and natural resources and an increase in forest
cover to 41.5 per cent in 2017; and (10) A reduction in inequality and an improvement in the
promotion of access to justice and information.
Moreover, sustainable development principles have been thoroughly mainstreamed into the
2011-2020 Social and Economic Development Strategy (SEDS) and the 2016-2020 Social and
Economic Development Plan (SEDP). In the coming years, the SDGs will be fully and further
integrated into Vietnam’s 2021-2030 SEDS and 2021-2025 SEDP.
The Government of Vietnam has created an enabling legal environment and encouraged
foreign and domestic private sectors to invest and do business in line with sustainable
development principles. Accordingly, the Vietnam Business Council for Sustainable
Development aims to enhance connections within the business community to share and spread
good practices and play an important role in realizing the SDGs.
Vietnam is now a lower-middle-income country and is also one of the most affected countries
by climate change. Moreover, increasingly integrated into the world economy, Vietnam is more
vulnerable to its fluctuations. Therefore, to successfully achieve all 17 SDGs, Vietnam requires
technical and human resources, financial support, and strengthened cooperation and knowledge
exchange with the international community. At the same time, Vietnam is eager to share its
own experiences and innovative approaches with other countries.
4 See: https://eeas.europa.eu/headquarters/headquarters-homepage_en/16779/6th%20EU-Vietnam%20Human%20Rights%20Dialogue
13
Despite many efforts, Vietnam still faces several development challenges to ensure access to
justice for all, including lack of a consistent and predictable legal system and its limited
effectiveness and efficiency; weak implementation of laws; lack of sufficient mechanisms for
citizens’ participation in law development and implementation oversight; especially disparities
in access to justice persist across several demographic dimensions, such as ethnicity, gender,
age, disability, poverty, education, and health status.
The need to promote legal empowerment and ensure justice remains strong in Vietnam.
Accordingly, efforts are being made to strengthen the rule of law through increased
effectiveness and responsiveness of justice institutions, for example, the establishment of
Family and Juvenile Courts (F&JCs), shifting the focus of legal aid activities with the Legal
Aid Reform Project and Legal Aid Law 2017”. However, the capacity to implement these
reforms remains constrained by the lack of institutional and human capacity and weak
monitoring and evaluation systems at all levels of the justice sector.
Going forward, Vietnam will therefore need to: improve society’s awareness of and mobilize
all stakeholders’ participation in sustainable development efforts; enhance institutional set-up
and policy frameworks for sustainable development; foster cooperation between the
Government and the business sector, domestic organizations, and the international community
in SDG implementation; issue national SDG indicators and strengthen national statistical
capacity; mainstream SDGs into development policies and strategies; and strengthen the
mobilization of resources, particularly from the private sector for SDG implementation.
The preparation of the Vietnam Voluntary National Review thus provides an opportunity to
raise SDG awareness and mobilize the participation of different stakeholders, including the
National Assembly, the Government, the United Nations in Vietnam, Political, Social,
Professional and Mass Organizations, international and local NGOs, the business community,
and other development partners.
Vietnam is confident that it will succeed in implementing the 2030 Agenda for current and
future generations. In their enduring commitment as a responsible member of the international
community, Vietnam will continue to contribute positively to global efforts to leave no one and
no country behind. This is Vietnam’s global endeavour for sustainable development.5
On 27 November 2015, the National Assembly voted in favour of removing seven crimes from
the list of offences that can be punished by death, bringing the total number of capital offences
down from 22 to 156. The amendments also required the commutation of the death penalty for
pregnant women, women with children under the age of 3, people aged 75 and over, and people
sentenced to death for embezzlement of assets or taking bribes who return at least three-
quarters of the embezzled assets. The reduction in the number of capital crimes and provisions
for commutations represent a positive development; however, other offences not involving “the
most serious crimes,” to which the use of the death penalty must be restricted under
5See: Vietnam’s Voluntary National Review- Key Messages. Voluntary National Review 2018. Available at
https://sustainabledevelopment.un.org/content/documents/19297VIET_NAM_VNR_Key_MessagesViet_Namedited.pdf, last visited
<<1.01.2022>>.
6 Submission To The United Nations Human Rights Committee 125th Session, 4-29 March 2019. Amnesty International.
14
international law, remain punishable by death. These include drug trafficking and
embezzlement. Vietnam received and accepted nine recommendations under the Universal
Periodic Review mechanism (UPR) on the death penalty. One of the accepted
recommendations for Vietnam from the UPR under the Human Rights Council and a
recommendation also reiterated by the Committees supervising the implementation of treaties
that Vietnam is a party to, is to reduce the scope of crimes for which the death penalty applies
and to consider a moratorium on the application of the death penalty.7 Other vital
recommendations concern the ratification of the Second Optional Protocol of the International
Covenant of the Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR), aiming to abolish the death penalty.
Under the UPR, Vietnam received and accepted 8 recommendations to establish a National
Human Rights Institute (NHRI) in line with Paris Principles8. One of the recommendations that
Vietnam received under the Human Rights Committee’s Concluding Observations on
Vietnam’s third periodic report is along the same line. The recommendation is repeated under
the UN Special Rapporteur mechanism, for example, on the right to food.
Vietnam’s openness to realise the recommendations under the two human rights mechanisms,
including on issues related to the death penalty and NHRI, is demonstrated by the UPR Master
Plan (Prime Minister’s Decision 1975) and ICCPR Master Plan (Prime Minister’s Decision
1252), which identify objectives and delegate tasks to national agencies to realise the
recommendations9. In 2018, Vietnam expressed its willingness to consider a moratorium on
the imposition of the death penalty during the 42nd and 43rd UN General Assembly’s meetings
on the resolution on the death penalty moratorium. The representative of Vietnam also stated
that the country would likely move towards abolishing the death penalty. However, it was
emphasized that several proposed policies should be adopted.10
2 Introduction of the Mid-Term Evaluation of EUJULE
2.1 Objectives and results of the evaluation.
The evaluation is focused on assessing achievements, the quality, and the results of EU Justice
and Legal Empowerment Programme in Vietnam (EU JULE) interventions in the context of an
evolving cooperation policy with an increasing emphasis on result-oriented approaches and the
contribution towards the implementation of the SDGs.
7 Recommendation 143.94 “Consider at least further restricting the use of the death penalty only for the most serious crimes, as stated in article
6 of ICCPR with a view to soon adopting a de facto moratorium on executions” (A/HRC/26/6)
8 See: UPR: 38.66, 38.68, 38.71, 38.75, 38.79, 38.80, 38.85, 38.88; ICCPR Concluding Observations: 8; Rapporteur on Right to Food: 126
9See:https://thuvienphapluat.vn/van-ban/Quyen-dan-su/Quyet-dinh-1975-QD-TTg-2019-Co-che-ra-soat-dinh-ky-pho-quat-ve-quyen-con-
nguoi-chu-ky-III-432887.aspx, last assessed <<8.02.2022>>
10See: Civil Society Report on the Implementation of the ICCPR (Replies to the List of Issues CCPR/C/VNM/Q/3). Review of the third State
Report of Vietnam (CCPR/C/VNM/3) At the 125th session of the Human Rights Committee. Geneva, 4 – 29 March 2019.
15
The main users of this evaluation will be the EU Delegation to Vietnam, the Ministry of Justice,
the Ministry of Public Security, the Supreme People’s Court, the Supreme People’s Procuracy,
UNDP, UNICEF, Oxfam, Justice Initiative Facilitation Fund (JIFF) grantees as well as
stakeholders.
2.2 The scope of MTE
The scope of the evaluation is limited to the EU JULE PROGRAMME that includes two
contracts subject to this Mid-Term Evaluation, namely:
ACA/2015/372-239-Agreement with UNDP- PAGoDA- (including working with UNICEF) to
support government institutions.
ACA/2017/382-51- Justice Initiatives Facilitation Fund: Establish a basket fund for civil
society organisations managed by OXFAM Novib.
The evaluation is based on the six standard DAC evaluation criteria: relevance, coherence,
effectiveness, efficiency, sustainability, and impact. In addition, the evaluation will assess one
EU specific evaluation criterion: the EU added value (the extent to which the Intervention
brings additional benefits to what would have resulted from Member States' interventions
only).
The evaluation team shall furthermore consider whether gender, environment, digitalisation
and climate change were mainstreamed; the relevant SDGs and their interlinkages were
identified; the principle of Leave No-One Behind and the rights-based approach methodology
was followed in the identification/formulation documents and the extent to which they have
been reflected in the implementation of the Intervention, its governance and monitoring.
The geographical scope of the evaluation is stakeholders in Hanoi, Ho Chi Minh City, the
beneficiaries in the four provinces of the programme that were included in the design based on
poverty rate, socio-economic conditions, the prevalence of ethnic minorities, remote
mountainous areas: Dong Thap, Nghe An, Hoa Binh, Quang Binh.
2.3 Project Background
EU JULE is the project supported by the EU for the Government of Vietnam to enhance the
justice services for the people. The relevant agencies of Vietnam and the EU had been
negotiating for the project since 2013, and the Agreement of the project was signed on
02/12/2015. The Project document was discussed and started being implemented after approval
in 08/2017. The Appendix to the Project Agreement was signed in May 2020 to extend the
project's implementation period to December 2022. Thus, the EU Justice and Legal
Empowerment (EU JULE) Programme (2017-2022) was formulated, and at present, has been
implemented by the MOJ as the project owner responsible before the Government. UNDP,
UNICEF, and Oxfam are in charge of the project implementation. The total amount of EU
16
budget contribution is: EUR 14,000,000, the UN contribution: EUR 700,000 and the
Government of Vietnam indicative contribution is EUR 1,400,000 (cash and in-kind).
EU JULE’s Implementation modality.
The EUJULE envisaged a mix of direct and indirect management mechanisms. Specifically,
the following two main mechanisms are used:
• The Justice Initiative Facilitation Fund (direct management) supports civil
society through a single grant, with sub-granting as the main purpose11. Thus, the JIFF
is a basket fund for civil society organizations managed by Oxfam M Novib. The role
of the JIFF Secretariat (Oxfam) includes as well CSOs network development for
policy advocacy. JIFF supports civil society initiatives via sub-granting towards the
achievement of EU JULE Programme results. The Action contributes to the EU JULE
specific objective and four results (The Overall objective is only measured at the EU
JULE whole programme level). In the design of JIFF, Oxfam has set 3 Sub-results
that each contributes to all 4 results of EU JULE. This grant contract entails: (i) the
administration of the sub-grants for civil society, research by universities and research
institutes and the media; (ii) secretarial functions for the grants selection; and (iii)
provision of technical assistance to and capacity development of grantees. In the
revised proposal submitted to the EU in July 2020, the target for the number of people
with increased awareness and understanding of legal rights was increased from 48,000
to 54,000 people. As a result, an estimated 54,000 people will demonstrate increased
awareness and understanding of legal rights and at least 32,000 people will receive
legal advice or assistance. In addition, research, media outreach and advocacy will
increase opportunities for access to justice for at least 4,500,000 people. The funds
allocated to the JIFF component constitute EUR 6 455 406.
• An Indirect Management Delegation Agreement12 with the UNDP under which
UNICEF and UNODC operate to provide targeted capacity building to institutions
and evidence-based research. After one year of implementation, the UNODC opted
out of implementation. The total duration of the action is 61 months, from the 1st of
November 2017 to the 30th of November 2022. The Indirect Management Delegation
Agreement with UNDP covers: (i) technical assistance to and capacity development
of state institutions, in particular for the strengthening of judicial integrity; and (ii)
support the generation of independent information on the formal/informal judicial
systems (grants to research institutes, universities, private companies/consultancy
firms, etc.) for quantitative and qualitative surveys, research studies, analysis of
statistical data, etc. and for activities promoting civil society and parliamentary
oversight of the judicial systems. The main targets of the Action include:
- Ministries and other duty-bearers: Ministry of Justice, Supreme People’s Court,
Supreme People’s Procuracy, Ministry of Public Security, and Ministry of Labour,
Invalids and Social Affairs; Vietnam Lawyers’ Association, Vietnam Bar Federation,
provincial departments of justice; the provincial courts and provincial procuracies;
committees and agencies of the National Assembly; relevant ministries; law
universities and research institutions relating to law and justice, and the media.
- Right-holders: Citizens, including vulnerable groups: women, children, ethnic
minorities, poor people, etc.
This Pagoda component is funded with EUR 7 400 000 (90.5 % EU contribution: 4.5%
UN).
11 ACA/2017/382-514
12 ACA/2015/372-239
17
Governance of the EUJULE.
A Programme Steering Committee governs EU JULE (PSC), chaired by the Ministry of Justice
and the EU, representing State’s institutions, the JIFF and UNDP management. The PSC
represents the highest management level of EU JULE with the power to decide policies,
directions and approve annual work plans for implementing the Programme. All members have
voting power and take decisions by consensus. The PSC meets at least once a year through
extraordinary meetings called by any of the co-chairs. In accordance with Vietnamese law, a
Project Management Unit (PMU) will be set up within the Ministry of Justice. MoJ bears the
functioning costs of this PMU as a part of the Government's contribution to EU JULE. The
PMU ensures achievement of expected outputs and effective budget management in
accordance with regulations of the EU and Viet Nam’s laws; support to the MoJ in management
and coordination of the Programme in line with Viet Nam’s laws; support the PSC to review
annual work plans and handle all issues arising with both mechanisms' framework -PAGoDA
and JIFF- before submitting to the PSC for review and decision-making; and to monitor daily
operation within the programme framework.
3 Evaluation methodology and framework
The methodology of this evaluation followed the approach laid down in the publication
“Evaluation Methods for the European Union's External Assistance” produced by the Europe
Aid Joint Evaluation Unit. Thus, the Evaluation Questions are linked to DAC Evaluation
Criteria, i.e., relevance, effectiveness, efficiency, impact and sustainability, the additional EU
Evaluation Criteria and the corresponding Result / Objective Area of the Programme.
3.1 Approaches
• Credibility approach. The evaluation's overall approach was guided by the principle of
credibility – ensuring that the best evidence available is harnessed, analysed appropriately,
and generates findings, conclusions, and recommendations that management is confident to
act upon. In addition, the methods was participatory, ensuring the collection of disaggregated
data, assessing gender roles, contextually and culturally sensitive.
• Theory-Based Approach. The evaluation team reconstructed the Intervention Logic and the
Theory of Change (ToC) of the EUJULE, recalled results to be achieved, set up evaluation
criteria, drafted and agreed on Evaluation Questions (EQs) and sub-questions, selected
judgment criteria for each question, indicators (measurement of results or achievements, or
process indicator), identified sources of information.
• A cross-cutting approach included:
- A Human Rights-Based Approach (HRBA) was used to assess the extent to which
the HRBA was applied both in the design and in implementation by measuring the
relevant outcomes in strengthening government institutions through technical
partnerships, creating platforms for grassroots voices to reach policymakers, good
practices, policy advocacy and support for action research.
- A Gender Equality approach: the relevant guidance methodologies for the
Gender-Sensitive evaluations and the EU Gender Action Plan III on Integrating
Human Rights and Gender Equality in the Evaluation was adapted during the
Inception Phase. The five key human rights principles: participation, accountability,
non-discrimination and equality, empowerment, and legality was applied;
18
- Progressive achievement of SDGs and, in particular, goals 5 (gender equality)13 and
16 (effective, accountable and inclusive institutions)14. Notably, the relevant policy
recommendations developed for the EU-funded interventions were mainstreamed in
the final report15.
Additionally, the evaluation will be carried out in line with the following guiding principles,
which have been drafted based on the lessons learned from previous similar assignments:
• Independence, neutrality and transparency with stakeholders and the EU;
• Ownership of respondents and end-users for sustainability by applying a participatory,
iterative, and constructive approach.
• Triangulation – Cross-checking, use of a variety of information sources (mostly
qualitative yet also quantitative), diversity of voices heard, and systematic proof search;
• Process focus, actions within the programme will be analysed as a process, involving
the interaction among several actors and the matching of the activities with larger,
overarching processes.
3.2 Ethical standards
As this evaluation involved interaction with ethnic and religious minorities, minors, survivors
of domestic and gender-based violence, the ET applied whenever relevant, the following
ethical standards in evaluation16:
Informed consent: All informants were asked for informed consent to participate in the
interview and were assured of their anonymity and the confidentiality of their responses; at
any time, all participants were given the right to choose whether or not to participate and/or
withdraw from the evaluation; Prior permission was requested for the taking and use of
photographs during individual and focus group interviews.
Sensitivity: the team was mindful of differences in culture, local customs, religious beliefs and
practices, personal interaction and gender roles, age and ethnicity when planning, carrying
out evaluation and reporting on the results.
Privacy and Confidentiality: the team ensured that no harm happened to the participants of
the evaluation and that particular respondents’ identification through data presentation and
discussion in the note will not be allowed.
Respect and empowerment: the evaluation process and communication of results was
conducted in a way that respects the stakeholders’ dignity and self-worth and contributes to
their empowerment.
Fair representation: the selection of participants was made in relation to the aims of the
evaluation, not simply because of their availability; inclusion of both women and men
from the excluded or most disadvantaged groups was ensured when relevant.
3.3 Evaluation’s data collection tools
This Evaluation is qualitative because of the participative approach but quantitative data
was collected when it was available. The capitalisation of existing knowledge and information
is based on primary data collection methods, including structured and semi-structured
13 See Goal 5: https://www.ua.undp.org/content/ukraine/en/home/sustainable-development-goals/goal-5-gender-equality.html
14See: SDG 16 https://www.ua.undp.org/content/ukraine/en/home/sustainable-development-goals/goal-16-peace-justice-and-
strong-institutions.html
15 Recommendations To the European Commission By The Subgroup On “Governance, Coherence And Rule Of Law” of the
Multi-Stakeholder Platform on the Implementation of the Sustainable Development Goals in the EU. Governance, Coherence
and Rule Of Law (Paper II – Expanded version)
16 Adopted form the UNEG
19
interviews, online surveys, case studies, field observations and focus group interviews on
investigating thematic questions in-depth.
Secondary data was collected from documents, reports and studies. The Evaluation Team
created a designated folder on Google Drive. The Implementing Partners (IP) and the
evaluators had access to all necessary documents and the possibility to upload and download.
The information collected from the different sources has been aggregated and analysed. The
on-site meetings and interviews, and desk review of the documents are modalities by which
most information data was collected. A detailed description of the used tools is provided
hereunder.
3.3.1 Desk review
The ET conducted a systematic analysis of existing documentation, including quantitative
and descriptive information about the EUJULE, its outputs and outcomes, such as
documentation from capacity development activities, donor reports and other evidence.
Advantages: Cost-efficient and time-efficient modality of collecting the information about the
implementation.
Disadvantages: It can be difficult to code and analyse documentary evidence. And, it can be
challenging to verify the reliability and validity of data.
3.3.2 On-site assessment through meetings and interviews with key
informants
There was rounds of meetings and interviews with participating entities. The Inception Phase
was a starting point when, in close collaboration with the EUD and IP, the contacts list,
validation of work and travel plans, and validation of Evaluation Questions were discussed
and confirmed. As an outcome of this meeting, the scope and scale of the evaluation was
defined, the Evaluation Questions agreed and finalised, the final list of the contacts (and
alternative contacts to mitigate) was submitted to the team.
Advantages: Facilitates fuller coverage, range and depth of information on a topic.
Disadvantages: Can be time-consuming, difficult to analyse and costly. There are also
potentials for the interviewer to bias the interviewee’s responses.
3.3.3 Focus Group Discussion (FGD)
To ensure the EU evaluation standards for participatory evaluation, a FGD with participating
CSOs and final beneficiaries was organised online to assess civil societies' perception of the
actions, quality of delivered training, goods, and best practices.
Advantages: Efficient way to obtain a high degree of in-depth information. Homogeneous
groups often provide information and qualitative insights that are not articulated otherwise.
This can also apply to other groups.
Disadvantages: Not very effective in online mode and hard to analyse responses. Requires
trained facilitator and consecutive translation that brings the costs high. Difficult to schedule
at the time of the pandemic.
3.3.4 Key informant interview (KII)
Some qualitative in-depth interviews with a wide range of stakeholders and experts who have
first-hand knowledge of the EUJULE’s implementation was organised. For instance with
members of the PMU, UNDP and UNICEF involved in assessing the legislation, key players
in the justice reforms. These experts provided particular knowledge and understanding of
problems and recommended solutions. Most questions for this process were open-ended and
meant to stimulate discussion.
20
Advantages: Provided insight on the nature of problems and gave recommendations for
solutions, different perspectives on a single issue and gave recommendations for solutions.
Disadvantages: KII is subject to sampling bias and depends on some means of verifying or
corroborating information.
3.3.5 Direct observation
This data collection method consists mainly of what can be seen during field missions and
project site visits and events such as training, seminars, provision of legal aid to the target
group, and court proceedings. However, this method could be subjective as human vision and
perception are selective, based on fields of interest or cultural sensitivities. Therefore, it was
important to cross-validate facts and elements collected.
Advantage: quick and cost-effective way to collect qualitative information.
Disadvantage: limited to what is visible at a particular point in time and to places where the
observer has direct access. Was not possible with the pandemic to use it in each field visits,
therefore, important information may be missed.
3.3.6 Evaluation Questions
The ToR provide a set of indicative Evaluation Questions (EQ)/issues. After initial
consultations, document analysis, and discussion with the EU, these questions are re-defined
and completed based on potential usefulness and feasibility answers. Evaluators reduce the
number of the issues from 33 to 22 evaluation questions to preserve coherence and respect the
length of the forthcoming report and executive summary. In addition, the Evaluability
Assessments was conducted to further incorporate the content of the specific issues into the
evaluation criteria in the Evaluation Matrix (EM). As a result, the EQ was refined and presented
in the table hereunder.
Table 2 Evaluation Question per the OECD DAC
Evaluation
Evaluation Questions (EQ)
Criteria
• To what extent was the EU JULE Programme in line with national development
priorities, the EU’s Multiannual indicative Programme and preferences, the UNDP
Strategic Plan, and the SDGs?
• Are the EU JULE Programme objectives and outputs clear, practical, and feasible
Relevance within its frame? For example, do they address women, men, and vulnerable groups
and align with the EU and Vietnamese Government’s strategy to increase access to
justice for vulnerable people and strengthen the rule of law?
• Have all the pre-conditions and assumptions are relevant during the implementation?
• To what extent were lessons learned from other relevant projects considered in the
design?
• How have both project components been compatible and synergised with each other
Coherence and with other interventions in the country, in the justice sector and partner
organizations?
• What are critical factors supporting or preventing the linkage and synergy?
• What is the level of overall progress and results achieved by components and their
contribution to the programme's overall purpose according to the logframe and its
Effectiveness indicators?
• What factors have contributed to achieving or not intended outputs and outcomes?
• What, if any, alternative strategies would have been more effective in achieving the EU
JULE Programme objectives?
21
Evaluation
Evaluation Questions (EQ)
Criteria
• To what extent have different stakeholders been involved in EU JULE Programme
implementation? Is it participatory?
• What has been the impact of COVID-19 on the project implementation and the project
response?
• To what extent was the EU JULE Programme management structure outlined in the
EU JULE Programme document efficient in generating the expected results?
Efficiency • To what extent have both component implementation strategy and execution been
efficient and cost-effective?
• To what extent do both components' monitoring and evaluations systems ensure
effective and efficient project management?
• To what extent has the project achievements contributed to a more reliable, trusted and
better-accessed justice system in Vietnam?
Impact
• To what extent did the EU JULE Programme contribute to the EU priorities, the UNDP
Strategic Plan and country programme outcomes and outputs, the SDGs and national
development priorities?
• What have the project stakeholders been doing to sustain its results financially,
Sustainability institutionally, environmentally and at the policy level? To what extent will financial
and economic resources be available to sustain the benefits achieved by the EU JULE
Programme?
• Have the relevant cross-cutting issues, including human rights, disability and gender
equality, empowerment of women has been adequately mainstreamed in the design and
Cross-cutting
the implementation of the programme?
Issues
• To what extent environmental and/or climate-related challenges, as well as digital
transformation aspects, have been considered?
EU - Added • To which extent does the Intervention bring additional benefits to what would have
Value resulted from Member States' interventions only?
• What is the level of awareness between the beneficiaries and the stakeholders on the
Visibility
EU-funded Project?
• Are there any best practices to sustain the programme results to be considered by the
Lessons
beneficiaries/EU JULE stakeholders? What can the team recommend for the
learned
programming of any future EU-funded intervention?
3.4 Evaluation Matrix
The Evaluation Matrix with Evaluation Questions, judgement criteria, indicators, and data
analysis and collection methods were developed (attached as an annex to the present Final
report). The Evaluation Matrix was produced to guide the process of the MTE, which is entirely
in line with Project Cycle Management, ToC, Logical Framework, and evaluation
methodology.
4 Phases of the evaluation
4.1 Inception Phase - October 2021
The Inception Phase was launched with an initial study and preparation of the kick-off meeting,
followed by a short meeting with EUD in Hanoi and a kick-off meeting with the Reference
Group (consisting of the EUD, the Ministry of Justice’s Project Management Unit (PMU) and
22
implementing partners: UNDP, Oxfam, UNICEF (5 participants) and the Evaluation Team
(ET). Overall, a total of 31 participants (20 female and 11 male professionals). During this
phase, the following activities were implemented:
• Stakeholder mapping was completed with the identification and categorisation of
potential informants and disaggregated per the Result Area.
• ET conducted preliminary interviews with the Oxfam team.
• A presentation of the Justice Initiative Facilitation Fund (JIFF) and the progress with
activities was delivered.
• The feasibility of the field trips to the project sites was discussed and agreed.
• Frequent consultations with the UNICEF and UNDP implementing teams were
organised.
• The field visit approach was discussed, and alternative modalities and logistics were
planned.
• The risks and mitigation measures were updated.
• Revision of the Theory of Change (ToC) as it represents the backbone for the evaluation
and outlines the objectives against which the EU intervention was assessed.
• Elaboration and validation of the EQ: the ET conducted the Evaluability Assessments
to reduce the number of EQs and downgraded some of the issues into sub-questions or
evaluation criteria.
• The Evaluation matrix (identifying data sources and tools for each evaluation question
and sub-question) was completed.
The ET conducted a desk review of key documents: 16 documents, including reports of the
programme and documents mentioned in the ToR, were studied. In addition, the ET identified
other relevant documents action, created a platform on Google Drive and organised the
EUJULE’s documents, report per IPs, and Result Area. However, due to the large amount of
information submitted by the implementing partners very close to the Inception and Desk Note
submission date, the ET continued the desk review simultaneously with the Field Phase.
4.2 Field Phase - 29 November to 18 December 2021
The Field Phase started after the approval of the inception & desk note by the Evaluation
Manager and the arrival of the evaluation’s Team Leader in Ha Noi. As a result, the Field Phase
fully met its aims and validated all preliminary answers formulated during the Inception and
Desk Note.
Furthermore, substantive information was collected during this phase through primary research
and interviews with the implementing partners' stakeholders and final beneficiaries. All
changes and deviations from the agreed work plan were communicated to EU Evaluation
Manager. In addition, corrective measures were undertaken when the planned meeting was
impossible to conduct physically.
In the first days of the field phase, on the 29th of November, the Evaluation Team held a briefing
meeting with the EUD in Hanoi, MoJ-PMU, UNDP-UNICEF, and Oxfam. In addition, the
team consulted with the different stakeholders (the relevant government authorities and
agencies) and beneficiaries. Throughout the field phase, the ET used the most reliable and
appropriate sources of information, respected the rights of individuals to provide information
in confidence, and was sensitive to the beliefs and customs of local social and cultural
environments. At the end of the field phase, the ET summarised its work, analysed data
23
collection's reliability and coverage, and presented preliminary findings in a meeting with the
Reference Group. In addition, a Slide Presentation was prepared and presented physically at
the EU Delegation and over Zoom to MoJ-PMU, UNDP-UNICEF, and Oxfam. The reference
group endorsed all preliminary findings and recommendations. It was agreed that first draft of
the report will be submitted to the EUDEL on 10 January 2022 for the Reference Group to
provide comments and recommendations.
Difficulties encountered during the field phase and mitigation measures adopted
• Due to the impact of the Covid-19, many meetings were switched to remote mode as
per request of the stakeholders and other informants. The negative impact of remote
interviews was that experts could not fully assess the EU visibility in the field, meet
with the final beneficiaries, visit the universities, or observe the provision of legal aid.
• Two physical site project field visits were conducted to Nghe An and Hoa Binh. In the
capital city of Ha Noi, ET conducted three physical meetings. In addition, remote
interviews and discussions were conducted in Ha Noi, HCMC and Dong Thap.
However, all planned meetings have been completed.
In total, 170 people were consulted (117 female, 53 male) in 32 institutions and organisations.
Out of this number, 44 are Final Beneficiaries (Persons with Disabilities (PwD), survivors of
Gender-Based Violence, etc.).
Figure 1 Map of the physical and online meetings visits in Vietnam
24
4.3 Synthesis Phase – 18 December 2021 to 10 February 2022
Following the field phase, the ET analysed the information collected and ensured that a cross-
section of beneficiaries’ opinions is reflected throughout the evaluation report. The Final report
was produced and shared with the EUDEL on 11 January 2022. The report included answers
to all EQ and recommendations for the remaining duration of the Programme and follow-up
intervention, including the overall assessments, conclusions, lessons learned.
Addressing the comments from Reference Group (RG) – 20 January to 10 February 2022
• During this phase, ET received jointly over 80 comments from the EU, PMU, UNDP,
UNICEF, and JIFF. The evaluators integrated the comments of the RG and submitted
the revised report to the EUDEL. During this period, the ET conducted following the
demands of the RG additional round of interviews with the implementing agencies and
beneficiaries.
4.4 Dissemination Phase – February 2022
The key findings and recommendations of the Final MTE Report will be presented at the two
days’ workshop at the end of February 2022 in Halong. The evaluators will draft a summary
of recommendations at the end of the workshop. The executive summary and final version of
the report will be provided to the EUDE. This phase will end with an online closure meeting
with the EU Delegation.
5 Intervention Logic
The EUJULE is supported with a Result Framework that contains an Overall Objective (OO)
and a Specific Objective (SO). The overall objective aims at strengthening the rule of law in
Vietnam through a more reliable, trusted, and better-accessed justice system. This aim will
increase access to justice for vulnerable groups (women, children, ethnic minorities, poor
people, etc.). Both interventions aim to raise people's awareness of their legal rights, helping
them invoke those rights in practice, and improve the availability of legal advice and
representation. Further, the action addresses the demand- and supply-side in the justice sector
by building the capacity of civil society, Government institutions at both the central and
provincial levels. The Programme’s geographic focus is limited to several provinces to increase
impact concerning the envisaged objectives. The four Result Areas are overarching the
implementation across the PAGoDA and JIFF as presented hereunder:
• Result 1 (R1): Increased public awareness and understanding of rights and how to
invoke those rights.
• Result 2 (R2): Increased access to legal advice, assistance, and representation in civil
and criminal matters.
• Result 3 (R3): An improved legislative and regulatory framework for legal
empowerment and access to justice.
• Result 4 (R4): Enhanced integrity and transparency in the justice sector.
The EUJULE’s Action Document does not provide a distinctive theory of change (ToC), nor
was such ToC developed within the PAGoDA’s Project description or JIFF’s programming
document. Thus, based on those mentioned above, Overall and Specific Objectives, the
evaluators developed the ToC. In addition, evaluators scrutinised the Project’s assumptions for
how the impact and sustainability are planned to be achieved. This put into perspective the
mechanisms of change and the assumptions, risks, and context that supported or hindered the
achievement of results. Below is the reconstructed intervention logic, which aims to present
25
the causal pathway and articulate the ultimate significant picture outcome of how and why
EUJULE expects the desired results to come about.
If the people are aware of their legal rights(R1) and the access to legal services in all
matters are available (R2) through the improved normative environment, and strengthened
the capacity of legal and judicial officials (R3)and enhanced transparency of the justice
sector (R4), then vulnerable groups: women, children, ethnic minorities, and poor people
will enjoy expeditious, transparent access to justice (SO) because a more reliable, trusted
and better-accessed justice system will be available for them (OO).
Figure 2 The reconstructed ToC of the EUJULE
Assumptions:
The justice system have the required financial, logistical and
human resources to perform its functions adequately, with
sufficient resources to maintain accessibility, retain well
trained and capable staff.
s
e
g
n a The poor, women and vulnerable groups empowered to access a fair, effective,
h c expeditious, transparent and affordable justice system and dispute resolution in
c /
m
t a p
I
The rule of law stre
V
n
i
g
e
t
t
h
N
en
am
ed through a more c a it
e c , v
d
i
a ag l
el
d e at
n di or
o c
d n a
reliable, trusted an s d ys b te e m tte r accessed justice m g a pr
of
y
t
b
ili
nt e er h
o c
a
n
g
i
,
a a l v i a e h n di u b li y b e . v l e
m e o c O ut un a d I n e
R
n a d r c w t s
e
h r h t
s
a e a o o
u
r a n s w e
l
e s d
t
n e i r t e
1
n d o i s g g
(
p s i h
R
n o u a t v f b
1
s n . o l
)
r d i
:
i k c g e h ts
R
a a r c m e c s i
e
v a p s c
s
i t i r e s l t
u
e e s t s
l
a s r
t
e s n n .
2
c t t o e a a
(
, n t
R
i d l o
2
e n g
) :
a
I
l
n
i c n
c
r a
r
i d m
e
v b
a
i a i
s
o n c n
e
t a e h d
d
l , I f m e ra a m p
R
a m c r p n c
e
o e o e d
s
v w s w
u
e r s o
l
e e d
t
t r g r o k l
3
m u e j l f g
(
e u a o
R
n i s t r s o t t
3
l i l r a c a e
)
y t
:
e n g i . v d a e l En tr h a a R n j n u s e c s p s e t u a i d c r l e e t i n n 4 s t c e e ( y c g R t i r o 4 n i r t ) y . t : h a e n d
e t v o
m pr o i d t n a e c ,
c
it
a pr n i s h g t ir e os
h e t
or tce
s e c t us i e h j n t ns i
ai rt ns o c e d si y- p p l
u s e h
a l l cn i
v o i pr d n a a l r nt e c
e h h t o t b at ns o uti
t t ns i
k
o v m n i e h p t
el
d
t
n a e d s d i
m
- n a m n
it
e n er v o G
of
s s e c o Pr s/ u p t O ut Acti A A A A vi c c c c t t t t y t i i i v v v v . i i i i 1 t t t t y . y y y 4 1 1 1 1 ( . . . . J 5 1 2 3 I FF)
A c
A
t
A A A
A
A
A
i
c
v
c c c
c
c
c
t
i
t t t
t
i
t
t
t
i i i
i
v
y
i
i
v v v
v
v
v
i i i i
i
t
2
i
i
t t t
t
y t
t
.
y y y
y
y
y
8
2
,
2 2 2 2
2
(
.
2
1 . . .
J
.
.
2 4 5
.
3
7
I
6
. . .
F F)
Ac A A t A iv c c c i t t t t i i i y v v v i i i 3 t t t y y . y 3 3 3 3 ( . . . J 2 4 1 I . . I F) A A A A
A
c c c c
c
t t t t
t
i i i i
i
v v v v
v
i i i i
i
t t t t
y
y y y y
y
4 4 4 4
4
. . . .
.
1 2 3 4
5
( ( J J I I F F F F ) ) h s h , g t ir a g l e l r e h i t of e
w
ar
a
e p
o
l
e
p
n o . a it nt e se pr
er
d , ed
een
e d e h t s e s dr d a y t ca i p a c e h t e r, n m n a
s e
gi e at
S
rt
e
p
s
ro
ta
m
b
o
lis
t
h
e
m
le
e
g
n
a
t
l e
o
m
f f
p
a
o
m
w
il
e
y
r
a
m
n
e
d
n
j
t
u
a
v
n
en
d
i
e
le
n
A
c
s
c
o
u
t
u
r
i
e
r
v
t
i
j
s
u
t y
a
s t
n
2
i
d
c
.
e
9
t h
.
t o
e
a
tr
ll
a
N ;
n
in a
sf
c t
o
i r o
P
e
rm
n
r
a
o
a s
a j
e l
e t
d
i
n
c o t
e e
n
e f f d
o
e
f
s c :
t
t
h
i v
e
e n
le
e
g
s
a
s
l
a
a
n
id
d
s
r
y
e
s
s
t
p
e
o
m
n s
a
i
l
v
ig
e
n
n
e
e
d
ss
w
o
i
f
t h
ju
t
s
h
ti
e
c e
L e
in
g
s
a
t
l
i t
A
u
id
ti o
R
n
e
s
f
,
o
t
r
h
m
e
g n
m
ki
a s ; e
gi
e at
S
rt
n w eh
d n , a ec
n
a st si sa
26
The reconstructed ToC builds on the needs of the vulnerable groups, the role of the stakeholders
in addressing those needs and further describes the mechanism through which the interrelated
levels (national, local, and grassroots) will lead the implementation towards the perceived
change. The overarching and expected change is grounded on the assumption “To strengthen
the rule of law through a more reliable, trusted and better-accessed justice system”. Thus, we
have developed a people-centred ToC and propose to see the desired change and impact of the
EUJULE on the people of Viet Nam. Although the list of activities is not presented in the ToC
chart, evaluations will explain the cause-and-effect links among inputs and activities and
outputs, outcomes and impacts in the final report.
6 Key findings/answers
6.1 Relevance
Evaluation Question 1.
To what extent was the EU JULE Programme in line with national development priorities,
the EU’s Multiannual indicative Programme and priorities, the UNDP Strategic Plan, and
the SDGs?
We found that EUJULE remains relevant to the needs of direct and final beneficiaries as
envisaged in the Action Document. To this end, we are presenting hereunder the stock-taking
of relevant national priorities and needs with corresponding justification:
Relevant of the EUJULE to direct beneficiaries. The Action was relevant to the needs of the
justice system’s key players, such as juvenile court judges, prosecutors, lawyers, law schools
and future generations of lawyers, and continuous professional education within the Justice
Academia.
Relevance to final beneficiaries. The Action was relevant and vital for the support of the civil
society organisations (CSO) sector and vulnerable groups that included people with disabilities
(PwD), ethnic minorities, children’s survivors of gender-based and domestic violence (GBV
and DV).
Relevance to the national reforms. The Action builds on key legal and constitutional reforms,
such as the 2013 Constitution, the 2014 Law on Organization of the People’s Courts, the 2016
revised Law on Legal Aid and the 2015 Legal Aid Reform Project. In particular, action supports
the development and implementation of a new vision and strategy for professional legal
empowerment through behaviour change of justice institutions and actors, generating data to
inform the legislative process to revise laws and regulations for legal empowerment and access
to justice.
Relevance to national development priorities of Vietnam and key development partners
engaged in the present Action. The EUJULE is entirely in line with national development
priorities and is aligned to the priorities set by the Government of Vietnam in the Socio-
Economic Development Plan 2016-2020. Specifically, the State has nationalised Seventeen
27
global SDGs into 115 Vietnam SDG (VSDG) targets in the “National Action Plan for
Implementation of Agenda 2030 for Sustainable Development”, based on Vietnam’s
development context and priorities and building on the successful implementation of the
Millennium Development Goals. To this end, Vietnam has paid particular attention to
vulnerable groups such as the poor, people with disabilities, women, children, and ethnic
minorities through several policies promoting social equality to ensure that no one is left
behind17. The Action advances State’s efforts in reaching specific goals within this agenda such
as SDG 5 Gender, SDG 10 with progressing towards the reduction in inequality and an
improvement in the promotion of access to justice and information, and SDG 16 on Promoting
a peaceful, fair, just, equitable, and equal society for sustainable development, provide access
to justice for all and build effective, accountable, and inclusive institutions at all levels. The
EU’s Multiannual indicative Programme and preferences and the One Strategic Plan between
Vietnamese Government and the United Nations (UN) in Vietnam (OSP) 2017-2021, UNDP
and UNICEF Country Programme Documents (CPDs) were entirely in line with the above-
mentioned national priorities.
Relevance to Vietnam’s Human Rights Agenda. Vietnam has ratified seven out of nine core
conventions related to human rights18and five conventions protecting rights promulgated
within the International Labour Organisation (ILO) framework. Therefore, the EUJULE was
relevant to the needs of the relevant agencies to advance the specific international commitments
of the country. The activities implemented within the EUJULE support the adopted in 2015
Project on “Strengthening the dissemination of the basic contents of the Covenant and the laws
of Vietnam on civil and political rights for officials, civil servants and the public for the 2015-
2020 period”. In addition, the specific result area of the EUJULE was aligned to the needs of
the MoJ and its professionals to implement recommendations stemming from the Human
Rights Committee under the ICCPR.
Further, EUJULE supports the National Action Plan on Strengthening the Effectiveness of the
Implementation of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and the United
Nations Human Rights Committee’s recommendations, including those mentioned in
paragraphs 24, 46 and 52 the Concluding Observations. To this end, during 2019 and 2020, the
MoJ, in co-operation with the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), supported an
expert team to prepare a research report on the formulation of a monitoring and assessment
mechanism on the implementation of the Human Rights Committee (HRC) recommendations,
in consultation with domestic organizations and agencies19. Following the recommendations
of the research report, in 2020, a set of ICCPR indicators on the right to a fair trial, equality
and non-discrimination was developed and adopted as a reference by UNDP and MoJ. Also
17 Vietnam’s Voluntary National Review- Key Messages. Voluntary National Review 2018. Available at
https://sustainabledevelopment.un.org/content/documents/19297VIET_NAM_VNR_Key_MessagesViet_Namedited.pdf, last visited
<<1.01.2022>>
18 International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, Convention
on the Rights of the Child, Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women, Convention on the Rights of
Persons with Disabilities. See also
https://tbinternet.ohchr.org/_layouts/15/TreatyBodyExternal/countries.aspx?CountryCode=VNM&Lang=EN, last visited <<1.01.2022>>
19 Information received from Vietnam on follow-up to the concluding observations on its third periodic report. CCPR/C/VNM/FCO/3. April
2021
28
relating to the implementation of HRC’s Concluding Observations to Vietnam under ICCPR,
and to respond to the challenges in realising civil and political rights in the context of Covid-
19 pandemic, a comprehensive law review on Vietnam’s current legal framework on the right
non-discrimination, to privacy, access to information and freedom to the movement was
conducted20. The review aimed at ensuring that existing regulations are in line with ICCPR,
especially on civil and political rights that are at greater risk of restriction while protecting
public health. These relevant activities were also outcomes of the successful collaboration
within the EUJULE.
Evaluation Question 2.
Are the EU JULE Programme objectives and outputs clear, practical, and feasible within
its frame? For example, do they address women, men, and vulnerable groups and align with
the EU and Vietnamese Government’s strategy to increase access to justice for vulnerable
people and strengthen the rule of law?
We found that the design of the EU JULE’s, including its overall objective the division of the
four result areas, are clear. Yet, the Result Framework of Action needs strengthening to ensure
more result-oriented implementation and reporting. Therefore, the result framework and the
relevance of some indicators to measure the outcome of the EUJULE should be revisited during
the ongoing cycle to take note and address the following listed hereunder findings:
First, we have initiated our analyses by assessing the Action Document’s21 result
framework to understand whether these indicators could be used to measure the results and
guide the ongoing implementation towards the prospective impact of the EUJULE. In
conducting this exercise, we took note of the following indicators on the level of Specific
Objectives:
1. Aggregate Justice Index indicator on the accessibility of the justice system (indicators
1.1, 1.2, 1.3).
2. Percentage of people from vulnerable groups who believe they can get justice if they
have a grievance.
3. Aggregate score for satisfaction with public administrative procedures (Provincial
Governance and Public Administration Index).
4. Number of legal aid programmes supported by the EU/ Number of individuals
benefitting from EU-funded legal aid programmes (by gender, age, income, and ethnic
minority group).
According to these result frameworks, the quality of a reliable, trusted, and better-accessed
justice system Overall Objective (OO) is measured through the satisfaction survey of the
beneficiaries and the number of programmes supported. However, focusing narrowly on
client satisfaction as an indication of service effectiveness is insufficient because
20See:http://docstore.ohchr.org/SelfServices/FilesHandler.ashx?enc=6QkG1d%2FPPRiCAqhKb7yhslrjZYHLHPYdqrup6FR%2FpxpoKD6
CFGnGSaZiMZA5cstApQ4%2FLSGVGL6rHlXBfZYdGh1DO9LG7%2BM6pkcuSoJ7H38G4X1D4w%2B0PGGRuCuB0OLW, last
visited <<8.02.2022>>
21 See: Action Document. EU Justice and Legal Empowerment Programme in Vietnam (EU JULE). DCI-ASIE/2014/037-404
29
beneficiaries’ viewpoints, while very important, provide little information to measure the
quality and correctness of the advice and adequate/appropriate assistance22. Thus, we found
that these indicators cannot be used for the entirety of the implementation to measure the mid-
term or overall impact of the EUJULE. A range of SMART indicators are included in the
Logical Framework (LF); however, these indicators are set mostly on mid-term result
measuring. As a result, the number of indicators is excessive and do not always correspond to
the Result Area. For example, the indicators against Result Area 4 can be mentioned in this
regard.
Secondly, we analysed the LF of PAGoDA that follows the four Result Areas (Specific
Objectives) of the Action as mentioned above. There are 18 indicators set to monitor and
measure the progress against these four SOs. Out of these numbers, only three indicators are
disaggregated23 . We found that within the mentioned LF, the other eight indicators could be
further disaggregated by gender and vulnerabilities to report how EUJULE address women,
men, and vulnerable groups and vulnerable people’s increased access to justice. In addition,
the activities implemented within the MoJ’s Department of the State compensation should be
measured with a specific indicator to measure the outcome result areas.
Comments on the Logical Framework (LF) of Justice Initiative Facilitation Fund (JIFF)
We found that JIFF’s result framework is coherent and adequate at the mid-term
implementation. There are about 20 indicators set against OO and SO and sub-result levels.
The LF also includes the indicator to measure the “Evidence of thematic and geographic
linkage between JIFF and UN/PAGoDA activities in each objective area”. The LF is gender-
disaggregated, and the progress against the result areas are measured with relevant indicators,
also disaggregated by the vulnerabilities. During the Inception Phase, the ET has learned that
initially, Oxfam developed its original intervention logic and the Theory of Change (ToC) that
stipulates the following:
“If vulnerable people in six target provinces increase their knowledge of their
rights and learn how to exercise them, then they raise their voice to claim their
rights (R1) and increase access to legal assistance (R2). With support from
strengthened CSOs, people can also participate in the decision-making process
that contributes to a more enabling environment (R3) and enhanced
transparency and accountability of the justice sector in these provinces. And
then, all vulnerable groups in the country will increase access to justice (SO)
that contribute to a more reliable, trusted, and the better-accessed justice
system in Vietnam.”
The JIFF’s ToC was also supported with a set of relevant programmatic assumptions related to
the subject of implementation.
22 See also: p.15. par.1. Understanding Effective Access to Justice. 3-4 November 2016. OECD Conference Centre, Paris
23 These indicators are: (d) Existence of indicators on children in contact with law and children involved in family law
cases integrated in the reporting systems of the Supreme People's Court and Procuracy; (c) Number of women who receive gender-sensitive
information on protection against GBV under EU JULE; (d) Number of children who receive child-sensitive information on the protection of
their rights under EU JULE.
30
Evaluation Question 3
To what extent were lessons learned from other relevant projects considered in the design?
The EU-commissioned Formulation Mission for the EUJULE has pointed out the necessity to
work strategically to ensure programmes align with current government policies and priorities
related to the Judicial Reform Strategy24. Working with the Central Judicial Reform Steering
Committee was pointed as a critical factor and, at the same time, demanding due to its
institutional weakness. A strong relationship with the CJRSC on a more operational level was
recommended to ensure a strategic relationship towards the shared goals of justice reform. The
UNDP considered this recommendation in the design of the EUJULE, and support was
extended for capacity development of the Ministry of Justice and the Central Judicial Reform
Steering Committee (CJRSC) and other state agencies in policy dialogue and partnership.
We also noted the lessons presented in the EU-funded Justice Partnership Programme (JPP)
that was finalised in June 2015. To this end, the JPP targeted both the supply and demand side
of justice through three components: working with institutions in component 1, the legal
profession through component 2 and civil society through component 3. This rationale to work
with justice institutions and users was preserved in the design of the EUJULE to create
synergies for a more significant impact. However, the design did not consider a lesson learnt
from JPP to avoid working in silos and increase collaboration and boost access to justice. The
main determinant here is that JIFF and its beneficiaries are working in silos in this process. At
the same time, it is important to work with all partners to ensure a common understanding of
what an access to justice approach includes and its implications for its use in a Vietnamese
context. We have provided more information on the consequences of these design aspects in
the chapter on Coherence.
6.2 Efficiency
Evaluation Question 4
To what extent was the EU JULE Programme management structure outlined in the EU
JULE Programme document efficient in generating the expected results?
The Action involves a wide range of implementing agencies and stakeholders. Therefore, the
mechanism of management and governance is complex and cascaded.
Effectiveness of EUJULE’s Governance and management structure.
Programme Steering Committee. The EUJULE’s two components of PAGoDA and JIFF are
governed by the Project’s Steering Committee (PSC), comprised of the representative of each
participating agency and the EU. This governing body gathers once a year to discuss the
progress and approve the work plan with activities and budget. The review of the Steering
Committee minutes demonstrates the adequate level of transparency between the Implementing
Partners (IPs) and across the stakeholders.
24 See: Support to Programming of ODA 2014-2020 in Vietnam. Formulation report. April 2014.
31
Project management Unit (PMU). This structure of the EU JULE management is tasked with
the following:
o To ensure achievement of expected outputs and effective budget management in
accordance with regulations of the EU and Vietnam’s laws.
o To support the MoJ in the management and coordination of the Programme in line with
Vietnam’s laws.
o To coordinate with the ICD of MoJ the support to the PSC to recapitulate annual work
plans and handle all issues arising with both mechanisms-PAGoDA and JIFF- before
submitting to the PSC for review and making decisions.
o To monitor operations within the Programme’s framework.
From UNDP observation, PMU is cooperative and helpful in supporting UNDP and UNICEF
in implementing the PAGoDa component. PMU also supported UN agencies in pushing the
progress of implementation of some partners.
The UN Program Coordination Team (PCT). This body has been formed and led by the
UNDP to support regular meetings among the Heads of UN agencies, discuss the progress, and
plan the implementation. The interviewed staff said the mentioned management structure
worked smoothly during the last three years. Potential risks to the implementation are
adequately monitored and managed every quarter. Close cooperation with the PMU in MOJ
has been maintained with regular biweekly meetings to update on the progress and address
challenges. Efforts have been made to keep the quarterly meetings with PMU even during
COVID outbreaks through virtual meetings to update the progress of activities and address
challenges. UNDP and UNICEF maintained proactive communication with MOJ’s Project
Management Unit to ensure effective programme implementation, develop the draft AWP, and
prepare for the PSC meetings.
However, the extensive numbers and levels of approval within the current governance
structure are not justified and, from our point of view, prevent the expeditious generation
of results. For example, it is not justified why the SC must also approve the successful grant
proposal under the JIFF component. We also could not receive feedback on what specific
criteria are used for approval or rejection at the level of SC. Thus, while the envisaged model
of governance in EUJULE is logical and, in theory, should have to increase the Action's
efficiency, effectiveness, and transparency, we did not find this specific model effective in
practice. Our argumentation is explained further:
• The PSC meetings occur once a year. The work of the PSC and the opinion of the
members were also communicated via mail during the pandemic. However, this is
insufficient for such a multifaceted intervention that requires many approvals before
moving the activities forward. The PSC should not be overburdened by acting as
quality control and approval mechanism but rather serve as a platform where all IPs
could present their achievements and challenges equally. The core elements of the
governance’s function in the development projects are assessing the project’s
progress, developing mitigation solutions, endorsing the work plans, and checking
the activities' relevance towards the national priorities and ownership. In other
words, supporting the implementation at all stages.
32
• The complex level of approvals envisaged in the design poses systemic delays for
both components. For example, in addition to receiving approval from the Project
Steering Committee, JIFF grantees also need to obtain permission from Provincial
People’s Committees in 6 provinces, and some of them (such as Ho Chi Minh City
Law University) require additional approval from their line management agencies.
As a result, it took 3-5 months for the first round of grantees to obtain permission,
thus significantly affecting the progress and results of implementing activities in the
initiative areas.
We have analysed the timeframe of the delays imposed by the complex management and
governance structure of the EUJULE and found that the average waiting time between the
Grant Committee and SC per call was two months. Therefore, while the duration of the
approval process was shortened by half during the last call, we do consider such a process
inefficient because it poses a negative impact on the already short implementation timeframe
of the project on a larger picture. In other words, out of the designated 12 months of
implementation, the grantees cannot use 20% of their time and resources. As a result, some
activities are implemented in hassle or cancelled to meet the deadline. But most importantly,
grantees are left with an unrealistic time to sustain their results.
Table 3 The timeframe of SC’s final approval of the grants
Submission date of Grant Final approval date from Project
Call Duration
Committee’s selection Steering Committee
1 14 March 2019 24 May 2019 2 months, 10 days
2 4 March 2020 13 May 2020 2 months, 9 days
3 23 July 2021 27 August 2021 1 month, 4 days
Later, the PSC gave grantees more time to fulfil their proposals to minimize these challenges.
Evaluation Question 5
To what extent have the component implementation strategy and the execution been
efficient and cost-effective?
To determine the cost-effectiveness of the activities and deliverables, we reviewed 16 training
modules and two published research. Overall, we found that, in terms of efficiency and quality,
the funds were sparingly used, and mainly national expertise was procured. The ToR was
designed to prioritize the procurement of national expert services and allow those specialists to
lead the assignment. As far as engaging and enhancing the capacity of national experts, this
approach worked well. However, even though this approach reduces the high cost associated
with procuring the services of the expert, it does not provide for a more diversified exchange
of knowledge. The international expertise was procured with fewer input days, which affected
their participation and efficient contribution. In addition, the opportunity of involving
international expertise in capacity development was sometimes overlooked. Thus, we are not
confident that it worked for all assignments equally in terms of quality and diversified
33
international best practices. Aside from the issues mentioned above, we believe EUJULE was
an appropriate use of the EU funds, with some quality deliverables, research, and
recommendations developed.
Evaluation Question 6
To what extent do both components' monitoring and evaluations systems ensure effective
and efficient project management?
We found that EUJULE has adequate support from the Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E)
experts at JIFF, UNDP, and UNICEF. The financial documentation appears to be in order. The
workplan with subsequent budgets are discussed in the SC’s meeting. Thus, there is a level of
transparency in the monitoring process. The financial, reporting and monitoring systems have
been set up, involving country-level working arrangements among UN agencies and country
offices and regional/HQ offices.
According to the following chart, the results reported between the two actions meet the output-
level quality. However, such reporting will not be sufficient towards the end of the
implementation. Therefore, to better align the SMART indicators with the EU strategy and
rationale in the EU JULE's Action Document (AD), it is essential to include SMART indicators
to measure the quality of access to justice.
Figure 3 Presentation of the Result Chain
Based on the Result Chain, we could not validate many results that could indicate the medium-
term changes in the target group's behaviour or the long-term changes that should be expected.
Such results may be available but they have not been reported. As these results are under
beneficiaries' control, they should be reported by IPs. Therefore, we recommend incorporating
these outcome-level indicators or alternative outcome-level indicators in the result framework:
34
Indicator measured by number or percentage Data source:
Result 2 “Increased access to legal advice, assistance, and representation in both civil and
criminal matters.”
An average score of expert perception on the availability At least two rounds of expert surveys
of free legal assistance for indigent defendants (Number). as part of the Project M&E system.
A number of people who received public representation
At least two rounds of expert surveys
free of charge (disaggregated by sex, age, disability, and
as part of the Project M&E system.
type of case: civil, criminal, or administrative).
Budget data provided by the
government, at the beginning and end
The annual public budget allocated to legal aid (in Euro). of the intervention. Additional
information: Value of state budget
allocated to legal aid.
The average score of expert perception on the quality of At least two rounds of expert surveys
legal representation of the people at the court. as part of the Project M&E system.
The proportion of victims who received compensation
MoJ
within X months (Percentage).
Number of people directly benefitting from legal aid
programmes supported by the EU (disaggregated by sex,
Project M&E system
age and disability/social group, and type of case: criminal,
civil or administrative) (Number of people)
Number of cases referred to/processed through alternative Project M&E system and
dispute resolution provided by the project (Number). implementing partners
Result 3: Improved enabling legislative and regulatory framework for legal empowerment
and access to justice.
Number of children in pre-sentence detention per 100,000
Project M&E system and
child population (Number). Dynamic: Direction and level
implementing partners
of change in the number over time.
Number of children in detention per 100,000 child Project M&E system and
population (disaggregated by sex) (Percentage). implementing partners
Further, for the alignment of the implementation with the design of the Action Document, we
find that the JIFF component should monitor and report on specific results (under the control
of the project) concerning the cross-cutting issues on the environment. Such possibilities are
provided within JIFF’s Third Call. To boost credibility and relevance, the indicators should be
developed jointly with the grantees and final beneficiaries.
Programme document efficient in generating the
6.3 Coherence
35
Evaluation Question 7
How have both project components been compatible and synergized with each other and
with other interventions in the country, in the justice sector and in partner organizations?
Synergies between PAGoDA implementing agencies. EU JULE project is implemented
synergistically with other interventions of UNDP, UNICEF, and other UN agencies under the
One Strategic Plan 2017-2021, especially Focus Area 4, Outcome 4.2 Human rights protection,
Rule of Law and Strengthened Access to Justice and the UN Sustainable Development
Framework 2022-2026, under the outcome on Improved Governance and Access to Justice.
The level of coherence between the UNDP and UNICEF is on an adequate level. These two
UN agencies have many advantages to support effective implementation of the project to
achieve the EUJULE results. Both agencies had agreed on strategies to support legal and
judicial reform in Vietnam. The experience goes nearly two decades back with work with the
Ministry of Justice, Supreme People’s Court, Supreme People’s Procuracy, and other legal and
judicial institutions. The workload was shared between UNDP supporting the justice sector in
Vietnam (on both the demand and supply side) and UNICEF promoting justice for children.
When UNODC withdrew from EUJULE in late 2018, UNDP and UNICEF took over the
additional activities inherited from UNODC without any disagreement from the Government
of Vietnam and UNODC’s partners (MPS, SPP, SPC).
Both agencies confirmed that cooperation in implementing PAGODA is going well thanks to
coherent reporting lines and shared responsibilities. For example, in terms of the distribution
of funds, both of these agencies signed a UN2UN agreement that specifies the transfer
schedule from UNDP to UNICEF. Additionally, the same agreement sets a reporting
schedule according to which UNICEF submits reports to UNDP for consolidation and
submission to EUD. Consequently, these two agencies avoid overlaps and create synergies
across their activities with the beneficiaries as a consequence of such well-designed coherent
coordination.
Evaluation Question 8
What are critical factors supporting or preventing the linkage and synergy?
Synergies between the PAGoDA and JIFF. The designed implementation modalities facilitate
synergies and collaboration among partners, direct beneficiaries, and final beneficiaries. We
identified effective synergies between the PAGoDA's IPs and their beneficiaries, but we could
not determine the same level of effectiveness between the JIFF and PAGoDA. In the JIFF
Component, the grantees have ample opportunities to complement or be involved in each of
the result areas of the PAGoDA because they represent the right-holders, and this balance is
essential to ensuring the Human Rights-Based Approach. For example, data on gender and
vulnerability have been generated by JIFF and research in legal aid, abuse of children, and
people with disabilities. Grantees in these cities and provinces are directly involved with local
communities and provide local insights. Thus, their involvement should not be limited to
36
participation at joint events but rather equal involvement in the EUJULE. The absence of
specific strategies regarding how the components can be linked and synergistically enhanced
hinders not only the coherence of the implementation but also its effectiveness and
sustainability in the future.
6.4 Effectiveness
Evaluation Question 9
What is the level of overall progress and results achieved by components and their
contribution to the programme's overall purpose according to the logframe and its
indicators?
Effectiveness PAGoDA Key achievements per EUJULE’s Four Result Area. Through the desk
study of the project documents and interviews with the IPs of the PAGoDA, including the four
departments of the MoJ, we validated the following output-level results:
Result 1:
(i) Orientation and key policies of a national strategy to strengthen legal awareness, focusing
on improving legal awareness for the people, focusing on vulnerable groups were identified
and recommended to MOJ.
(ii) A capacity building programme including a curriculum and teaching materials for legal
communicators and legal disseminators using modern adult-centred learning methodologies
and information technology has been developed.
(iii) A communication master plan for strengthened legal awareness of minors in contact with
the law and women and child survivors of gender-based violence has been developed.
(iv) Selected interventions to raise legal awareness for some vulnerable groups, including
ethnic minorities, women, children, and persons with disabilities, have been implemented;
various forms of communications products have been developed to support national
stakeholders in legal education and dissemination in the coming years. For example, some
communication materials have been translated into ethnic minority languages and signed
language to promote access to legal information for ethnic minorities and persons with
disabilities, respectively. In addition, guidelines on child-friendly legal aid were developed to
guide lawyers and legal aid office representatives' works that provide services to children in
contact with the law.
Result 2:
(i) To enhance the capacity of officials in the legal and justice system, in particular legal
communicators and disseminators, lawyers, judges, legal aid providers, legal consultancy
providers, grassroots mediators, law lecturers and law students, 9 sets of training materials and
4 guiding documents with the piloted process were developed. In addition, as a result of good
feedback from trainees, national partners proposed to work with UNDP to develop more
training materials in 2021 and 2022.
(ii) As a result of support for the roll-out and effective operation of Family and Juvenile courts
(F&JC), 38 provinces/cities and 03 high courts are operational. This includes institutional
capacity building for Family and Juvenile judges through foundational and three advanced
37
child justice training programmes developed and delivered by the Court Academy. In addition,
a guideline on essential equipment of F&JC was adopted, and equipment was procured for
HCMC and Dong Thap for demonstration purposes, which will allow hundreds of children and
women to avoid trauma and re-victimization during trials.
(iii) EUJULE has strengthened partnerships with key partners in the legal and justice sector
and contributed towards establishing strong cadres and future legal practitioners, including
critical evidence generated developing the social service workforce in the justice sector for
children in contact with the law. As a result, a child justice subject was incorporated into the
Ha Noi Law University curriculum for undergraduate students. Some 5000 students signed for
the mentioned course.
(iv) The child justice legal and policy framework has been improved with the adoption of the
SPC Resolution #6 on the adjudication of sexual crimes and protection of children under 18
who are survivors of sexual abuse during criminal proceedings. As a result, an inter-agency
circular is pending its finalisation and endorsement. This document will provide a legal ground
for child-friendly and gender-sensitive handling of child sexual abuse cases.
Result 3:
(i) Implementation of laws that affect access to justice, in particular for women, children, ethnic
minorities, and poor people, was reviewed to propose interventions to make the law more
responsive to the needs and aspirations of the people, for example, Law on Civil Registration,
Law on Criminal Record, Law on Mutual Legal Assistance, Law on the Organization of
People's Court., In addition, Guidelines on case management of child offenders were developed
to promote the implementation of new diversionary measures under the Penal Code.
(ii) Various legal studies have been conducted to provide recommendations of improving legal
framework to align with standards set out in the core UN human right conventions and
implementation of Human Rights Committee’s recommendations, such as a study on the
possibility for Vietnam to accede to the Second Optional Protocol to the International Covenant
on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR), a review on Vietnam’s current legal framework in light
of HRC’s Concluding Observations in the context of Covid-19 pandemic, preparation for the
review of the Third Periodic Report under Article 40 of the International Covenant on Civil
and Political Rights (ICCPR)25; access to justice for women (in accordance with CEDAW) and
persons with disabilities (CRPD).
(iii) Child justice monitoring system was improved with the integration of child justice
indicators into the national criminal statistical systems through the approval of three new sub-
laws of the Supreme People’s Procuracy and Supreme People’s Court for systemic collection
and management of data and reporting on child victims, alleged offenders, and other children
in contact with the justice system handled by Family and Juvenile Courts.
(iv) Legal Partnership Forums were held annually to maintain high-level dialogues between
the Government of Vietnam, the United Nations, the European Union, and other development
partners on law implementation to improve the protection of vulnerable groups and on
grassroots mediation
25 See: A Review On Viet Nam’s Current Legal Framework In Light Of The Concluding Observation 6(A) Of The Human Rights
Committee In The Context Of Covid-19 Pandemic
38
Legal Policy Dialogues also were held to assess the current situation and discuss how to
implement policies that increase the consistency of the justice sector, heighten awareness of
legal rights, and improve access to justice services for vulnerable communities. Following
topics have been discussed: anti-discrimination against women and prevention of gender-based
violence, child rights and child justice in the legal and judicial reform; improving the
effectiveness of grassroots mediation in Vietnam; increasing legal awareness for strengthened
prevention and response to violence against children; strengthening access to legal aid for poor
people and vulnerable groups in Vietnam
Result 4
(i) Integrity and transparency of the justice sector have been improved through interventions
on review, development, and dissemination code of conduct for legal professionals, including
judges and lawyers. In addition, the process of selection of precedent has been reviewed and
revised; court judgments have been proposed as new precedents, and independent
commentaries on precedents were published with the support of EU JULE.
(ii) Capacity of judges and court officers were improved through training on drafting skills of
court decisions/judgements in criminal, civil and administrative areas and training on
knowledge and skills of full compliance with Code of Ethics and Conduct for judges.
(iii) Guidelines on statistical analysis and assessment on provisions results of the public
services in the justice sector, focusing on grassroots mediation and legal aid was developed,
serving as a tool to help judicial officials provide gender-sensitive grassroots mediation and
legal aid services at all levels to evaluate their work through statistical evidence so that they
can make appropriate changes and reforms.
Effectiveness JIFF. In our opinion, JIFF component performed well under challenging
circumstances of delays, pandemic, and natural disasters in the concerned project sites. To this
end, JIFF successfully finalised the launch process for all three rounds of grants.
In connection with Result Area 1, in total, 33 initiatives in these two rounds of calls raised the
legal awareness of 51,637 people (63% female; 0.5% LGBTI; 38% ethnic minorities; 24%
children; and 55% near-poor). In this regard, JIFF exceeded its target by reaching 107.5% of
the planned target on awareness-raising.
Regarding Result Area 2 of the EUJULE, 7,779 (66% women; 18% ethnic minorities; 11%
children; 42% poor) people in JIFF-focused provinces benefited from access to legal advice or
assistance from JIFF grantees. JIFF grantees assisted in solving 81 disputes and legal
representation in 20 court cases.
Regarding the Result Area 3 of the EUJULE, JIFF grantees contributed to enabling
environment and regulatory framework for legal empowerment and access to justice by
advocacy activities on 10 laws and policies including Labour Law for Foreigners; Law on
Medical Examination and Treatment; Education Law; Insurance Law; Law for the Disabled.
In addition, within the same result area, two research papers on grassroots dispute mediation
and legal support by Oxfam were generated.
39
Within Result Area 4, JIFF grantees produced 63 media articles that do not necessarily address
the justice sector's integrity, transparency, and accountability. Nevertheless, they are in line
with the overall objective of the EUJULE.
In its most recent report, JIFF provides that overall, by 31 October 2021, 45 grants of the first,
second, and third calls contribution against the result areas stand as follows:
• 44 grants contributed to Result 1 (98%)
• 41 grants contributed to Result 2 (91%)
• 27 grants contributed to Result 3 (60%)
There is no relevant contribution from the grants towards Result 4 of the Action.
In addition, 35,072 people received training to raise legal awareness on topics related to gender
equality, domestic violence prevention and control, children's rights, elderly people, and people
with disabilities. 4,644 people received legal advice and representation in court regarding the
above matters.
Evaluation Question 10
What factors have contributed to achieving/not achieving intended outputs and outcomes?
Impact of delay factor on the implementation. The implementing partners provided that
systemic delays had negatively impacted the implementation. As designed in 2015, the original
programme was formulated with a 5-year timeframe in mind. With the two-year extension, the
end date was fixed for 30 November 2022. However, because of the delay in the programme's
start and the suspension period, there remained only 52 months of implementation time from
August 2018 (when the Programme was resumed after a 6-month suspension) to November
2022. In addition, COVID- 19 outbreaks occurring in 2020 and 2021 coupled with protracted
social distancing measures put several pauses into implementing the project. The chart
hereunder depicts the timeline of the occurred delays.
Figure 4 timeline of important milestones and factors that caused significant delays
40
The delays were also reported within in the exercising the mandate of the Programme Steering
committee. For example, it takes a month to get the endorsement of the minutes26. As a result,
the approved work plan is shared late with implementing partners, and consequently, the
activities are also implemented with delay. This process was out of the control of the UN,
which could discuss AWP with government partners only after they received the document
from the PMU.
Redundancy of needs and priorities and lack of effective coordination of some government
partners. Not all identified in 2014-2015 needs of government stakeholders were on demand
by the launch of the EUJULE. As a result of the delayed start of the programme, some planned
activities, in particular Act. 2.5, 4.5. are no longer the priority. Therefore, it partly affects the
achievement of the expected result.
Change of leadership. Due to a leadership change, commitment, and priorities of national
partners, several activities were not progressing and were proposed for cancellation by national
partners. In addition, some government stakeholders' re-structure and change of policies caused
the delays and withdrawal of planned activities, especially activities with the Ministry of Public
Security (MPS).
26 1st PSC meeting on 20 Aug. 2018, the minutes was signed on 24 September 2018; 2nd PSC meeting was on 24 January 2019, the minutes
was singed on 1 March 2019; the 3rd PSC meeting was on 18 December 2019, the minutes was signed on 14 February 2020; the 4th PSC
meeting was on 16 April 2021, the minute was signed on 6 May 2021
41
Withdrawal of UNODC in 2019. The UNODC had its share of work in EUJULE, however,
after windrowing from the Programme, UNDP and UNICEF need some time and efforts to
adjust to additional activities previously planned for UNODC. In addition, engagement with
government partners to implement former UNODC activities faced some difficulties, including
with MPS.
Coherence between the implementing agencies in developing the proposals and workplans. We
learned that the invitation to propose activities under the programme is extended exclusively
to State agencies, VLA and VBF. At the same time, these entities are requested to submit
proposals within an unrealistic timeframe and without reference or logical connection to the
approved ProDoc. As a result, sometimes proposals for activities submitted to the PMU lack
relevance towards the agreed results framework. The situation was mitigated by the UN
agencies anticipating the call for proposals and working with each agency/MOJ department
exclusively to ensure that proposed MOJ ICD interventions were more in line with the four
programme results. Thanks to this approach, negotiation of the Annual Work Plan became
smoother, however, UN agencies could not implement some activities as envisaged in the
Delegation of Agreement.
The differences between the Government ProDoc and the co-Delegation Agreement caused
many challenges for the UN team because UN agencies and JIFF followed the Programme’s
implementation based on the DoA. In contrast, Vietnamese agencies are bound by the ProDoc
that does not envisage any activities to be implemented with NGOs or research institutes. And
such an approach is not in line with the co-delegation Agreement Activity 3.1. These critical
discrepancies between the co-Delegation Agreement and the ProDoc have been updated in
Rider 3. However, as a result, some designed activities/partners could not be implemented and
had to change during implementation. Overall, this mitigation process was a time-consuming
and ineffective use of the programme’s time.
Natural disaster’s impact. JIFF’s grantees were also affected by natural disasters, especially in
central Vietnam in 2020. Due to this unfortunate event, some activities took longer to finalise.
The situation was further exacerbated during the ongoing pandemic that affected both
PAGoDA and JIFF equally.
Evaluation Question 11
What, if any, alternative strategies would have been more effective in achieving the EU
JULE Programme objectives?
After analysing key factors, determinants, and bottlenecks that prevented the programme from
a full-swing generation of outcomes, we have summarized strategies/approaches that could
provide a more effective implementation. To this end and in our humble opinion, IP should
consider the following:
a) the Excessive number of approvals across the management and governance structure is
unnecessary because, except for the delays, they did not provide any positive outcome. Thus,
42
the PMU and PSC should revisit their structure and simplify the process for the remaining
implementation time, come up with more effective and efficient deadlines, or find any other
suitable solutions for all parties’. We also learned that the proposed modality of indirect and
direct management under one umbrella management structure did not prove to be as effective
as planned. In the future, such a mix of aid modalities should be considered if the implementing
partners secure a certain level of flexibility, transparency, and agility.
c) Ensuring complementarities and synergies between the JIFF and PAGoDA by linking the
duty-bearer with right-holders, CSOs with the State’s agencies - is the best strategy for the
people-centred implementation.
d) Creating a digital library for all training tools, materials and research publications generated
by JIFF’s grantees and PAGoDA could enhance the coherence and avoid duplication between
the two components. The level of coherence between the two is not clear at the moment. We
have learned that both components develop training tools for a similar vulnerable group but on
different national and province levels. A digital publication fair would be important for
displaying or exhibiting the training tools to promote coherence among the development
partners and national agencies and stimulate interest among the beneficiaries.
e) To promote the Programme’s broader coverage, efficiency, and sustainability, a strategy
should be adopted to share the EUJULE’s outputs among national agencies and localities. For
instance, training materials and pilot courses for lawyers’ skills should be shared and used by
relevant training centres/academies to extend training coverage for legal professionals (i.e.,
lawyers) nationwide.
f) The envisaged 12 months implementation period for the JIFF grants was insufficient to cope
with the many approvals, pandemic, and consequences of the natural disaster. While grantees
performed well and delivered planned activities, no time was left to sustain the results. In the
given context, at least 18 months to two years should be planned for the next phase of grant
applications of the CSOs.
g) Finally, lifting the implementation efforts from the output level to the outcome and overall
objective, ensuring that all implementing partners and beneficiaries have an adequate
understanding of EUJULE objectives – this result-oriented strategy may effectively achieve
the anticipated goals.
Evaluation Question 12
To what extent have different stakeholders been involved in EU JULE Programme
implementation? Is it participatory?
We found that all stakeholders relevant to the EUJULE were involved within the scope
envisaged in the Programme activities. The key justice institutions such as Vietnam Lawyers’
Association, Vietnam Bar Federation, Ha Noi Law University, Police Academy of the MPS,
43
Court Academy of the SPC, the Ha Noi Procuratorate University of the SPP, the Supreme
People’s Court (SPC) and the Supreme People’s Procuracy (SPP), Ministry of Justice, Supreme
People’s Court, Supreme People’s Procuracy, Ministry of Public Security – all were actively
involved in the implementation. Thus, PAGoDA has ensured the participation of a critical mass
of legal professionals.
The participatory implementation, however, was not always preserved. Specifically, within the
PAGoDA, due to the different nature of the work of the justice system agencies and their
specific functions, the participation was active within the scope of their respective work and
matching capacity building activities. For example, UNDP has been working with the Ministry
of Labour, Invalids and Social Affairs for many years and has implemented many other relevant
activities to increase the staff’s participation in EUJULE activities. For example, UNDP has
conducted a study on legal gaps between Vietnam’s Law on Persons with Disabilities and the
United Nations Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (UNCRPD), and a study
on improving employment policies for PWDs, however specific JIFF grantees working on
access to justice for PwD were not aware of the recommendations of this high-quality study,
neither such participation was ensured in other joints with MOLISA evaluation of ten years of
the Law on People with Disability (2010).
We also believe that involving the Human Rights Institute in any part of the research or training
capacity building would have benefited the Action and provided more sustainability27. But,
again, this is something that the IPs could take on board for the next phase.
At the level of JIFF, participation was secured by involving all relevant vulnerable groups and
ethnic minorities. For example, out of 167,149 participants in public awareness on
understanding and use of legal rights, 63% represented women, 0.5% LGBTI, 38% ethnic
minorities, 24% children and 55% near-poor. Thus, a critical mass of vulnerable groups has
participated in the intervention. The JIFF should ensure the effective participation of its
beneficiaries, contributing towards ensuring access to justice.
Evaluation Question 13
What has been the impact of COVID-19 on the project implementation and the project
response?
Both components were negatively affected by the EUJULE’s initial approval’s delays.
However, COVID 19- related restrictions further delayed the implementation of many
activities that required group gathering and travel to the provinces. Both components have
adequately documented the delays, and the revised work plan was discussed during the most
recent Steering Committee. Examples of the negative impact include long delays in conducting
field surveys, capacity development activities, consultation workshops, challenges in the
deployment of the International to Vietnam, lack of capacity for smart working (home office).
27 The institute is the country’s academic institution for research and teaching in the field of state system, the political theory of human and
fundamental rights and other related issues. Among its essential tasks are consulting the academy’s president, conducting teaching events
and courses on protecting human rights for party-members and government staff of all levels, preparing surveys for the government,
cooperating with international and regional academic research institutions for human rights issues and scientific research projects on the
protection of human and fundamental rights, as well as publishing and distributing materials and reference books on the protection of human
and fundamental rights. In 2014 the master’s course “Human Rights” was established. (English source: GIZ)
44
Project response to pandemic-related restrictions. The Mitigation measures employed by
each component includes switching to online events, advocating for e-learning programmes,
changing research methodology from offline field survey to hybrid methods. The UNDP and
UNICEF consistently suggested the relevant partners switch from offline to online working
methodologies, including trainings and workshops; advised the relevant partners to include
online participatory training methodology as one of the main items in the training materials to
be developed; keep guiding consultants and governmental partners about designing and
implementing the distance learning and meeting workshops appropriately for the relevant
activities. These are placing additional pressure on UNDP and UNICEF regarding quality
assurance and timely reporting processes. To mitigate these challenges, PMU set up a Zoom
account and shared it with the partners to hold their meetings and large workshops in 2020 and
early 2021. The support was also extended to assist the partners with less IT experience.
Challenges of online work. The transformation to online was not always smooth as trainings
worked at the province level but excluded some specific groups at the community level. The
latter did not have a stable internet connection, computers, laptops, cameras, microphones. The
use of the smartphone was not a sustainable solution since the internet connection is limited to
a slow speed. The budget calculated prior to the global pandemic in 2017 did not consider these
needs as mentioned above.
6.5 Impact
Evaluation Question 14
To what extent has the project achievements contributed to a more reliable, trusted, and
better-accessed justice system in Vietnam
PAGODA contributed to improvement of legal aid system, the provision of child-friendly
judicial proceeding and gender-sensitive grassroot mediation, and the availability of
specialized justice institution.The PAGoDA component in the last three years produced
strategic reports and evidence, and tools that paved the way for the development of targeted
public awareness of legal right interventions, enhanced capacity of legal and judicial officials
and strengthened law implementation. Action has built the capacity of a critical mass of legal
services providers and other duty bearers, including legal aid providers, legal communicators,
legal disseminators, law teachers and future legal professionals, grassroots mediators, law
enforcement personnel, prosecutors, and judges. It is expected that this important force will
make an impact to serve better and protect vulnerable groups in the justice system and promote
access to justice for all.
Under PAGoDA, the quality of legal aid, child friendly and gender-sensitive judicial
proceedings and availability of specialist child justice institutions were enhanced. The Action
also increased the number of vulnerable people and children who have access to child-friendly
justice services in 38 provinces/cities and three High Courts.
45
PAGoDA has good chances of delivering impact level results also in the areas pertaining to the
State's international obligation. For example, Action builds the capacity of the state agencies
in reporting to HRC under the ICCPR and is paving the way for the ratification of the Second
Optional Protocol. If materialised, the latter would be another laudable milestone in the history
of the State. However, we have noted that the perception of the impact could be more balanced
across the main stakeholders to ensure that there is a mutual understanding of the EUJULE's
goal and how this success and change should be measured towards the end of the Programme.
As for the JIFF, the impact of the two rounds of call with 12 months’ time-frame grants is that
currently, 58,924 people are benefiting directly from the project. JIFF and its partners created
three national legal fora on grassroots dispute mediation, capacity building and legal education
on employment that has encompassed the large scope of the vulnerable people in the six target
provinces of the country. In addition, JIFF’s grantees raised the awareness of 51,637 (63%
female, 0.5% LGBTI; 38% ethnic minorities; 24% children; 55% near-poor) on understanding
legal rights and how to invoke these rights. As a result, at least 167,149 vulnerable people are
empowered with knowledge and skills, which is a critical mass of people with knowledge far
from the capital28.
Evaluation Question 15
To what extent did the EU JULE Programme contribute to the EU priorities, the UNDP
Strategic Plan and country programme outcomes and outputs, the SDGs and national
development priorities?
Contribution to the EU priority development goals. The EUJULE contributes to SDG 16.3 and
the New European Consensus on Development (2017), which recognise that promoting the
rule of law and justice should be at the core of sustainable development and long-term peace
and stability29. The activities within both components support the justice sector to uphold the
rule of law and its core function according to its principles. Specifically, four results areas and
activities within the JIFF’s grants projects promote the spirit of the Consensus in ensuring that
EU-funded action promotes and foster efficient, transparent, independent, open, and
accountable justice systems, access to justice for all, in particular the poor and persons in
vulnerable situations.
Contribution to the One UN Plan. While Action benefited from the existing Joint Programming
Group (JPG) on Governance and Rule of Law established by the United Nations in Vietnam,
it also greatly contributed towards the effective implementation of the One UN Plan results in
governance and the rule of law.
Contribution to national development priorities. EUJULE is essential in the implementation of
the legal and judicial reforms for strengthening children’s and women’s rights (PC, PPC, Legal
aid law, child law), supporting court reform and the rolling out of family and juvenile courts,
Legal Aid Reform Strategy, Legal Dissemination Programme, and National Child Protection
28 Source: JIFF’s Annual Report.
29 See: The New European Consensus on Development ‘Our World, Our Dignity, Our Future’. A/Res/71/256
46
Programme. The Action made commendable contribution in State’s implementation of
concluding observation of UN convention committees (ICCPR, CRC, CRPD, CEDAW)30
6.6 Sustainability
Evaluation Question 16
To what extent will financial and economic resources be available to sustain the benefits
achieved by the EU JULE Programme
Most of the result areas do not have a distinguished exit strategy for various reasons explained
hereunder:
1. For the PAGoDA component, as part of the exit strategy, UNICEF and UNDP consulted
with the government and the donor on the vision of the government and donors for child
justice in Vietnam and capacity building programme for officials in the legal and judicial
system.
The dialogue, however, is more toward a possibility of an extension of the current
programme, given major needs and gaps in this sector.
2. The national partners are looking forward to continuing the support, and it will be necessary
to sustain the current output-level results. In a way, EUJULE was sustaining the momentum
for the pre-existing results and expanding the geographical scope of the activities. For example,
UNICEF initially supported child-friendly courts in 2 provinces – HCMC and Dong Thap.
With the current support, EU JULE’s work will be expanded to courts of 36 provinces.
3. For PAGoDA components, not all result areas are backed by the necessary resources to
sustain the benefits. We were not able to verify the specific budget for the legal aid and
compensations. For the evaluation team, increase or decrease of these budget lines was
important to assess the financial sustainability of Result 1 and Result 2 and to understand
whether the awareness-raising activities have resulted in people applying for legal aid and
compensation to realise their access to justice rights fully.
4. Currently, the most sustained activities are developed and endorsed courses. We have,
however, noted that these endorsed courses still do not constitute the core and mandatory part
of the respected curricula. For example, the course on juvenile justice at the Hanoi Law School
is popular at the time being but not mandatory. In the assumption that juvenile justice courts
will be rolled-out across all 36 provinces and cities, there will be a great need for a child justice
specialist to staff these courts. Therefore, it is important to ensure that future generations of
lawyers pass the mandatory course in law school and arrive at the workplace with the necessary
professional competence.
5. The initiatives aiming at the reforms have more chances to be sustained: The child justice
legal and policy framework (adoption of the SPC Resolution #6) on the adjudication of sexual
crimes and protection of children under 18 who are survivors of sexual abuse during criminal
proceedings is one of the examples of the sustained result. Furthermore, activities directed on
30 Source: UNICEF Vietnam.
47
support in fulfilment of the State’s International Human Rights obligation and implementation
of recommendations are one of the most commended results mentioned by the stakeholders
and the development partners. For example, support in reporting to the HRC under the ICCPR
and assistance in ratifying the Second Protocol could further sustain the result and attract more
development partners to work alongside the State and the CSOs.
6. As for the grantees of the JIFF component, their intervention's timespan is too short,
overcomplicated by the time wasted on receiving the necessary approval to launch the project.
This situation results in a very limited time to prepare for the exit/sustainability strategy.
Nevertheless, we noted that on the individual level of each right-holder that received the
support, the knowledge and built capacities were sustained and, most likely, will be passed
over within the community.
6.7 EU-added value
Evaluation Question 17
To which extent does the Intervention bring additional benefits to what would have resulted
from Member States' interventions only?
We found that the EU added considerable value above and beyond the efforts of individual MS
interventions through continued, holistic, and not patchworked support. We have, however,
noted that not many best EU practices were introduced in this EU-funded action. This is
surprising as the legal system of Vietnam has “all the characteristics of a civil law tradition,
which is essentially based on the written law”31. This means that many best practices of the
EUMS with similar legal systems could be showcased in developing legal aid standards, access
to justice for PwD, juvenile justice and others. While best practices from USA and Canada,
Japan and South Korea were mentioned, the EU-added value would have increased and could
bring an additional benefit if more relevant European expertise was attracted and introduced.
6.8 Cross-cutting Issues
Evaluation Question 19
Have the relevant cross-cutting issues, including human rights, disability and gender
equality, empowerment of women has, been adequately mainstreamed in the design and the
implementation of the programme?
We found that except for the missing gender-disaggregated data and indicators in the LF of
PAGoDA, the cross-cutting issues of disability, gender equality and empowerment of women
are present in the implementation process of both components EUJULE. Human rights-related
issues such as access to justice through adequate legal aid, human rights education, awareness-
raising campaign, and trainings - these all-important aspects are placed at the core of the design
and implementation. Within PAGoDA, between 2018 and 2021, gender equality and gender
31 See: Overview of the Legal System of Vietnam Council of ASEAN Chief Justices
48
mainstreaming were conducted through (1) Improving legal framework for ensuring equal
access to justice; (2) Analysis of gender-differentiated needs on legal services and action taken;
sex-disaggregated child justice monitoring; (3) Combat to gender-based violence (GBV) and
discrimination, including through capacity building gender-sensitive criminal proceedings and
GBV, and gender mainstreaming in the training programme of law training institutes;
and 4) Increased children access to justice.
Evaluation Question 20
To what extent environmental and/or climate-related challenges, as well as digital
transformation aspects, have been considered?
Environmental and/or climate-related challenges. As mentioned in the chapter on Relevance,
the issue of the environment, while envisaged in the Action Document, was not adhered to at
the start of the implementation, and the activities concerning the environment were relatively
scarce. However, the situation was balanced within the JIFF component. For example, three
research grants (one in Call 2 and two in Call 3) have helped make the system more
accountable in providing tools to assess environmental and social impacts in national
conservation areas, including forestry and marine protected areas.
Further to support the environmental and climate-related challenges, JIFF has launched the 3rd
grant call on environmental protection on 17 May 2021. As a result of the broad awareness-
raising strategies of the JIFF, 76 project proposals were received from social organisations and
associations, research institutes, and universities located inside the six key provinces. The
Secretariat shortlisted 62 eligible applications for the Grant Committee (GC) members for
evaluation and scoring. As a result, a list of 13 eligible initiatives was unanimously selected by
all three GC members under the supervision of the EU and the PMU of the MOJ. However, on
31 August 2021, 12 out of 13 initiatives were approved. The rejection was explained as “it was
not effective and feasible”32.
In our humble opinion, the fourth call, which was cancelled due to the protracted process of
delays, should be reinstated to launch the issues concerning the climate-related challenges in
Vietnam. For example, the fourth call could tackle the issue of climate change and the
environment from the gender perspective. In particular, the activities could support women,
men, girls, and boys, in all their diversity, in addressing land use and management, climate
change in their daily lives and preserving the natural environment33
Digital transformation aspects. The issues concerning the digital transformation, automation of
justice or other legal services were not considered in the design of the Action. However, the
interviewed direct beneficiaries of the PAGoDA expressed their view on the possibilities of
digital transformation of the case management system. We have covered this issue in more
32 See; 4 Annual Report. JIFF. 1 November 2020 – 31 October 2021
33 See: Climate Change and Environment. Gender Action Plan III: An Ambitious Vision on Gender Equality and Women’s Empowerment
for EU External Action. EC. 2021
49
detail with our response Evaluation Questions (EQ) 23 and consider that digitalisation should
be one of the core areas of the next phase. However, this intervention should be initiated with
adequate documentation of costing needs and gaps analyses, including regulatory impact
analyses, analyses of the human and technical abilities. Finally, the adequacy of the normative
environment towards the international standards should be assessed and relevant
recommendations generated. Based on these steps and political commitments to implement the
recommendations beyond the formal endorsement, the EU and partners should agree on
designing a distinctive intervention on digitalization of court procedures and services (e-court
or just electronic case management system).
6.9 Visibility
Evaluation Question 21
What is the level of awareness between the beneficiaries and the stakeholders on the EU-
funded Project?
The EU Delegation’s participation in many activities of the EUJULE at the national and
regional levels has increased the visibility of the EU’s support and increased the awareness of
the final beneficiaries. In addition, the EU’s officials conduct regular visits to EUJULE’s sites.
We found that JIFF’s grantees and their final beneficiaries are adequately aware of the EU’s
support of EUJULE. A similar observation was made during the discussions with the direct
beneficiaries of the PAGoDA.
Such a level of success was possible thanks to targeted communication activities ensuring
awareness of the Programme. For example, a nationwide Logo Design Competition called
“JUST ART: Design logo contest for EU JULE Programme” successfully attracted more than
4000 people. Furthermore, during the project implementation, EU JULE events received
extensive media coverage, with more than 250 news articles and TV media outlets, including
VTV1, VTV3, VTV4 and Nhan Dan (The People Online Newspaper), Phap Luat Vietnam
(Vietnamese Law Online Newspaper) and Phu Nu Vietnam (Vietnamese Women Online
Newspaper).
An effective social platform such as Facebook was used to increase the visibility of EU JULE.
As a result, since its establishment of the EU JULE Facebook Page in August 2019, the site
collected 1,100 “Likes” within a few months. Regular posts were available in English and
Vietnamese. To date, the Facebook page collected 3400-page likes and has 3600 followers. In
addition, 278 posts were featured on EU JULE Facebook Page, both in Vietnamese and
English, which reached more than 412,000 people in total. All of EU JULE’s posts covered the
key messages on strengthening Vietnam's legal and justice system. In addition, the project
webpage was launched in June 2019 with more interactive features such as videos,
publications, job vacancies, and links to EU JULE social media channels. In addition,
promotional products, including T-shirts, notebooks, and mask with the logo of EUJULE, have
been distributed to workshop participants and final beneficiaries during field trips and surveys.
50
As for the JIFF component, EU’s funding was highlighted in all meetings where the displayed
EU logo in training events organised to date (Activity 2.1 – 2.6). At the beginning of the second
call, JIFF adjusted its communication interventions by focusing on coaching for all grantee’s
communication activities. Thanks to this strategy, the EU’s standards were adhered to across
the JIFF’s intervention. JIFF closely monitors the visibility standards and provides that to date,
the EU name and logo have been displayed on a series of the product, including: 54 training
courses, 73 communication campaigns and events, 18 research reports, 20 handbooks
/manuals, and seven package leaflets, 144 videos (documentary films, short clips, TV news,
live video streams), six messages on local radio stations, 25 newspaper articles about grantees
activities, 22 newspaper articles on JIFF Secretariat’s activities and many news items about
project activities on grantees websites/Facebook pages34.
Despite such extensive work on the visibility of EU-funded projects, the room for improvement
is there, and the PAGoDA component needs to ensure that visibility efforts are balanced across
each national partner that benefits from the EUJULE.
In addition, adequate attention should be given to printed materials with the fund of the
EUJULE that should include EU or EUJULE’s logo. We have brought the issue to the attention
of the relevant IPs during the de-briefing, and hopefully, this will also be solved in the future
activities.
6.10 Lessons Learned
Evaluation Question 22
Are there any best practices to sustain the programme results to be considered by the
beneficiaries/EU JULE stakeholders?
Through the discussion with the JIFF Secretariat and their grantees, we have learned about
some innovative approaches to raising access to justice for vulnerable people. This includes,
among others, the development of the specific application. For example, JIFF’s grantee
Disability Research and Capacity Development (DRD) developed the DLaw application
(which has been used 86,000 times) and the Vietnam Association for the Protection of Child
Rights (VACR) online training/forum (which has been used 31,747 times). In our opinion,
proposals that use IT for the benefit of vulnerable groups should be promoted in the future.
The call one of the JIFF was most fruitful to produce best practices. To this end, seven best
practices were studied in the evaluation process. However, to preserve the agreed limits of the
report, we have presented hereunder practice. The complete list of all seven best practices could
be found in Annex 3 of the present Evaluation report.
A sample of best practices is presented hereunder:
Research Center for Initiatives in Community Development (RIC)
34
See; 4 Annual Report. 1 November 2020 – 31 October 2021
51
Number of people benefiting from the project: 2.755 people (Ethnic women and men, children)
The model “Developing mechanisms for inter-sectoral coordination and making policy
proposals at the provincial level to address gender-equality issues” was implemented in the
framework of Initiative 6, “Effective cooperation for the Right to legal advice and legal
assistance of the poorest ethnic minority communities in Hoa Binh” implemented by RIC. The
initiative promoted the mechanism for inter-sectoral coordination and the making of policy
proposals at the provincial level to address gender-equality issues, the improved legal capacity
for core groups in the community as well as provides the legal knowledge and legal assistance
for people, particularly people of ethnic minorities (Muong, Thai, H’Mong).
A core working group from local departments of the local authority in Hoa Binh province,
including the Department of Labor, War Invalids and Social Affairs (DoLISA), Department of
Culture, Sports and Tourism (DoCS&T), Women Union (WU), Provincial Department of
Public Security (DoP), Department of Culture, Sports and Tourism (DoE&T), Youth Union,
Lawyers Association, Legal Aid Centre, Ethnic Committee jointly developed and promoted
provincial strategy and plan and approved the provincial decision No. 2728/QD-CTUBND to
prevent and support child abuse in Hoa Binh province. Thus, the initiative was successful and
adequately sustained by strengthening the normative environment pertaining to the children's
rights on the provincial level. A similar approach could be promoted within the next EU-funded
grants.
Evaluation Question 23
What can the team recommend for the programming of any future EU-funded
intervention?
The EU provides targeted support to justice systems worldwide, aiming to enhance their
independence, impartiality, accountability, accessibility, efficiency, and quality and increase
their compliance with international human rights standards. EU interventions aim to promote
the independence and impartiality of relevant justice actors, strengthen their capacities, and
improve the management and performance of courts. Thus, in consideration of delivered results
and to match our recommendations with the EU and national values, we recommend that the
EU Delegation to Vietnam and national partners considers the following areas of intervention
with a summary of justifications:
1. In the next EUJULE phase, in addition to the JIFF component, design a distinctive
component that supports Vietnam in implementing accepted recommendations stemming from
the UPR and other UN Treaty Bodies. Such a distinguished angle would be relevant for the
following reasons:
• In 2024, VN is expected to submit its national report to implement UPR
recommendations in the third cycle.
• In 2023, VN will undergo periodic review under ICCPR, CRPD, CEDAW, CAT and
ICESCR.
• The beneficiary institution, in this case, would include but not be limited to the MoJ,
MoFA, MPS, MOLISA and National Human Rights Institute.
52
To this end, the support could be designed around the following intervention:
A) Technical assistance in developing a comprehensive national mechanism for
monitoring the implementation of the recommendations from the UPR and UN Treaty
Bodies. Specifically, developing National Human Rights Action Plan that could
encompass all recommendations clustered by the category of the specific rights: Civil,
Political, Cultural, Economic and Social. These categories of human rights are cutting
across all the international treaties signed by Viet Nam and protect all relevant
vulnerable groups: women, children, PwD, migrants, ethnic and other minorities, and
other groups.
Justification: Currently, monitoring and reporting on these treaties are divided between
the lead ministries. In line with the two Prime Ministers’ decisions and national master
plans, such a mechanism for implementing and reporting HRs commitments under all
UNHRs treaties could strengthen coherence, coordination and effectiveness in
monitoring and reporting. Many progressive UN member states have adopted such an
approach35. The prospective plan may include a relevant result framework, monitoring
and evaluation mechanisms and the secretariat coordinating work across the line
ministries and institutions.
B) Support in the development of the Human Rights Institute under the Ho Chi Minh
Academy of Politics harmonised with the Paris Principles, including developing the
National Mechanism on Prevention of torture. Or support the development of the
separate independent structure based on the international model (Paris Principles). The
Paris Principles are the international minimum standards that all NHRIs – regardless
of size or structure – must meet if they are legitimate, credible and effective in
promoting and protecting human rights. Therefore, the first and most essential
requirement for an NHRI’s independence.
Justification: the NHRI, as a model, plays an increasingly important part in
safeguarding human rights in their respective countries. They monitor and report on the
human rights situation, advise parliaments and governments, deal with complaints from
citizens whose rights have been violated, train authorities, provide public information
and much more to strengthen and protect the human rights of people in their
country. The critical role of NHRIs have also been recognised in the 2030 Agenda as
fully independent and well-functioning (A-status). Furthermore, NHRIs have been
chosen as an indicator for SDG 16 on peace, justice, and strong institutions. To this
end, support should be extended to the State to ratify, without reservations, the Second
Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, aiming
at the abolition of the death penalty (UN Recommendations to Vietnam).
We have, however, identified a challenge and risks in connection with the proposed component
as stipulated hereunder:
• To support in harmonisation with the Paris Principles or the extension of Human Rights
Institute's mandate to reporting on HR is heavily dependent on the political will of the
State to establish an independent HR institution
C) Facilitating technical assistance to the State and specifically to the MoJ in reporting
on ICCPR. To this end, specific intervention could be designed to support reform on
35 See: https://www.ohchr.org/en/issues/plansactions/pages/plansofactionindex.aspx, last visited <<9.02.2022>>
53
the moratorium or complete eradication of the death penalty by ratifying its Second
Optional Protocol.
2. The next phase of the EUJULE may build on the tangible results of the ongoing phase and
include more concrete areas with the following justification:
A) Access to effective and fair justice systems is essential for addressing the underlying
causes of poverty and inequality and contributing to shared prosperity, inclusive
growth, and a healthy business environment. Therefore, we think that support for
Juvenile Justice Reform and activation of Juvenile Court's through strengthening
the Human Resources Management of the activated courts should continue in the
next phase. To sustain the operability of the activated juvenile courts, it is important
to build the capacity of the administrative staff to train, retain and maintain the
necessary staff, match workload with the workforce, etc. In addition, continuous
legal and professional education should be part of future engagements, ensuring that
relevant courses are mandatory.
B) The EU pays special attention to improving prison and detention conditions and
promoting access to justice for all, particularly for women, children, and vulnerable
groups. Supporting the development of a comprehensive probation system for the
juveniles and humanization of function. This area of engagement may require a
thorough identification and formulation by a team of experienced experts (national
and international) to define all determinants and bottlenecks. Based on the analyses,
a pilot project could be designed. A study on recidivism among the children in the
areas where juvenile courts are operating or planning to operate should be
considered within this result area.
C) Automation/Digitalisation of Justice System. The EU Delegation should engage
with the national partners and assess the level of interest in the
automation/digitalisation of the justice system. However, there are many issues that
both the national partners and the donor should take into consideration:
- Before Information and Communication Technologies (ICT) automates the
Justice Sector, the Sector must have organised and implemented a standardized,
integrated information management strategy within each institution and across
the sector that reflects the most effective, accountable, and transparent process
possible under the current legal framework of Vietnam and the best practices of
the EU.
- The development of digital systems may also require introducing additional
legislation to protect rights-holders and direct the mandates of duty bearers,
including regulatory acts.
- It is essential to develop realistic objectives and expected results, considering
the national partners' absorption capacity and political commitment.
Comparative analyses of the normative environment on personal data protection
with determinants and bottlenecks.
3. Support the CSOs and ensure that the grant scheme is implemented through a mechanism
that represents transparency, agility, effectiveness, and representation in selecting eligible
grants. The design of the call should be informed from the lessons learned and best practices
54
of the present report (Annexed). The prospective grants should include new provinces of the
state and be balanced in terms of geographic scope. In line with the new Human Rights
Instrument, ensure that future grants address climate change and environmental degradation,
digital and new technologies.
Special note to EU concerning the formulation of future actions.
1. The future Action Document should have a distinguished Theory of Change (ToC)
developed by qualified experts in human rights and justice reforms and endorsed by national
stakeholders. This approach could increase understanding of impact and ensure ownership
from the start.
2. The reference group of the prospective Action should develop the overarching result
framework (logical framework). To this end, a workshop on Human Rights Indicators should
be planned for the component on Human Rights and the State’s obligation to develop the
capacity of the relevant stakeholders in monitoring the implementation processes36.
3. Ensure that the future intervention design supporting Economic/Legal Empowerment of the
Women and specific objectives matching EU Gender Marker 1 or 2 included objectives and
relevant indicators of the EC's EU Gender Action Plan III and Result Framework are
incorporated. To this end, access to justice initiatives should also be measured from the
perspective of economic implication (positive or otherwise) resolutions of disputes have on
their economic/social activities and legal status.
4. Ensure that the Identification and Formulation Mission for the next phase is comprised of a
team of experienced legal experts specializing in justice reforms, gender equality/gender and
justice, administration of the justice processes, ICT in the modernisation of justice institutions,
probation system (if this topic is considered). In addition, it is paramount that representatives
of the concerned ministries and justice institutions and local legal experts are included in the
design and consultation to reach a broader consensus on the outcomes that all parties should
deliver jointly.
5. The following objectives should be included in the ToR for the team as mentioned above:
a) To assess the level of political will of the beneficiaries in accordance with the international
standards of human rights, access to justice, gender equality – the relevant UPR and UN
Treaty Bodies recommendations accepted by Vietnam.
b) To identify best EU practices in access to justice, legal aid, juvenile justice, probation
system, human rights reporting, evaluation and monitoring of UN recommendations that are
relevant to Vietnam’s justice system and thus could be adapted and sustained within the same
governmental structure.
c) Stock-taking of the relevant UPR and UN TB recommendations should be exercised to
identify relevant actions and ensure that these responses form the core of the result
framework.
36 See: https://www.ohchr.org/Documents/Publications/Human_rights_indicators_en.pdf, last visited <<4.01.2021>>
55
7 Conclusions
A summary of key lessons and findings from the responses to 23 evaluation questions and the
OECD DAC is presented in this part of the evaluation report. Furthermore, every conclusion
provided in the present section has been cross-referenced to the relevant findings and lessons.
Conclusion 1.
The EUJULE’s goals and implementation are aligned with the beneficiary and stakeholder
needs. Moreover, beneficiaries' priorities shaped the planning and implementation of the
Programmes in PAGoDA and JIFF. As a result, action has contributed to meeting the needs of
the disadvantaged and marginalized in six provinces of Vietnam with regard to access to
justice. The design of the EUJULE is supported with adequately defined, realistic and feasible
objectives. However, the design could benefit from strengthening the Result Framework and
introducing indicators that could measure the outcome of each Result Area (4) from the
perspective of the impact of their functioning. Therefore, given EUJULE’s highly distinctive
and local character, such indicators are best designed through a country-led consultative
process, including stakeholders of state and non-state justice systems.
Conclusion 2.
The PAGoDA component has activated a significant and critical mass of legal professionals in
this ongoing implementation. As a result of a collaboration between the UN agencies and the
MoJ, the EU JULE Programme produced strategic documents and tools which will serve to
inform the development of targeted public awareness of legal right interventions, enhance the
capacity of legal and judicial officials and strengthen law implementation, increased the
transparency of law-making and law-implementing institutions, as well as strengthened a
justice sector that is more accessible and inclusive to all in Vietnam, leaving no one behind.
Thus, the current environment is conducive to developing interventions in support of the State’s
international human rights obligation and endorsed recommendations from the Universal
Periodic Review and UN Treaty Bodies mechanisms.
Conclusion 3.
PAGODA contributed to improvement of legal aid system, the provision of child-friendly
judicial proceeding and gender-sensitive grassroot mediation, and the availability of
specialized justice institution. The EUJULE was pivotal in supporting the juvenile justice
system and other child-friendly initiatives. Thanks to the joint contribution of the Supreme
Court and PAGoDA, the geographical map of the courts is expanding. In parallel, the higher
legal education system that engaged with PAGoDA successfully institutionalised a course on
juvenile justice; thus, these new branches of the justice system will be staffed with a generation
of specialized child-friendly justice system lawyers. However, to fully finalise the circle of
necessary elements of the juvenile justice reforms, the development of the probation system
and adequate social and psychological services is necessary. Thus, the reforms should include
these important elements. We also conclude that the perception of the impact could be more
balanced across the main stakeholders to ensure a mutual understanding of the EUJULE's goal
and how this success and change should be measured towards the end of the Programme.
56
Conclusion 4.
The JIFF component performed efficiently and effectively despite the short period of the grants
and the systemic challenges that the implementation team and its grantees faced through the
delays, pandemic-related restrictions, and natural disasters affecting the final beneficiaries of
the grants.
JIFF and its grantees ensured that 58,924 people had benefited directly from the Action in this
challenging environment. The scope of legal rights protection was broad, including economic
and social rights. The supported grantees advanced the adherence of and awareness of national
and international laws concerning children, people with disabilities, gender equality, marriage
and family, domestic violence prevention, elderly, child protection, and other related legal
documents and international conventions to which Vietnam is a signatory. JIFF’s third call for
proposals distributed grants to address environmental rights, and by this intervention, lack of
activities on the necessary cross-cutting issues of the environment was balanced. We
concluded, however, that an 18 months extension of the JIFF component is necessary to finalise
the planned firth call for proposals and to balance further the necessary cross-cutting issues of
gender and environment in the ongoing implementation.
Conclusion 5.
The EUJULE as EU-funded Action would have benefited from more relevant best practices in
legal aid, legal compensation, legal awareness, and juvenile justice system from the EUMS
(Croatia, Slovenia, Poland, etc.) or countries with similar geopolitical, multi-ethnic
representation and legal system with adequate anti-corruption and justice index record
(Georgia, Lithuania,). The PAGoDA component could have also engaged experts from the
European Commission for the Effectiveness of Justice (CEPEJ) of the Council of Europe
(CoE)37, specifically relevant to Result Area 4. The PAGoDA component may need a no-cost
extension to complete all planned activities and develop its exit strategy. In addition, to sustain
the wealth of the knowledge and research developed and leverage the coherence among the
development partners and beneficiaries, there is a need to systematically document the
developed training tools and research publications. Such digitalised library could be developed
with the help of the Human Rights Institute that could serve as a custodian and sustain the use
of these resources. The institute is the Party‘s academic institution for research and teaching in
the field of the state system, the political theory of human and fundamental rights and other
related issues. Among its essential tasks are consulting the academy’s president, conducting
teaching events and courses on protecting human rights for party-members and government
staff of all levels, preparing surveys for the government, cooperating with international and
regional academic research institutions for human rights issues and scientific research projects
on the protection of human and fundamental rights, as well as publishing and distributing
materials and reference books on the protection of human and fundamental rights. In 2014 the
master’s course “Human Rights Law” was established. In 2021 the Institute launched the first
PhD program on Human rights law and an academic journal titled “Vietnam Journal of Human
rights Law.”
37 https://www.coe.int/en/web/cepej
57
Conclusion 6.
We concluded that the work with the larger scope of CSOs should be continued under different
EU funding instruments for advancing human rights and democracy, including addressing the
impact of global challenges, such as climate change and environmental degradation, digital and
new technologies, or the COVID-19 pandemic. The approach, however, should secure result-
oriented implementation of the planned interventions that includes grant scheme for the CSOs.
Conclusion 7
The request from the PAGoDA beneficiaries to support automation/digitalization of the court
system, specifically the case management system, is justified. It is also in line with the EU
priorities that promotes the digital sector to promote human development reconciling economic
prosperity and efficiency, peaceful societies, social inclusion, and environmental
responsibility38. Furthermore, if implemented promptly, the automated system can promote the
transparency of the justice system and ensure expeditious justice for all. Thus, the EU should
consider this avenue of collaboration with the State on automation of legal services across the
system of justice.
8 Recommendations
The present chapter is organised with the recommendations received from the PAGoDA
Implementing partners and beneficiaries, JIFF’s beneficiaries, and grantees. Finally, the
chapter is concluded by the recommendations from the Evaluation Team. The nature of
recommendations is formative to address the ongoing implementation, and summative to guide
the EU in future engagements. For coherence purposes, we have defined the target audience
and the order of priority to attract the attention of the IPs on the instances when the corrective
actions could be applied already within the ongoing phase.
Table 4 Recommendations table with targets, references and order of priorities
Order
Reference Recommendations Target of
priority
Recommendations pertaining to the ongoing implementation of EUJULE
Strengthen the result framework by including relevant
Conclusion 1
indicators to ensure more result-oriented implementation,
Ch. PAGoDA HIGH
and monitor outcome results.
Relevance
Ensure that the perception of the impact is balanced across
the main stakeholders, ensuring that there is a mutual
Conclusion 3
understanding of what the goal of the EUJULE is and how PAGoDA HIGH
Ch. Impact
this success and change should be measured towards the
end of the Programme.
38 Reference to ICT can be found explicitly as a target under SDG 9 "Build resilient infrastructure, promote inclusive and sustainable
industrialization and foster innovation", while ICT is also referenced in the targets related to climate change (SDGs 13, 14 and 15), gender
equality and women empowerment (SDG 5), private sector development (SDG 8), education (SDG 4) and health (SDG 3).
58
Order
Reference Recommendations Target of
priority
Consider 18 months extension of the JIFF component to
finalise the planned fourth call for proposals and further
Conclusion 4 balance the necessary cross-cutting issues of gender and
EUDEL
Ch. environment in the ongoing implementation. HIGH
JIFF
Efficiency Consider the extension for the PAGoDA component to
ensure complementary between the two components of the
programme.
Conclusion 5
Ch.
Consider introducing relevant best EUMS or EU and CoE
Efficiency PAGoDA HIGH
best practices to leverage the EU-added value.
Ch. EU-
added Value
Discuss with the Human Rights Institute the possibilities of
creating a digital Human Rights Library to sustain the
PAGoDA
wealth of the knowledge and research developed within the
Conclusion 5 JIFF
EUJULE. The Human Rights Institute could serve as a
Ch. Human HIGH
custodian and sustain the efficient, effective, and sustained
Efficiency Rights
use of these resources. Once established, the development
Institute
partners could consult the digital library and update the
necessary tools instead of duplicating the efforts.
Recommendation pertaining to the follow-up phase (EQ 23)
A) Identification and Formulation Mission for the next
phase comprised of a team of experienced legal experts
specializing in justice reforms, Human rights (international
normative HRs frameworks), gender equality/gender and
justice, administration of the justice processes, ICT in the
modernization of justice institutions, probation system (if
this topic is considered).
Programmin
g of any
B) Ensure that representatives of the concerned ministries
future EU-
and justice institutions, ad local legal experts are involved EUDEL HIGH
funded
in the design and consultation to reach a broader consensus
intervention
on the outcomes that all parties should deliver jointly.
(EQ 23)
C) Ensure that the following objectives are included in the
ToR for the team as mentioned above:
• To assess the level of political will of the
beneficiaries in accordance with the international
standards of human rights, access to justice, gender
equality – the relevant UPR and UN TB
59
Order
Reference Recommendations Target of
priority
recommendations accepted by Vietnam. Assess the
political will to develop National Human Rights
Action Plan.
• To identify best EU practices in access to justice,
legal aid, juvenile justice, probation system, human
rights reporting, evaluation and monitoring of UN
recommendations relevant to Viet Nm’s justice
system and thus could be adapted and sustained
within the same governmental structure.
• Stock-taking of the relevant UPR and UN TB
recommendations should be exercised to identify
relevant actions and ensure that these responses
form the core of the result framework. Specifically,
the development of the National Human Rights
Action Plan.
Lesson
The best practices of the JIFFs under the grant scheme Next
Learned and JIFF
should be sustained in the next round of the calls. Phase
best practices
In the next EUJULE phase, design a distinctive component
that supports Vietnam in the implementation of relevant
recommendations from the UPR and UN Treaty Bodies
with the following result areas:
A) Support in the development of National Human Rights
Institutes harmonised with the Paris Principles Support the
development of National Human Rights Institutes,
including National Mechanism on Prevention of torture.
Programmin
B) Support the State in fulfilling the UN Recommendation
g of any
on ratifying the Second Optional Protocol to the MOJ
future EU- Next
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, EUDEL
funded Phase
aiming to abolish the death penalty. UN
intervention
C) Facilitating technical assistance to the State and
(EQ 23)
specifically to the MoJ in reporting on ICCPR. To this end,
intervention could be designed to support reform on the
moratorium or complete eradication of the death penalty
through ratifying its Second Optional Protocol.
D) An inter-agency, comprehensive national mechanism
and action plan across all UN HRs mechanisms that address
HRs implementation and reporting by themes, rather than
by treaty.
60
Order
Reference Recommendations Target of
priority
A) Consider support to Juvenile Justice Reform and Supreme
activation of Juvenile Courts through strengthening the Court
Human Resources Management of the activated courts UNICEF
Programmin
EUDEL
g of any
B) To sustain the operability of the activated juvenile Ha Noi Law
future EU- Next
courts, building the capacity of the administrative staff to School
funded Phase
train, retain and maintain the necessary staff, matching the Judicial
intervention
workload with the workforce, etc. Academy
(EQ 23)
The continuous legal and professional education should be Academy of
part of future engagements, ensuring that relevant courses the Supreme
are mandatory. Court.
A) Support the development of a comprehensive probation
system for the juveniles and humanisation of function to
reduce the prison population.
Programmin B) Conduct thorough identification and formulation
g of any mission by a team of experienced experts (national and EUDEL
future EU- international) to define all determinants and bottlenecks UNICEF Next
funded that could present smooth implementation of the future Supreme Phase
intervention programming. Court
(EQ 23) C) Based on the analyses, consider designing a pilot project
and initiative country-wide study on recidivism among the
children in the areas where juvenile courts are operating or
planning to operate should be considered.
A) Consider launching a wide-scale grant scheme action
under the Global Europe Human Rights and Democracy
programme (2021-2027).
B) Entrust an eligible pillar-assessed development partner
Conclusion to undertake the operation and management of the
Next
6. prospective programme with indirect management aid EUDEL
Phase
modality to ensure flexible, result-oriented and prompt
implementation of grant proposals.
C) Increase the timeframe of the grants to ensure that
prospective grantees have adequate time to implement their
activities and sustain their results.
A) The EU Delegation should engage with the national Supreme
partners and assess the level of interest in Court
Next
Conclusion 7 automation/digitalisation of the justice system. EUDEL
Phase
B) Consider comparative analyses of the normative UNDP
environment on personal data protection to identify gaps
61
Order
Reference Recommendations Target of
priority
with international standards and other determinants and
bottlenecks.
C) Ensure that regulatory impact analyses are conducted to
define the scope of financial resources and technical and
human capacities needed to launch such an ambitious
initiative. We recommend starting within the Result Area
4, Result 2 (Act. 2.6) or Result 3 (act. 3.2) of the ongoing
EUJULE Programme, as digitalisation and innovation of
the court, to some extent, enforced the transparency of the
courts processes and services.
9 Annexes
9.1 The Terms of Reference
62
63
64
65
66
67
68
69
70
71
72
73
74
75
76
77
78
79
80
81
82
83
84
85
86
87
88
89
90
91
92
93
94
95
96
97
98
99
100
101
102
103
104
105
9.2 Best practices
JIFF’s Lessons learned and good models for ensuring the effectiveness and
sustainability of the initiatives that could be introduced in the next intervention with the
grant scheme for the CSOs.
Model 1: Developing mechanisms for inter-sectoral coordination and making policy
proposals at the provincial level to address gender-equality issues in Hoa Binh.
Background
The model “Developing mechanisms for inter-sectoral coordination and making policy
proposals at the provincial level to address gender-equality issues” was implemented in the
framework of Initiative 6 “Effective cooperation for the Right to legal advice and legal
assistance of the poorest ethnic minority communities in Hoa Binh” implemented by RIC. The
Initiative promotes the mechanism for inter-sectoral coordination and the making of policy
proposals at the provincial level to address gender-equality issues, improves legal capacity for
core groups in the community as well as provides the legal knowledge and legal assistance for
people, particularly people of ethnic minorities (Muong, Thai, H’Mong).
Effective approach and intervention model:
a. Approaching project beneficiaries
Having determined that the development of mechanisms for inter-sectoral coordination and the
making of policy proposal at the provincial level to address gender-equality issues in Hoa Binh
would require a Department to act as the focal point in the project area, RIC proposed this
matter and then signed an agreement with Hoa Binh DOLISA. Through their functions, tasks,
and activities, DOLISA played an important role in the promotion and development of the
inter-sectoral mechanism for coordination with other departments, committees, and sectors in
Hoa Binh to address cases of children affected by violence, abuse, and sexual abuse in the
province.
In addition, RIC has also established community core groups in 10 villages comprised of
excellent members of their community through voting. These core groups worked closely with
the provincial core action group for the rights of women and children; and with officers of the
Youth Union and teachers/officers of local community learning centres in the project areas to
develop plans and contents for communication and dissemination of the law, and provision of
legal assistance to people.
b. Activities of the Provincial core action group for the rights of women and children
After the agreement’s signing, RIC worked closely with DOLISA to establish the core action
group for the rights of women and children, including relevant departments/committees/sectors
in Hoa Binh, and ensure the effective operation of this group. Its achieved results are as follows:
- Establish the action group with 12 members from DOLISA, the Department of Justice,
Department of Education and Training, Ethnic Minority Committee, provincial Women's
Union, provincial Youth Union, provincial Red Cross, Legal Assistance Centre, provincial
106
Police, Bar Association, Lawyers Association, Legal Advice and Assistance Centre for the
poor and people of ethnic minorities in Hoa Binh (per Decision 4449/QD-SLDTBXH dated
23 September 2019 of DOLISA). This group has the following functions and tasks: (i)
studying and reviewing the current cooperation between agencies of the organizations,
carrying out communication activities, disseminating and educating the law and providing
legal assistance in Hoa Binh; (ii) participating in the development of joint action plans
between government agencies, communities, and NGOs regarding communication and
dissemination of legal knowledge, and provision of legal assistance for people in need and
(iv) providing their inputs during the implementation of activities and events of the project.
- Reviewed the coordination between stakeholders and the development of joint action plans
between government agencies, communities, and social organizations.
- Members of the core action group, after attending TOT courses, organized 8 training
courses for grassroots officers and community core groups in the project areas, these
training courses aimed to raise awareness of (i) the Law on Gender Equality, (ii) Law on
Domestic Violence Prevention and Control, (iii) Law on Children, (iv) Law on Marriage
and Family; and skills of conducting communication activities, providing legal advice, and
promoting the mentioned laws. Through these training courses, the expertise in and skills
of child protection and child care of commune judicial officers, legal assistance officers,
the core community groups, officers from district offices of Labour, Invalids, and Social
Affairs were improved.
- Workshops were organised on the development of action plans to apply the model in the
state’s programs currently implemented in Hoa Binh.
- Approved Decision 2728/QD-CTUBND on “the Procedures for supporting, intervening,
and handling cases of children suffering from violence, abuse, and sexual abuse in Hoa
Binh” on 09 November 2020.
- Developed and effectively implemented the community-based model on communication
and legal assistance in pilot villages. This model was integrated by the Department of
Culture, Sports and Tourism into the scheme “Strengthening communication work on
maintaining family happiness and prevention and control of child abuse in the 2021-2025
period”.
c. Diversification of communication activities
The project implemented a diverse range of communication activities towards the community
and target groups such as directly communicating the law to people, publishing leaflets,
broadcasting news on TV and radio channels in the province, communicating via portals of
organizations and social networks (Facebook). As a result, these activities have raised the legal
awareness of 1,316 people (128.4 per cent of the initial target of 1,025 people).
d. Cooperation with local authorities in building legal capacity and providing legal
advice and assistance
RIC worked closely with DOLISA, the Department of Justice, Department of Education and
Training, Ethnic Minority Committee, provincial Women's Union, provincial Youth Union,
107
Red Cross, Legal Assistance Centre, provincial Police, Bar Association, Lawyers Association,
Legal Advice and Assistance Centre providing services for the poor and people of ethnic
minorities to implement project activities, focusing on the following 3 groups of activities: (i)
improving knowledge and counselling skills for the core action group for the rights of women
and children at the provincial level and the community core group; (ii) conducting
communication activities on the law through the action group, and carrying out communication
plans; and (iii) providing direct legal advice and assistance in communities.
Results:
- The number of people receiving legal advice and assistance: 233/150 – 155.3 per cent of
the original target;
- The project’s overall result: The number of people accessing justice: 1,316, including 993
women, accounting for 75.5 per cent, and 1,206 people of ethnic minorities, accounting for
91.6 per cent.
Sustainability of the Initiative
DOLISA and the Department of Culture, Sports and Tourism have integrated various activities
into the provincial scheme “Strengthening communication on maintaining family happiness
and prevention and control of child abuse in the 2021-2025 period” to ensure the effective
prevention and control of violence and sexual abuse against children in Hoa Binh.
Model 2: “Family and law clubs”
Background
The “Family and law clubs” model was implemented in the framework of the initiative
“Raising legal awareness and providing legal assistance for child marriage and near-
familial marriage issues for women and adolescents of ethnic minorities in Tuyen Hoa and
Minh Hoa districts of Quang Binh" undertaken by CIRD. The Initiative aimed at both raising
awareness of the law and providing legal assistance for people, particularly people of ethnic
minorities (Ma Lieng, Chut, Ruc, Bru Van Kieu, etc.) to help them clearly understand the harms
of child marriage and near-familial marriage as well as laws regarding these issues, thus
providing solutions to handle related violations.
Effective approach and intervention model
a. Approaching project beneficiaries
To effectively implement the Initiative, CIRD identified two target groups of the project,
including the group consisting of people from communities and villages, and the students'
group, an at-risk population, from ethnic minority secondary boarding schools.
Regarding the former group, the Project contacted and worked with the Women’s Union to
approach them through the Union's network. As for students, the Project cooperated with the
108
District Offices of Education and schools to implement communication activities and
disseminate legal knowledge.
b. Family and law clubs
In 5 project communes, CIRD established 5 Family and law clubs with core members including
members of the Women’s Union and village officers with a relatively balanced proportion
between men and women. After receiving training on legal knowledge and skill of providing
legal advice and assistance from Quang Binh Legal Assistance Centre, members of the clubs
organized visits to families and communities to discuss relevant matters, including legal advice
and support to prevent and handle cases of GBV, domestic violence, etc. The information
obtained from such visits was then shared in meetings of the clubs before proposing to the
provincial Legal Assistance Centre for organizing trips to provide mobile legal advice or
providing legal advice via telephone regarding cases where in-depth advice is needed.
c. Diversification of communication activities
Diverse communication activities aiming at communities and target groups were carried out
such as direct communication in the community, competitions on legal knowledge for
secondary school students, the publication of panels and posters in villages, and other
communication materials, organization of mock trials, and social network communication
(Facebook). As a result, these activities have raised the legal awareness of 3,373 people (482
per cent of the initial target of 700 people).
d. Cooperation with local authorities in building legal capacity and providing legal
advice and assistance
CIRD worked with Legal Assistance Centres of Quang Binh and Nghe An in the 2 following
activities: (i) improving knowledge and counselling skills for members of Family and law
clubs; and (ii) implementing visits to provide direct legal advice and assistance in communities,
and provide legal advice via the Centre’s hotline with support of Family and law clubs for
connection. Furthermore, the Legal Assistance Centres also provided legal assistance during
court hearings.
Results:
- The number of people receiving legal advice and assistance: 295/300 – 98 per cent of the
original target;
- The number of cases represented and defended in court hearings: 13;
- The project’s overall result: The number of people whose access to justice was improved:
3.668, in which people of ethnic minorities accounted for 90 per cent and women accounted
for 70.5 per cent of the beneficiaries.
Sustainability of the Initiative - model
The “Family and law clubs” model continues to be operated and integrated into activities of
the Women’s Union in the project area and replicated in other districts and communes of Quang
109
Binh. Clubs also maintained their connection with the Legal Assistance Centre to refer and
receive cases where in-depth legal advice is needed.
Quang Binh Legal Assistance Centre has integrated the project's activities into its general
action programs regarding the provision of communication and legal advice for communities,
Notably, the activities were incorporated in the province’s programs/schemes on reducing child
marriage and near-familial marriage among ethnic minorities, aiming towards gender equality
in Quang Binh.
Model 3: “Network of social organizations in the community and cooperation with
stakeholders”
Background
The “Network of social organizations in the community and cooperation with
stakeholders” model was implemented in the framework of the Project "A new page life -
Project to promote the right to have birth certificates for children in Ho Chi Minh City ”
undertaken by MSD. The Initiative aims at raising awareness of target groups, families,
communities, and society and promoting the implementation of the right to birth certificates of
children with special circumstances in Ho Chi Minh City, particularly those who have not got
or could not get their birth certificate registered due to various reasons, by mobilizing the
support of many stakeholders, closely monitoring and assisting each specific case, raising
awareness of communities, and facilitating policy advocacy.
Effective approach and intervention model:
a. Approaching project beneficiaries
Through social organizations in the community such as charitable organizations, safe houses,
and orphanages, MSD reached out to children and families with special circumstances in
HCMC such as migrant workers, informal workers, etc. whose children, or even themselves,
have not had all basic personal documents such as birth certificates.
b. Network of social organizations in the community – A new page life
The project has established a network of social organizations in the community named “A new
page life” with the participation of 12 social organizations, charitable organizations, safe
houses and orphanages such as Hoa Mau Don, Y Tam, CEPORER Hoc Mon, etc. These
organizations carried out communication activities and organized events such as “Children and
Birth Certificate Day” in the community with legal advice and assistance provided by HCMC
Legal Assistance Centre, Registry Office, and HCMC Department of Justice. Follow-up
actions of A new page life project include reviewing procedures to obtain birth certificates and
assisting families in project areas to complete such procedures. The Legal Assistance Centre,
Registry Office, Department of Justice, and law firms provided support in information
verification and supplementation, etc. of necessary documents for birth certificate issuance.
c. The cooperation model involving various stakeholders
110
With the operation of the network of social organizations in the community, the project
engaged the participation and cooperation of government agencies such as the Legal Assistance
Centre and District Offices of Justice to provide legal advice and assistance to cases applying
for birth certificates. NGOs including law firms were also called for participation and
cooperation because government agencies, due to limited resources, cannot participate in more
cases spanning different localities of the city.
d. Diversification of communication activities
The project implemented a variety of communication activities towards communities and target
groups in project areas such as the communication day event, etc. Communication also aimed
at the society to raise awareness and attention of, and support for the target groups via social
networks – the fan page of A new page life - and events participated by celebrities with familiar
circumstances to inspire the society and motivate children and families to live a better life in
the future.
Sustainability of the Initiative - model
Through its network of social organizations in the community – “A new page life” continues
to accompany activities of the project as it is the purpose of the organizations to benefit their
target groups. For the mentioned cooperation fields, the city Legal Assistance Centre, the
Registry Office of the Department of Justice, and lawyers commit to working with the network
to support the issuance of birth certificates and other personal documents for children and
adults with special circumstances.
Model 4: The “Peer counselling” model
Background
The “Peer counselling” model was carried out within the framework of the “Strengthening
capacity to respond to gender-based violence against women and girls with disabilities in
Nghe An province” Initiative undertaken by Action to the Community Development Center
(ACDC). The Initiative aims to minimize GBV against women and girls with disabilities in
Nghe An (Thanh Chuong, Thai Hoa districts, and Vinh City to be specific) through awareness-
raising, knowledge- and skill-enhancing activities, thus strengthening the capacity of women
and girls with disabilities, as well as their families and the community in responding to GBV,
and also through increasing the provision of legal advice and support for women and girls with
disabilities.
Effective approach and intervention model:
To approach the project beneficiaries who are women and girls with disabilities in the project
area, ACDC cooperated with Nghe An Association of People with Disabilities to implement
interventions under the project through the Association’s network to reach out to community
groups of villages and hamlets.
a. Diversification of communication activities
111
During the project implementation, a diverse range of communication activities was carried
out to reach the community and target beneficiaries (women and girls with disabilities and their
families), which included training in legal knowledge and prevention skill; communication of
events participated by representatives of bodies responsible for policy making, implementation,
and monitoring, people with disabilities, their families, and media agencies. These events were
broadcasted on provincial television channels for greater outreach to not only people in the
project areas but also in the whole province. Moreover, the project published the “Skills of
Preventing Gender-based Violence against Women and Girls with Disabilities - Needed
Information”, a handbook that aims at enabling women and girls with disabilities and their
families to self-learn and enhance their skills of preventing GBV.
b. Development of core groups - peer counselling groups
Compared to other vulnerable groups, women and girls with disabilities are typically more
disadvantaged. Most of them cannot lead an independent life and have to rely on support from
their family members or society. As a result, when discrimination or even violence happens,
they tend to hide the incident and hesitate to share about it or refuse to ask for help. They also
have few opportunities for social interaction and self-development (in terms of knowledge and
skills). To tackle these problems, the Project established four core groups comprised of
enthusiastic members of the Association of People with Disabilities, who had received
adequate training in approaching and counselling people with disabilities. They offered peer
counselling sessions for women and girls with disabilities and their families, shared and
provided counselling on issues in life, including initial legal advice on matters of beneficiaries’
interests and concerns. On that basis, the core groups reviewed the demand for legal advice
then referred women and girls with disabilities to higher-level service providers for specialized
support.
c. Cooperation with local functional authorities in providing legal advice and
assistance
ACDC’s Legal Advice Department cooperated with Nghe An Legal Assistance Centre in
providing direct legal advice and assistance to the community with many activities carried out
such as organizing trips to deliver outreach legal counselling services, providing advice via
phone, hotlines, and other mobile applications like Zalo, etc. Such legal advice and assistance
were provided based on the review of the community’s demand for assistance conducted by
core groups and through direct communication between ACDC and the local authority.
Sustainability of the Initiative - model
The activities carried out by core groups - peer counselling groups are among many activities
conducted within the network of the Nghe An Association of People with Disabilities to better
support people with disabilities in general and women and girls with disabilities especially -
the project’s beneficiaries - in particular, so that they can, together with the community and the
society, take part in activities, especially the GBV prevention.
112
ACDC’s Legal Advice Department and Nghe An Legal Assistance Centre continued their
provision of legal advice and assistance. Notably, through this project, the Legal Assistance
Centre has gained a deeper understanding of people with disabilities and the skills needed to
work with special target groups, as well as closely cooperating with Nghe An Association of
People with Disabilities in providing legal advice. Two local organizations agreed on the
development of a cooperation plan for organizing field trips for communication purposes,
providing advice on issues regarding people with disabilities, including gender equality.
Model 5: The “Public-private partnership and network of legal advice providers in the
community” model
Background
The “Public-private partnership and network of legal advice providers in the community”
model was carried out within the framework of the: “Facilitating justice access to marriage
and family, gender equality and prevention of domestic violence issues for poor communities
and ethnic minorities in Quang Binh” Initiative, undertaken by the Rural Development and
Poverty Reduction (RDPR) Fund. The Initiative aims to tackle issues related to women’s rights
and gender equality for the ethnic population in two areas namely Quang Ninh and Le Thuy
districts of Quang Binh province, where ethnic minority men and women have a limited
understanding of women’s rights and gender equality supported by the law, thus causing the
occurrence of child marriage, near-familial marriage, and GBV; also to improve the judicial
system at the grassroots level, which has failed to effectively implement the Law on Legal Aid.
Effective approach and intervention model:
a. Network of legal advice providers in the community
With an aim to approach and rigorously support the beneficiaries of the project, RDPR
cooperated with the commune authorities and local WUs to create and operate five networks
of legal advice providers with core members being commune-level legal officers and WU
officers with legal expertise. They conducted communication activities to disseminate the laws
in the community and provided legal advice to each beneficiary’s particular case. RDPR also
worked with Quang Binh Legal Assistance Centre and Ho Ly Hai Law Office to conduct
outreach legal assistance services. Within the framework of the project, legal advice providers
received training in communication skills and methods, as well as working and counselling
skills to ensure the quality and effectiveness of communication and counselling activities.
b. Public-private partnership in providing legal advice and assistance
RDPR cooperated with State functional authorities, including Quang Binh Legal Assistance
Centre and Ho Ly Hai Law Office, to deliver outreach legal assistance services in communes
and provide legal advice and assistance via telephone with the support from local networks of
legal advice providers. As a result, 13 trips were organized to bring legal assistance to 360
people (114 males - 32 per cent, 246 females - 68 per cent, 290 Van Kieu people - 81 per cent,
70 Kinh people - 19 per cent, 257 poor and near-poor households - 75 per cent, and 103 medium
113
households - 25 per cent) in 17 villages eligible for the project. The Law Office has provided
legal advice and assistance via telephone for 97 cases.
Sustainability of the Initiative - model
The commune authorities and WU will continue to support networks of legal advice
providers in the community in legal communications and counselling to educate the people
and enable them to abide by the law in the fields of marriage and family, gender equality, and
many others, thereby maintaining social order in remote villages and communes. The public-
private partnership has enabled Quang Binh Legal Assistance Centre and other non-state law
firms like Ho Ly Hai Law Office to continue their support for legal assistance activities under
the State’s responsibilities and charitable activities conducted by other organizations, thus
strengthening people’s access to legal services.
Model 6: The “Strengthening organizations’ capacity to better perform their roles in
policy contribution and protection of the rights and interests of DP Hanoi’ members”
model.
Background
The “Strengthening organizations’ capacity to better perform their roles in policy contribution
and protection of the rights and interests of HNDP’ members” model was carried out within
the framework of Initiative 7 “Raising legal awareness and increasing access to legal service
for women and girls with disabilities in Gia Lam, Hoai Duc, Soc Son, and Phuc Tho districts
in Ha Noi”, implemented by the Hanoi Association of People with Disabilities (DP Hanoi).
The Initiative includes raising awareness and providing legal assistance for women and girls
with disabilities in four suburban districts of Ha Noi so that they are aware of their rights and
interests prescribed in the law on gender equality, the law on marriage and family, the law on
GBV prevention, and law on persons with disabilities and how to seek legal advice when in
need.
Effective approach and intervention model:
a. Approaching project beneficiaries
According to the statistics in 2019, DP Hanoi was comprised of 15,700 members, of which
female members accounted for 46 per cent. With such a high percentage, women and girls with
disabilities may expose to the risk of falling victims to various forms of violence, including
mental, physical, economic, and sexual violence. Therefore, they need prompt protection and
assistance to facilitate their enjoyment of basic human rights. To effectively implement the
project, DP Hanoi approached two groups at risk of violence and abuse who were women and
girls with disabilities in four districts to communicate with and educate them on the law and
show them how to seek legal advice/assistance.
b. Capacity strengthening for officers of the Association and organizations
To guarantee that the staff members of the Association and clubs for people with disabilities
have qualified capacity for project execution, DP Hanoi conducted the following activities to
114
equip its staff with knowledge of the law, communication skill, and skill at providing initial
legal advice for people with disabilities:
- Since the project focused on raising people with disabilities’ awareness of the law, a
completely new territory for DP Hanoi, the capacity strengthening training programs
for core officers of the Association and its related organizations were planned in detail,
trainers were equipped with knowledge of the law on gender equality, the law on
domestic violence prevention and control, law on marriage and family, the law on
persons with disabilities, and the law on children (2 courses, each lasted 2 days, 15 were
TOTs from the Association and Women Committee).
- Core members of the Women Committee and four clubs for women with disabilities
were given capacity-building training to be capable of communicating information on
the law and legal assistance procedures. The training focused on identifying sexual
abuse acts and providing initial assistance for women with disabilities, as well as
conducting communication activities at the grassroots level.
- Moreover, officers of the Association actively worked with gender and law experts to
develop communication content, select appropriate communication methods, and
analyse legal situations where people with disabilities need legal advice. The
preparation and execution of the project enabled the Association’s officers to gain
learning experience and analyse the practical demand for legal advice of people with
disabilities in Ha Noi. These served as evidence-based information on the provision of
legal advice for women and girls with disabilities when they face domestic violence,
sexual abuse, inheritance, and unequal access to employment.
- Women and girls with disabilities in need of legal advice were also given relevant
counselling and support in the prevention and handling of GBV and domestic violence
cases at the Association’s clubs for people with disabilities.
c. Diversification of communication activities
A diverse range of communication activities was carried out and targeted at people with
disabilities of various kinds and degrees to ensure their participation in and enjoyment of
benefits from this project. Drawing competitions on the themes of gender equality and domestic
violence prevention were organized, puppet shows were created to talk about violence
prevention with girls with disabilities; a short film/video-making competition on gender
equality and domestic violence prevention was held; publications of the Law on Gender
Equality, the law on domestic violence prevention and control, the law on marriage and family,
and the law on children were printed with coloured illustrations, the directory of agencies and
organizations providing legal advice services for people with disabilities was printed, social
networking site (Facebook) was used to share the activities of the project, the Association’s
magazines and e-portal were used for providing legal advice and assistance. As a result, these
activities have raised legal awareness among 420 women and girls with disabilities (accounting
for 68 per cent of the initial target of 620 people).
115
d. Cooperation with local authorities in building legal capacity and providing
legal advice and assistance
DP Hanoi worked with community lawyers to (i) enrich knowledge and skill at providing legal
advice for members of the Association and the club for women with disabilities; and (ii) to
provide legal advice and assistance at 4 suburban districts of Ha Noi by direct means and
through the legal advice column in the Association’s magazines or its portal.
Results:
- Increased legal awareness for 420 people.
- Legal assistance provided for 50 cases.
Sustainability of the Initiative
By executing the project, officers of DP Hanoi have reshaped their mindset and recognized the
role and potential of the Association in supporting and providing legal advice for its members.
The Association has developed direct and online modes of providing legal advice, which
includes the association’s magazine and e-portal, to disseminate information on the law and
increase members’ knowledge so they can protect their legitimate rights and interests in a more
realistic way. Notably, “the project has also motivated and encouraged the leaders of the
Association to change their mindset about the contributions, supplementation, and amendment
to laws and policies related to the protection of women and children with disabilities’ rights”
(C.D, DP Hanoi), thereby proposing DOLISA to supplement special incentive policies for
people with disabilities and consulting with the Department of Justice on policies related to
providing legal advice for people with disabilities in Ha Noi.
Model 7: The “Provision of outreach legal advice services in the locality of Hoa Binh
Women Union” model
Background
The “Provision of outreach legal advice services in the locality of Hoa Binh Women
Union” model was carried out within the framework of Initiative 8 “Strengthening the role of
women and girls in Hoa Binh province in preventing gender-based violence”, implemented by
Hoa Binh Women Union (HBWU). The Initiative includes raising awareness of the law,
providing legal assistance for women and girls in 64 local WUs in 16 mountainous communes
of four districts namely Da Bac, Lac Son, Mai Chau, and Yen Thuy, Hoa Binh province, and
helping them acknowledge their rights and ways to protect themselves from gender-based
violence and abuse.
Effective approach and intervention model
a. Approaching project beneficiaries
To effectively undertake the Initiative, HBWU clearly defined the beneficiaries of the project
as women and students/children in communities and villages. To approach targeted women,
116
HBWU worked with the district-level WUs and their branches to formulate plans for
communicating the law and providing legal advice. For students and children, HBWU
cooperated with local teachers to carry out activities for communication and development of
legal knowledge for students at school as part of extracurricular activities.
b. Provision of outreach legal advice services in the locality
HBWU successfully organized 96 trips to deliver outreach legal advice and assistance services
to over 1,000 members of 64 local WUs in 16 communes of mountainous areas of Da Bac, Lac
Son, Mai Chau, and Yen Thuy districts. They were given legal advice and assistance on gender
equality, marriage and family, prevention of violence and sexual abuse against women, and
inheritance. The friendly model of outreach legal advice services has reached residents in
mountainous villages and motivated many ethnic minority people to learn more about the law,
understand their rights and interests, as well as seeking legal advice.
To successfully operate this model, HBWU worked closely with Lawyer Dan Tiep Phuc and
the provincial Legal Assistance Centre to provide legal advice in 16 communes. Lawyer Dan
Tiep Phuc, legal assistance officers, and HBWU’s officers developed a plan for studying and
evaluating the cases where legal advice and assistance are needed in the project area with the
support from local WUs and core groups in villages. Upon receiving cases where legal advice
is needed, HBWU, Lawyer Dan Tiep Phuc, and officers of Hoa Binh Legal Assistance Centre
discussed, classified, and prepared the content for legal advice in detail based on the nature of
the case, laws, and policies before delivering outreach legal advice services at the project area.
The thorough preparation of legal advice contents and methods of service delivery has
maintained the high quality of the advice provided for each case and met the lawful demand of
recipients. Furthermore, site selection is of significance as it facilitates people’s easy access to
legal advice sessions and enables such sessions to be divided by big groups or individuals, thus
making people in need of legal advice feel comfortable and protecting their privacy.
c. Diversification of communication activities
The project has implemented a diverse array of communication activities for the community
and target groups, such as direct communication, musical performances given by communes
to increase legal knowledge, organizing drawing competition with the theme of domestic
violence prevention, printing handbooks and leaflets about the prevention of child sexual
abuse, publishing handbooks on GBV prevention. As a result, over 2,390 people were educated
in the law (on target).
d. Cooperation with local authorities in building legal capacity and
providing legal advice and assistance
HBWU worked with community Lawyer Dan Tiep Phuc and the Legal Assistance Centre to
organize training in the skill at providing legal advice as a legal assistance activity and
strengthening capacity for GBV prevention for 140 participants from district/commune WUs,
Fatherland Fronts, Farmers’ Unions, Federations of Labour, Youth Unions, Veterans
Associations, district judicial bodies, commune-level branches of WU, heads of hamlets, heads
117
of WU branches, mass organizations in hamlets, thereby improving their skills at delivering
initial legal support and advice to those in their areas of management. The participants also
provided information on cases where legal advice and assistance are sought so that HBWU
could prepare to provide outreach legal advice services for the community.
Results: - The number of people receiving legal advice and assistance: 1,000
Sustainability of the Initiative
According to the annual plan, Hoa Binh Legal Assistance Centre and seven district-level Legal
Assistance branches are going to organize 100 trips to providing outreach legal advice
services39 for extremely disadvantaged and ethnic minority areas in Hoa Binh. With a
population of 854,131 people, the province’s legal assistance programme has yet to meet the
demand for legal advice and assistance of its people. Although the model of outreach legal
advice services of HBWU has just applied to 64 out of 176 branches in different hamlets, it has
also enabled those who are not beneficiaries of the Initiative to get access to and receive legal
assistance and advice for free. In addition, the project brought legal knowledge to ethnic
minorities in mountainous areas, helping them understand their rights and interests, and
removed the barrier of distance, thus ensuring their safety. For these reasons, “The model of
outreach legal advice services has benefited people and left a meaningful impact on their lives.
As a result, it should be sustained in the community”. (Lawyer Dan Tiep Phuc). HBWU also
planned to work with Hoa Binh Legal Assistance Centre to integrate outreach legal advice
services into its up-and-coming activities.
9.3 The names of the evaluations and their presentations
Our Team Leader, Ms. Bunafsha Gulakova holds a Master’s in International Human Rights
Law and is a practising International Human Rights lawyer with expertise in Justice and Anti-
Corruption reforms. She worked on numerous Monitoring and Evaluation of complex, multi-
faceted EU-funded programs in developing countries. Bunafsha conducted over 40
programmes and project evaluations and Results-Oriented Monitoring in Asia including in
Vietnam on EU’ support to gender equality, justice and Good Governance reforms. She has
acted as a Team Leader for 18 complex country evaluations and TA, including justice
projects. She has extensive experience working in Vietnam including working with UN
Women and the Academy of Justice in 2015 in developing 100 cases for the investigation of
gender-based and domestic violence; drafting Common Country Assessment of Vietnam for
the UN Country Team focusing on SDGs to inform the formulation of the ongoing UN’s One
Strategic Plan 2017-2021; mapping relevant existing and planned programmes in the field of
Human Rights, Gender, Good Governance and Rule of Law; finalising the evaluation of the
international commitments of Viet Nam towards the implementation of UPR
Recommendations and developing an Evaluation proposal on Ten Years of the
implementation of Viet Nam’s Law on Persons with Disabilities and the United Nations
Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities. Her human rights background is a
strong asset in terms of ensuring that the HRBA and gender equality are adapted in the design
39 http://sotuphap.hoabinh.gov.vn/index.php/th-i-s-qu-c-t/295-trung-ta-m-tra-gia-p-pha-p-la-nha-n-a-c-ta-nh-hoa-ba-nh-ka-nia-m-20-n-m-nga-y-tha-
nh-la-p-ta-cha-c-tra-gia-p-pha-p-la-via-t-nam
118
and implementation of the mid-term, final, impact, and ex-post evaluation. She is fluent in
English.
Our Key Expert 2, Ms. Nguyen Thi Minh Hai obtained an MA in Law. She has more than
15 years of experience working for various international development partners in Vietnam,
including the EU and the United Nations Development Program mostly for the
implementation of legislative, institutional and judiciary reform programs and to strengthen
the rule of law in Vietnam. She is well trained and experienced in Program Results-Based
Management and Participatory Result-based Monitoring and Evaluation. She is fluent in
Vietnamese and English and worked with most of the stakeholders of the programme. She is
strongly experienced in evaluation techniques, the dissemination/communication of actions
and mainstreaming cross-cutting issues including gender.
Our Key Expert 3, Mr. Giao Vu Cong has a master’s degree in constitutional law, a master’s
degree in human rights law and a PhD degree in peace and human rights studies. He has over
20 years of experience working in the human rights sector, access to justice and legislative
and judiciary reform programs collaborating with various academic institutions and
organizations in Vietnam including Ho Chi Minh National Political Academy, Vietnam
Lawyers’ Association, School of Law under Vietnam National University in Hanoi and many
UN bodies, the EU, the WB, etc. Giao has strong research, analysis, networking, and
organization skill. He has worked extensively with CSOs in Vietnam.
9.4 Evaluation Matrix
The Evaluation Matrix with Evaluation Questions, judgement criteria, indicators, and data
analysis and collection methods were developed and presented in Annex 4 of the Inception and
Desk Note. The EM was produced to guide the process of the MTE, which is entirely in line
with Project Cycle Management, ToC, Logical Framework, and evaluation methodology.
Table 1: Evaluation Matrix
119
Evaluation Question Judgment Criteria/Indicator Data Collection Method Sources
Relevance
1. To what extent was the EU JULE ▪ The extent of alignment between the ▪ Document analysis and revision of ▪ EU Country Partnership Strategy.
Programme in line with national project objectives and national strategies, the updated Logframe. ▪ Strategy for the Development and
development priorities, the EU’s policies and plans and the country’ ▪ Monitoring records Improvement of Viet Nam’s Legal
Multiannual indicative internationally undertaken obligations ▪ Interviews System to 2010 with a Vision to
Programme and priorities, the (Number of relevant Outputs). ▪ Focus Group Discussions (FGD) 2020 and the Judicial Reform
UNDP Strategic Plan, and the ▪ Availability of activities supporting the and individual interviews with key Strategy for the Period until 2020.
SDGs? implementation of the Strategy for the implementation stakeholders: ▪ Action Document.
2. Are the EU JULE Programme Development and Improvement of Viet project’s central & local government ▪ Logframe
objectives and outputs clear, Nam’s Legal System to 2010 with a counterparts, NGO partners. ▪ National counterparts
practical, and feasible within its Vision to 2020; and the Judicial Reform ▪ National Plans
frame? For example, do they Strategy until 2020. ▪ Beneficiaries
address women, men, and ▪ Level of alignment with the EU and ▪ Project partners and stakeholders
vulnerable groups and align with Vietnamese Government’s strategy to
the EU and Vietnamese increase access to justice for vulnerable
Government’s strategy to people and strengthen the rule of law.
increase access to justice for ▪ Strategies undertook by the project to
vulnerable people and strengthen ensure that the activities and outputs are
the rule of law? relevant to the needs of beneficiaries and
3. To what extent were lessons stakeholders.
learned from other relevant
projects considered in the
design?
Effectiveness.
4. What is the level of overall ▪ % Progress towards expected results. ▪ Document analysis (annual and ▪ Progress Reports
progress and results achieved by ▪ Level of improvements in the technical donor reports, etc.) ▪ Field missions’ outcome.
components and their and/or managerial capacity of EU JULE ▪ Monitoring reports ▪ Statistics on court cases
contribution to the programme's beneficiaries. ▪ Interviews handling and other trends in
overall purpose according to the ▪ Level of coherence in the theory of ▪ Case study institutional performance by
logframe and its indicators? change and evidence of its consistent ▪ Pre/post-training evaluations sector bodies
translation into activities. ▪ FGD and in-depth Interviews ▪ Media and CSO reports
120
Evaluation Question Judgment Criteria/Indicator Data Collection Method Sources
5. What factors have contributed to ▪ Use of baselines to establish targets, ▪ Open format questions without a ▪ Reports (Result Oriented
achieving/not achieving priorities, and timelines. predetermined set of responses. Monitoring, M&E, peer-to-peer
intended outputs and outcomes? ▪ Validity of the assumptions underpinning progress).
6. What, if any, alternative the theory of change and the chosen ▪ Project partners and stakeholders
strategies would have been more outcomes and outputs.
effective in achieving the EU ▪ LF indicators are set on the output,
JULE Programme objectives? outcome, and impact level.
7. To what extent have different ▪ The extent of the partnership strategy’s
stakeholders been involved in effectiveness between the IPs.
EU JULE Programme ▪ The extent of participatory
implementation? Is it implementation and Programme
participatory? management.
8. What has been the impact of ▪ Level of participation of men, women and
COVID-19 on the project vulnerable groups and their contribution
implementation and the project to achieving the EU JULE Programme
response? objectives?
▪ Adequacy of the Risk and Mitigation Plan
in connection with C19.
Efficiency
121
Evaluation Question Judgment Criteria/Indicator Data Collection Method Sources
9. To what extent was the EU JULE ▪ Evidence of clearly established (i.e. in ▪ Desk review of activity plans ▪ Progress Report and budget
Programme management written format) processes to safeguard the budget records, interim/ status/ revision.
structure outlined in the EU use of funds, value-for-money, annual reports, partners’ reports, ▪ Database of training participants
JULE Programme document transparency and accountability in sub- etc.) maintained by the project
efficient in generating the contracting and other procurement ▪ Interviews with project ▪ Financial audit report
expected results? processes. management/ partners/stakeholders ▪ Pre/post-training evaluations
10. To what extent have the ▪ Samples of cost-shared events. ▪ Interviews with beneficiaries report.
component implementation ▪ Samples of the appropriate use of funds ▪ Open format questions without a ▪ Project partners and stakeholders
strategy and the execution been that led to the multiplayer effect. predetermined set of responses.
efficient and cost-effective? ▪ Evidence of efficiency of partnerships ▪ Direct observation of activities and
11. To what extent do both (use of capacity, resources, coordination, assessment of the outputs’ quality
components' monitoring and etc.).
evaluations systems ensure ▪ Use of the third parties’ in-project skills
effective and efficient project or partner’s premises for training.
management? ▪ Actual compared to planned expenditure
by project output.
▪ Actual compared to the planned timeline
of delivery of outputs.
▪ Beneficiaries’ level of satisfaction with
the programme’s outputs and outcomes.
Impact
12. To what extent has the project ▪ World Justice Project Rule of Law Index. ▪ Quantitative and qualitative content ▪ Annual World Justice Project Rule
achievements contributed to a ▪ Perception/trust in the sector indicated by analysis of Law Index40
more reliable, trusted and better- scores in relevant assessments/indexes. ▪ Monitoring records ▪ Annual Transparency
accessed justice system in ▪ SDG16 – Peace, Justice and Strong ▪ Interviews with final beneficiaries International Report.
Vietnam? Institutions Unsentenced detainees ▪ Freedom House Ranking
13. To what extent did the EU JULE Property Rights ▪ Official statistics of MOJ, SC and
Programme contribute to the EU ▪ Corruption Perception Index other relevant national bodies
priorities, the UNDP Strategic ▪ Access to and affordability of justice ▪ UNTB and UPR
Plan and country programme recommendations to Viet Nam.
outcomes and outputs, the SDGs
40 Ibid.
122
Evaluation Question Judgment Criteria/Indicator Data Collection Method Sources
and national development ▪ State’s national SDGs Agenda and
priorities? progress with SDG 5, 1641.
Sustainability
14. To what extent will financial and ▪ The extent to which stakeholders are ▪ Direct observation ▪ First and secondary sources,
economic resources be available prepared to continue/allocate funds to the ▪ Interviews including informants
to sustain the benefits achieved continuation of initiatives facilitated by the ▪ FGD and individual interviews with ▪ National budget.
by the EU JULE Programme? programme. key implementation stakeholders: ▪ EUJULE’s exit strategy.
▪ Availability, quality of the Exit Plan central & local government ▪ Project partners and stakeholders
agreed with stakeholders. counterparts, NGO partners.
▪ Availability of human and financial
resources from the partner institutions to
continue activities.
▪ Identification of factors that promote the
sustained functioning of the
structures/initiatives facilitated Adequacy
of the Risk analyses, level of ownership
over the current mid-term results,
adequacy of the result framework.
EU Added Value
15. To which extent does the ▪ Type and size of the EUMS contribution. ▪ Interviews with EU MS, members of ▪ Field missions’ outcome.
Intervention bring additional ▪ Examples of the police-level changes that the donor coordination meetings: ▪ Statistics on case handling and
benefits to what would have promote the EU values or best EU WB, UNODC, key stakeholders at other trends in institutional
resulted from Member States' practices. national and regional levels. performance by sector bodies
interventions only? ▪ Level of interaction with the EUMS. ▪ Interview with judges, lawyers, ▪ Media and CSO reports
16. What is the level of awareness ▪ Evidences UMS practices in access to youth. ▪ Reports (review,
between the beneficiaries and the justice, legal aid, juvenile justice, children ▪ Direct observation. ▪ M&E, peer-to-peer progress) by
stakeholders on the EU-funded in conflict with the law. international organisations and
Project? ▪ Links to other joint strategies, such as the development partners
CSO Roadmap, Gender Action Plan and ▪ Project partners and stakeholders
Human Rights and Democracy Country
Strategies.
41 See: https://dashboards.sdgindex.org/static/profiles/pdfs/SDR-2021-vietnam.pdf, last visited <<1.11.2021>>
123
Evaluation Question Judgment Criteria/Indicator Data Collection Method Sources
Coherence
17. How have both project ▪ Level of the coordinated EU and the ▪ Interviews with key stakeholders at
components been compatible Member States approach to development, both the national and regional levels.
and synergized with each other promoting joint programming and joint ▪ Interview with the EUMS, EU ▪ Project partners and stakeholders
and with other interventions in actions. funded projects. ▪ Development partners
the country, in the justice sector ▪ Adequately tailored partnerships with a
and in partner organizations? broader range of stakeholders and partner
18. What are critical factors countries.
supporting or preventing the ▪ Level of the contribution to the National
linkage and synergy? Development Plan’s priority area.
Cross-Cutting Issues
19. Have the relevant cross-cutting ▪ Availability of monitoring mechanism at ▪ Desk Review ▪ Progress reports against the
issues, including human rights, national and local levels to collect ▪ Interview and direct observation gender-segregated LF indicators.
disability and gender equality, programme-related in a sex-disaggregated ▪ Twelve calls under the JIFF grants ▪ National Action Plan on People
empowerment of women has manner. scheme on environmental with Disability.
been adequately mainstreamed ▪ The type of engagement of women at protection. ▪ Third-round grants call of Justice
in the design and the different stages of the programmes Initiatives Facilitation Fund
implementation of the ▪ Number of women empowered by the focused on “Strengthening access
programme? programme (law enforcements agents, to legal and justice on
20. To what extent environmental SCOs representatives). environmental protection for the
and/or climate-related ▪ Number of women supported by the vulnerable groups, especially
challenges, as well as digital programme. women, children, ethnic minority
transformation aspects, have and poor people”.
been considered? ▪ Project partners and stakeholders
Visibility
21. What is the level of awareness ▪ % of the interviewed stakeholders and ▪ FGD ▪ Direct communication with the
between the beneficiaries and the beneficiaries aware of the EU-funded ▪ Interviews informants.
stakeholders on the EU-funded project. ▪ Direct observation of EU logo and ▪ Printed deliverables.
Project? sign ▪ Project partners and stakeholders
▪ Media and other digital products.
▪ Communication Strategy.
Lessons Learned
124
Evaluation Question Judgment Criteria/Indicator Data Collection Method Sources
22. Are there any best practices to ▪ Number of best practices collected during ▪ Interviews. ▪ First and secondary sources,
sustain the programme results to the MTE. ▪ Desk study of the research and including informants, project
be considered by the ▪ Number of recommendations by the MTE academic studies partners and stakeholders
beneficiaries/EU JULE ▪ Number of recommendations of the MTE
stakeholders? What can the team accepted by the RG
recommend for the programming
of any future EU-funded
intervention?
125
9.5 Logical framework matrices
Below are the cumulative results of the Action against the overall results in the Log-frame (revised 30 October 2021):
Results chain Indicators Targets up Results by 31.10.2020 (call Results42 by 31.10.2021
to Dec 2022 1) (call 1 + 2)
To increase access to (c) % of people from Currently, 30,565 people are Currently, 58,924 people are benefiting directly
justice for vulnerable vulnerable groups in JIFF- benefiting directly from the from the project.
) groups, particularly focused provinces who project.
t
c
a women, children, believe they can get (d) 3 national legal fora on grassroots dispute
p
m ethnic minorities, justice if they have a (d) Evidence (d) National Legal Forum on mediation co-organised by JIFF and VIJUSAP; on
I
(
e
and poor people. grievance (disaggregated of linkages in grassroots dispute mediation capacity building and legal education on
v
i by sex, ethnicity, and all 4 results with joint efforts from JIFF employment; recommendations built on inputs
t
c
e income level). areas and at and PAGoDA. from 12 grantees and shared with PAGoDA and the
j
b least 2 Policy dialogue on grassroots Department of Legal Education under MOJ.
o
c (d) Evidence of thematic priority dispute mediation co-
i
f
i c and geographic linkage topics. organised by JIFF and
e
p between JIFF and VIJUSAP.
S
UN/PAGoDA activities in
each objective area.
1. Increased public (a) # of people in JIFF- (a) Est. 26,799 people (63% women; 51,637 (63% female, 0.5% LGBTI; 38% ethnic
awareness and focused provinces whose 54,000 people 1% LGBTI; 42% ethnic minorities; 24% children; 55% near-poor).
understanding of rights awareness increases (18 grants in minorities; and 28% children; With at least 167,149 participants.
s t
) s
e m
l
t
e
o
g
i
a
n
l
v
r
o
ig
k
h
e
t
t
s
h
a
e
n
se
d how a
(d
ft
i
e
s
r
a g
g
g
ra
re
n
g
te
a
e
te
a
d
c
b
ti
y
v i
s
ti
e
e
x
s
,
t
a
h
re
is
a
r
*
e s
3
u
,
l
0
t
0 0
60% near-poor).
l
uo
sc rights. ethnicity, age, and income pp/grant);
et
Ru
level). min. 50%
O
( female, 40%
ethnic
minority,
42 All results are cumulative unless otherwise stated!
126
Results chain Indicators Targets up Results by 31.10.2020 (call Results42 by 31.10.2021
to Dec 2022 1) (call 1 + 2)
50% under
30, 50% poor
or near-poor.
2. Increased access (a) # of people in JIFF- (a) Est. (a) 3,766 people (72% 7,779 (66% women; 18% ethnic minorities; 11%
to legal advice, focused provinces who 32,000 people women; 32% ethnic children; 42% poor).
assistance and benefit from access to (32 grants in minorities; 19% children;
representation in legal advice or assistance this result 49% near-poor).
administrative, civil, from JIFF grantees area * 1,000 (b) 81 disputes
and criminal matters. (disaggregated by sex, pp/grant); (b) 10 disputes (c) 20 cases
ethnicity, age, and income 50% female, (c) 3 cases
level). 40% ethnic
(b) # of disputes resolved minority;
or mediated by JIFF 50% under
grantees. 30; 50% poor.
(c) # of court cases (b) Est. 80 (4
representing vulnerable grants on this
people contributed to by topic * 20
JIFF grantees. disputes/grant
).
(c) Est. 20 (4
grants on this
topic* 5
cases/grant).
3. Improved (a) # of positive changes (a) 4 (laws (a) Advocacy activities on 4 (a) Advocacy activities43 on 10 laws and
enabling in laws and regulations and policies policies: Law for the Elderly; policies (Labour Law including Labour Law for
environment and that can be attributed to for 4 priority Criminal Code; Law on Civil Foreigners; Law on Medical Examination and
regulatory JIFF grantees' advocacy topics). Status; and Law on
Treatment; Education Law; Insurance Law; Law
framework for legal activities on priority (b) grassroots dispute mediation.
for the Disabled).
topics. Documented
43 Initial advocacy efforts by grantees through consultation workshops to share research findings and project experience with policymakers.
127
Results chain Indicators Targets up Results by 31.10.2020 (call Results42 by 31.10.2021
to Dec 2022 1) (call 1 + 2)
empowerment and (b) Quality of positive (b) 1 research report on (b) Documented positive contributions for the
access to justice. laws/regulations in terms contributions. grassroots dispute mediation. research report – the need to develop a
of practically facilitating strategy/programme to raise awareness and legal
access to justice and legal
understanding for the people, focusing on
empowerment.
disadvantaged groups in the PAGoDA component;
2 pieces of research on grassroots dispute
medication, and legal support by Oxfam;
Policy recommendations and workshop
proceedings by grantees.
4. Enhanced (b) # of articles/reports/ (b) Est. 110 32 media articles. 63 media articles44
integrity, research produced media articles No research on integrity, No research on integrity, transparency, and
transparency and contributing to enhanced (20/year) + transparency, and accountability.
accountability in the integrity, transparency and 10 reports (5 accountability.
justice sector. accountability in the research
justice sector. grants* 2
reports/grant).
Sub-result 1: Civil (a) # of grants made on Minimum 5% (a) 33 grants, of which 100% (a) 45 grants, of which 100% contributed to
society organisations raising awareness among of total grants contributed to Results 1 Results 1 & 2; 69% (3 grants from Call 1; 18
)
and networks in vulnerable groups, (cumulative) & 2; 63% (3 grants from from Call 2; and 10 from Call 3) to Result 3
s t u Northern, Central, including women, are made in Call 1 and 19 from Call and none to Result 4.
p and Southern children, ethnic each result
t 2) to Result 3 and none to
u
O Vietnam complete minorities, and poor area. Result 4. (b) 45 grants (several initiatives implemented in 2
(
s
64 JIFF grants on people. Minimum
or 3 provinces), of which 37% were in the
t
l priority topics (b) # of grants made to 20% of total
u
(b)33 grants (several North; 30% in the Central region and 33% in
s
e related to four provide legal advice, grants
r initiatives implemented in the South.
b - results. assistance and (cumulative)
u 2 or 3 provinces), of
S representation for are made in
which 37% were in the (c) 31 grants (2 in Call 1; 19 in Call 2; 10 in Call
vulnerable groups in each of the 3
North; 31.5% in the 3).
44 Media articles on project activities around awareness raising, legal aid and policy advocacy.
128
Results chain Indicators Targets up Results by 31.10.2020 (call Results42 by 31.10.2021
to Dec 2022 1) (call 1 + 2)
administrative, civil and geographic Central region and 31.5%
criminal matters provinces. in the South. (d) 1 research grant (CELA) in Call 1 and 1 in Call
(c) # of grants made to (c) 21 grants (2 in Call 1; 19 3 (VSIL).
constructively engage
in Call 2).
with policymakers on
(d) 1 research grant (CELA).
issues pertaining to legal
empowerment and access
to justice based on
demand-driven research.
(d) # of grants made to
civil society actors
(media, CSOs and
academics) to research
and report on corruption
and malpractice in the
justice sector, and to
enhance integrity and
transparency in the justice
sector.
Sub-result 2: A (a) # of CSO (a) 480 (a) 198 social organisations' (a) 270 social organisations' staff (45 CSOs in 3
minimum of 48 civil staff/members who people (48 staff (33 CSOs * 6 staff and calls * 6 staff and their partners); 81% female.
society organisations complete pre-grant CSOs * 10 their partners); 81% female. (b) 33 grants from Call 1 and 2 completed capacity
and networks in six awareness-raising and staff or (b) 33 grants from Call 1 and development plans. Call 3 just started with a series
focus provinces capacity development members/CS 2 completed capacity of training.
deliver better quality activities (disaggregated O); 50% development plans. (c) 13 grants in Call 1 + 1 grant in Call 2 achieved
legal services; by sex, ethnicity, and female; 25% (c) 2 grants in Call 1 set objectives.
undertake more region). ethnic achieved set objectives. (d) 29/33 grantees (Calls 1+2) met all financial,
effective, evidence- (b) % of JIFF grantees minorities; (d) 97% of grants met all accounting and reporting requirements.
based advocacy; and who complete capacity min. 30% in financial, accounting and
become more development plans and each region. reporting requirements.
report improvements in (b) 80%
129
Results chain Indicators Targets up Results by 31.10.2020 (call Results42 by 31.10.2021
to Dec 2022 1) (call 1 + 2)
effective their technical and (c) 90%
organisations. organisational capacity as (d) 90%
a result of JIFF coaching
and support.
(c) % of JIFF grants that
achieve their set
objectives and targets.
(d) % of grantees meeting
JIFF financial
management, accounting
and reporting
requirements.
Sub-result 3: (a) Number, type, and (a) Est. 15 (a) 2 CSOs representing JIFF (a) 12 grantees giving inputs for policy
Networking and location of CSOs CSOs in PAGoDA’s national recommendations on capacity building and legal
collaboration among participating in national (5/region) platforms. education on employment.
at least 50 CSOs and platform activities. representing (b) 1 policy dialogue on (b) 3 policy dialogues on grassroots dispute
policymakers (b) # of national dialogues JIFF grantees grassroots dispute mediation. medication, capacity building and education on
facilitates evidence- held between CSOs and (b) 4 (1 (c) 19 CSOs participating in employment.
based dialogue on policymakers that dialogue/year policy dialogues on (c) 31 CSO representatives participating in 3
JIFF priority topics generate specific follow- ) grassroots dispute mediation. policy dialogues. No local people could
and increases up plans. (c) Est. 50 pp/ participate.
transparency and (c) # of people dialogue
accountability in the participating in policy (40% from
justice sector. dialogues (from CSOs and govt, 40%
government, female, 20%
disaggregated by sex, ethnic
ethnicity, and region). minorities;
min. 25% per
region).
130
9.6 Relevant geographic map where the intervention took place
9.7 List of interviewed stakeholders during the Field Phase
No. Name, position, contacts Institution Modality Ref Gender
EU Delegation
1. Audrey Rochelemagne, EUJULE Project EU Briefing Donor/Development F
Manager/ Chargée de coopération Delegation to and de- partner
internationale Ha Noi briefing
Email:
Audrey.ROCHELEMAGNE@eeas.europa.eu
2. Jesus Lavina, Deputy Head of Cooperation De- Donor/Development M
Email : Jesus.LAVINA@eeas.europa.eu briefing partner
PMU/MoJ
3. Tran Thu Huong, Deputy Director ICD, KII IP F
Director of PMU. Email:
huongtt@moj.gov.vn
Ministry of Justice (MOJ)
1
4. Cù Thu Anh,Director-General National Discussion Direct Beneficiary F
Email : anhct@moj.gov.vn Legal Aid
Mob. : 0903201479 Agency
5. Dept. Nguyễn Thị Tố Hằng, Deputy Director Department of Discussion Direct Beneficiary F
nguyentohang@moj.gov.vn the State
compensation
6. Bach Quoc An, irector-General Department of Discussion Direct Beneficiary M
Email : anbq@moj.gov.vn International
law
7. Ms. Ngô Quỳnh Hoa, Deputy Director Department of Discussion Direct Beneficiary F
General, Legal
hoanq@moj.gov.vn Dissemination
and Education
UNDP
8. Diana Torres, UNDP Assistant Resident UNDP Hanoi KII IP F
Representative, Team leader of Project
Coordination Team
diana.torres@undp.org
9. Dao Thi Thu An, Project Manager UNDP Hanoi KII IP F
UNICEF
10. Lê Hồng Loan, Chief of Child Protection UNICEF IP F
Programme Hanoi
11. N guyen Thanh Truc, Child Protection UNICEF KII IP F
Specialist (child justice) Hanoi
nttruc@unicef.org
MOLISA
12. N guyen Van Binh, Director-General, MOLISA KII Direct Beneficiary M
Department of legal affairs
vanbinhir@gmail.com
OXFAM
13. Ph am Quang Tu, Oxfam Deputy Country Oxfam Discussion IP M
Director - JIFF team leader
tu.phamquang@oxfam.org
14. Tr an Thi Thu Hien - JIFF Programme Oxfam Discussion IP F
Manager
hien.tranthithu@oxfam.org
15. H oang Anh Dung - JIFF Project Officer Oxfam Discussion IP M
dung.hoanganh@oxfam.org
16. N guyen Thi Hong Van - JIFF Project Officer Oxfam Discussion IP F
van.nguyenthihong@oxfam.org
2
17. H a Quynh Anh - Project Assistant Oxfam Discussion IP F
anh.haquynh@oxfam.org
18. N guyen Thi Mai – MEL Specialist Oxfam Discussion IP F
mai.nguyenthi@oxfam.org
19. N guyen Thi Thu Hien - Senior Financial Oxfam Discussion IP F
Officer
hien.nguyenthithu@oxfam.org
Research Center for Initiatives in Community Development (RIC)
20. Lê Văn Hải – Director of RIC Center RIC, Hanoi Discussion Grantee M
21. N guyễn Bá Kim– Deputy Director of RIC RIC, Hanoi Discussion Grantee M
Center
22. Ph ạm Thị Ngọc Huyền – Project Officer of RIC, Hanoi Discussion Grantee F
RIC Center
23. N guyễn Thị Linh Ngọc - Deputy Director - Hoa Binh Discussion Local authority F
Department of Labor - Invalids and Social province
Affairs in Hoa Binh province
24. Ph ạm Thị Thanh Hiền - Head of Division of Hòa Binh Discussion Local authority F
Gender Equality, Child Welfare province
25. B ùi Thu Hiền - Vice President of Women's Thượng Cốc Discussion FB F
Union of Thuong Coc Commune, Lac Son commune,
District, Hoa Binh Province Lạc Sơn
District, Hòa
Binh province
26. B ùi Thị Hồng Thắm - Women's Union of Yên Phú Discussion FB F
Trang Doi hamlet, Yen Phu commune, Lac commune,
Son district, Hoa Binh province Lạc Sơn
district, Hòa
Bình province
Center for Legal Consulting and Legal Aid for Women and Children (LACEW)
27. Ph an Thị Thu Nga – Director of LACEW LACEW, Hoa Discussion Grantee F
Center Binh Province
28. Đ inh Hồng Quân – Project Officer LACEW, Hoa Discussion Grantee M
Binh Province
29. Đ inh Thị Nguyệt – Vice-Headmaster of Phu Phu Cuong, Discussion FB F
Cuong Kindergarten Hoa Binh
30. N guyễn Thị Phương - Vice-Headmaster of Phu Cuong, Discussion FB F
Phu Cuong Kindergarten Hoa Binh
31. Lê Thị Nhi - Vice-Headmaster of Phu Cuong Phu Cuong, Discussion FB F
Kindergarten Hoa Binh
32. Đ inh Thị Tuyết – Teacher of Phu Cuong Phu Cuong, Discussion FB F
Kindergarten Hoa Binh
3
33. B ùi Thị Xâm - Teacher of Phu Cuong Phu Cuong, Discussion FB F
Kindergarten, Ethnic minority Hoa Binh
34. B ùi Thị Binh - Teacher of Phu Cuong Phu Cuong, Discussion FB F
Kindergarten, Ethnic minority Hoa Binh
35. B ùi Thị Dứa - Teacher of Phu Cuong Phu Cuong, Discussion FB F
Kindergarten, Ethnic minority Hoa Binh
36. Đ àm Hải Yến - Teacher of Phu Cuong Phu Cuong, Discussion FB F
Kindergarten Hoa Binh
37. V ũ Thị Thia - Teacher of Phu Cuong Phu Cuong, Discussion FB F
Kindergarten Hoa Binh
38. B ùi Thị Hoà - Teacher of Phu Cuong Phu Cuong, Discussion FB F
Kindergarten, Ethnic minority Hoa Binh
39. B ùi Thị Đằng - Teacher of Phu Cuong Phu Cuong, Discussion FB F
Kindergarten, Ethnic minority Hoa Binh
40. B ùi Thị Thảo - Teacher of Phu Cuong Phu Cuong, Discussion FB F
Kindergarten, Ethnic minority Hoa Binh
41. B ùi Văn Tường - Teacher of Phu Cuong Phu Cuong, Discussion FB M
Kindergarten, Ethnic minority Hoa Binh
42. Ph ạm Thị Hoa - Teacher of Phu Cuong Phu Cuong, Discussion FB F
Kindergarten Hoa Binh
43. B ùi Thị Lựu - Teacher of Phu Cuong Phu Cuong, Discussion FB F
Kindergarten, Ethnic minority Hoa Binh
44. H à Thị Vân - Teacher of Phu Cuong Phu Cuong, Discussion FB F
Kindergarten Hoa Binh
45. B ùi Thị Chung - Teacher of Phu Cuong Phu Cuong, Discussion FB F
Kindergarten, Ethnic minority Hoa Binh
46. B ùi Thị Yến - Teacher of Phu Cuong Phu Cuong, Discussion FB F
Kindergarten, Ethnic minority Hoa Binh
47. B ùi Thị Huệ – Medical Staff of Phu Cuong Phu Cuong, Discussion FB F
Kindergarten Hoa Binh
48. Đ inh Thị Nga – Cooking Staff of Phu Cuong Phu Cuong, Discussion FB F
Kindergarten Hoa Binh
Vietnam Association for Protection of Child's Rights (VACR).
49. N inh Thi Hong- Vice president VACR, Hanoi Discussion Beneficiaries from F
the second call.
50. N guyen Thi Thu Ha- Project Coordinator VACR, Hanoi Discussion As above F
51. Le Thi Hoang Yen- Lawyer VACR, Hanoi Discussion As above F
52. N guyen Thu Hien-Lawyer VACR, Hanoi Discussion As above F
Action to the Community Development Center (ACDC)
4
53. N guyen Thi Lan Anh, Director ACDC, Hanoi Discussion Beneficiaries from F
the First call
54. Le Hai Yen, Team Leader of Legal Aid Dept. ACDC, Hanoi Discussion As above F
55. N guyen Thi Quy, Project Coordinator ACDC, Hanoi Discussion As above F
56. Tr an Thi Hong Nhung, Project Officer ACDC, Hanoi Discussion As above F
57. M ai Thi Lien, Head of Finance ACDC, Hanoi Discussion As above F
Hanoi Law University
58. N guyễn Văn uang, HLU, Hanoi Discussion. Direct beneficiary M
Head of ICD
Email : nguyenvanquang@hlu.edu.vn
Mob.: 0976804244
Ministry of Public Security (MPS)
59. N guyen Ngoc Hai, Deputy Director, Institute MPS, Hanoi Discussion Direct beneficiary M
for Police Science, The People’s Police
Academy
0976017099, hainn.tph@gmail.com
Vietnam Bar Federation (VBF)
60. La wyer, Dr. Do Ngoc Thinh, President VBF, Hanoi Discussion Direct beneficiary M
61. La wyer Tran Thuy Dung, Deputy Head of VBF, Hanoi Discussion Direct beneficiary F
VBF’s Office. dung.tt@liendoanluatsu.org.vn
62. Tr an Nguyen Hong, International Relation VBF, Hanoi Discussion Direct beneficiary M
Department,
Vietnam Judicial Support Association for the Poor (VIJUSAP)
63. D r. Ta Thi Minh Ly, President. 0837839988. VIJUSAP, Discussion Direct beneficiary F
Email: taminhly1@gmail.com Hanoi
64. N guyen Thi Anh Chi, staff responsible for VIJUSAP, Discussion Direct beneficiary F
Foreign Affairs Hanoi
65. Lu ong Thi Thuy, Legal aid to the poor expert VIJUSAP, Discussion Direct beneficiary F
Hanoi
Judicial Academy
66. Tr uong The Con, Deputy Director, Hanoi Discussion Direct beneficiary M
Email : truongthecon@yahoo.com; Mobile :
+84.912029216
67. V u Thu Hang, officer in charge of Hanoi Discussion Direct beneficiary F
international transactions.
Supreme People’s Procuracy (SPP)
68. H oàng Thị Quỳnh Chi, Director General, SPP, Hanoi Discussion Direct beneficiary F
Department for Legal and Science
Management
5
69. Lê Minh Long, Director General, Department SPP, Hanoi Discussion As above M
of Public Prosecution Exercise, and
Investigation of Social Order Cases
(Department 2).
70. N guyễn Đức Hạnh, Vice Dean, Hanoi Police SPP, Hanoi Discussion As above M
University.
71. H oàng Thị Thúy Hòa, Department for SPP, Hanoi Discussion As above F
International Cooperation
72. Đ ỗ Nguyệt Quế, Deputy Director, Department SPP, Hanoi Discussion As above M
of Criminal Statistics, and Information
Technology
73. N guyễn Như Hùng, Director, Department of SPP, Hanoi Discussion As above M
IT and Crime Statistics.
Grant Committee
74. N guyễn Tuyết Mai, Ministry of Home Affairs. Hanoi Discussion Members of the F
0904528000, nguyentuyetmai73@gmail.com grant committee
75. N guyễn Sĩ Dũng, Former Vice Chairman, the Hanoi Discussion As above M
Office of the National Assembly,
0913237487, nguyensidung@gmail.com
76. Lư ơng Thị Trường, expert in development of Hanoi Discussion As above F
minorities,
0913038782 luongthitruong04@yahoo.com
Call 1 Grantees – Group discussion
77. N guyễn Hồng Oanh, Director, Center of Hanoi Discussion Grantee from the F
Research and Inclusive Development Action First call
(IDEA)
78. Ph ạm Thị Sâm, Communication officer, Hanoi Discussion As above F
Centre for Indigenous Knowledge Research
and Development (CIRD)
79. Lê Thị Dịu, project officer, Hanoi Association Hanoi Discussion As above F
of People with Disabilities (DP Hanoi)
80. Ph an Thị Bích Diệp, Standing Vice Hanoi Discussion As above F
Chairwomen, Hanoi Association of People
with Disabilities (DP Hanoi)
81. Tr ần Vân Anh, Programme Director, Hanoi Discussion As above F
Management and Sustainable Development
Institute (MSD)
82. Lê Xuân Đảng, project officer, Vietnam Hanoi Discussion As above M
Association of the Elderly (VAE)
83. Ph ạm Thị Thanh Nhàn, project accountant, Hanoi Discussion As above F
Vietnam Association of the Elderly (VAE)
6
Call 2 Grantees – Group discussion
84. Ph ạm Thùy Dương, project staff, Center for Hanoi Discussion Grantee from the F
Research and Education of the Deaf and Hard Second call
of Hearing (CED)
85. Tr iệu Thúy Mi, Project Manager, Center for Hanoi Discussion As above F
Research and Education of the Deaf and Hard
of Hearing (CED)
86. Tô Thị Bích Phương, Deputy Director, Center Hanoi Discussion As above F
for Research and Education of the Deaf and
Hard of Hearing (CED)
87. N guyễn Đình Toán, Project Director, Center Hanoi Discussion As above F M
for Social Work Skills and Knowledge
Development (CSWD)
88. N guyễn Thị Nga, Project staff, Center of Legal Hanoi Discussion As above F
Advice for Poor People and Community
Development (LAC)
89. N guyễn Hải Hữu, Project Director, Vietnam Hanoi Discussion As above M
Association for Vocational Education
Training and Social Work Profession
(VAVETSOW)
90. Tr ần Thị Hồng Hải, General Deputy Director, Hanoi Discussion As above F
Department for Foreign Affairs, Women and
Children, Vietnam Blind Association (VBA)
91. N guyễn Thị Thanh Hường, Communication & Hanoi Discussion As above F
M&E officer, Association for Empowerment
of Persons with Disabilities (AEPD)
92. N guyễn Thị Phương Hảo, Programme Hanoi Discussion As above F
Manager, Association for Empowerment of
Persons with Disabilities (AEPD)
93. Tr ịnh Quang Chiến, Deputy Director, Center Hanoi Discussion As above M
for Consulting on Legal and Policy on Health
and HIV/AIDS (CCLPHH)
94. N guyễn Thị Kim Hoa, Project staff, Center for Hanoi Discussion As above F
Social Work Skills and Knowledge
Development (CSWD)
95. Ph ạm Đình Nghinh, Vice Chairman, HCMC HCMC Discussion As above M
Association for Protection of Child Rights
(HCMCACR)
96. N gô Dương, Project Manager, the Center for HCMC Discussion As above M
Legal Advice (CELA)
7
97. Tr ần Thị Loan, staff, the Center for Legal HCMC Discussion As above F
Advice (CELA)
98. Ph ạm Thị Hiền, Project Administrative HCMC Discussion As above F
Assistant, the Center for Legal Advice
(CELA)
99. Đ inh Việt Anh, Vice President, Vietnam Blind Hanoi Discussion As above F
Association (VBA)
100. N guyên Thị Thanh Hương, Project officer, Hanoi Discussion As above F
Vietnam Federation for Persons with
Disabilities (VFD)
101. Đ ặng Văn Thanh, Project Director, Vietnam Hanoi Discussion As above M
Federation for Persons with Disabilities
(VFD)
102. N guyễn Thị Thùy Trang, Project Accountant, Hanoi Discussion As above F
Center for Research and Education of the Deaf
and Hard of Hearing (CED)
Supreme People’s Court
103. B ùi Thị Nhàn, Deputy Director General, Hanoi Discussion. Direct beneficiary F
Department of International Cooperation.
nhanbuihtqt@gmail.com
104. D irector-General Deputy Director General, Hanoi Discussion As above F
General Affairs Department
105. H oàng Phong Mai, Head of Criminal Division, Hanoi Discussion As above F
Legal Department
106. Ph ạm Như Hưng, Deputy Director, Court Hanoi Discussion As above M
Academy. nhuhunghvta@gmail.com
Dong Thap Family & Juvenile Court
107. M s. Nguyen Thi Thuy Hang, Chief Justice, Dong Thap Discussion. Direct beneficiary F
F&JC
Beneficiaries of ACDC (Nghệ An)
108. N guyễn Hải Thành, member of the Thanh Discussion FB M
Association of People with Disabilities of Chuong, Nghe
Thanh Chuong District, Nghe An Province An
109. Lê Thị Ánh, member of the Association of Thanh Discussion FB F
People with Disabilities of Thanh Chuong Chuong, Nghe
District, Nghe An Province An
110. N guyễn Thị Thu Trang, member of the Thanh Discussion FB F
Association of People with Disabilities of Chuong, Nghe
Thanh Chuong District, Nghe An Province An
8
111. Lê Văn Thịnh, member of the Association of Vinh City, Discussion FB M
People with Disabilities of Vinh City, Nghe Nghe An
An Province
112. V ũ Thị Hiền, member of the Association of Vinh City, Discussion FB F
People with Disabilities of Vinh City, Nghe Nghe An
An Province
113. N guyễn Văn Hà, member of the Association Thanh Discussion FB M
of People with Disabilities of Thanh Chuong Chuong, Nghe
District, Nghe An Province An
114. Lê Thị Mỹ Anh, member of the Association of Thanh Discussion FB F
People with Disabilities of Thanh Chuong Chuong, Nghe
District, Nghe An Province An
115. Ph ạm Thị Na, member of the Association of Thanh Discussion FB F
People with Disabilities of Thanh Chuong Chuong, Nghe
District, Nghe An Province An
116. B ùi Văn Tính, member of the Association of Thanh Discussion FB M
People with Disabilities of Thanh Chuong Chuong, Nghe
District, Nghe An Province An
117. C hu Vĩnh Đức, member of the Association of Vinh City, Discussion FB M
People with Disabilities of Vinh City, Nghe Nghe An
An Province
118. Th ái Khắc Hoàng, President of the Vinh City, Discussion Direct beneficiary M
Association of People with Disabilities of Nghe An
Nghe An Province
119. Lư u Thị Hà, Chairwoman of the Club of Vinh City, Discussion Direct beneficiary F
Women with Disabilities of Nghe An Province Nghe An
120. Tr ần Thị Như Học, member of the Association Vinh City, Discussion FB F
of People with Disabilities of Vinh City, Nghe Nghe An
An Province
121. Ph an Duy Đứng, member of the Association Vinh City, Discussion FB M
of People with Disabilities of Vinh City, Nghe Nghe An
An Province
122. H oàng Thị Thanh, member of the Association Vinh City, Discussion FB F
of People with Disabilities of Vinh City, Nghe Nghe An
An Province
123. N guyễn Thị Thắng, member of the Thanh Discussion FB F
Association of People with Disabilities of Chuong, Nghe
Thanh Chuong District, Nghe An Province An
124. N guyễn Thị Mỹ Anh, member of the Thanh Discussion FB F
Association of People with Disabilities of Chuong, Nghe
Thanh Chuong District, Nghe An Province An
9
Legal Aid Centre under Department of Justice of Nghe An Province
125. N guyen Ngoc Thanh, Director of Legal Aid Vinh City, Discussion Direct beneficiary M
Center under Department of Justice of Nghe Nghe An
An Province
126. H oang Thi Thu Hang, Officer of Legal Aid Vinh City, Discussion Direct beneficiary F
Center under Department of Justice of Nghe Nghe An
An Province
Legal Consultancy Centre under Lawyer Association of Nghe An
127. Tr ần Thị Khánh Hương, Officer of Legal Vinh City, Discussion Direct beneficiary F
Consultancy Centre under Lawyer Nghe An
Association of Nghe An
128. H oàng Thị Liên, Director of Legal Vinh City, Discussion Direct beneficiary F
Consultancy Centre under Lawyer Nghe An
Association of Nghe An
Vietnam Lawyers’ Association
129. Le Thi Kim Thanh, Vice Chair Ha Noi Discussion Direct beneficiary F
130. N guyen Thi Phuong Thao, Head of the Ha Noi Discussion Direct beneficiary F
International division
Legal Aid Centre under Department of Justice of Quang Binh Province
131. H oang Thi Le Hai – Head of Legal Education Dong Hoi, Discussion Direct beneficiary F
Department, Department of Justice of Quang Quang Binh
Binh province
132. N guyen Ba Thanh – Deputy Director of State Dong Hoi, Discussion Direct beneficiary M
Legal Aid Center, Department of Justice of Quang Binh
Quang Binh province
Quang Binh Women's Development Fund (QBWDF)
133. Đ ỗ Thị Bích Thủy, Standing Vice President of Dong Hoi, Discussion Direct beneficiary F
Provincial Women's Union, Fund Director, Quang Binh
Head of Project Management Board of Quang
Binh Province
134. H oàng Thị Tố Như, Deputy Director of the Dong Hoi, Discussion Direct beneficiary F
Fund/Project Manager of the Fund for Quang Binh
Supporting Women Development in Quang
Binh Province
135. N guyễn Phương Huyền, Officer, Legal Dong Hoi, Discussion Direct beneficiary F
Counseling Center of the Provincial Women's Quang Binh
Union
136. N guyễn Công Huy, Project Accountant of the Dong Hoi, Discussion Direct beneficiary M
Fund to Support Women Development in Quang Binh
Quang Binh Province
10
137. N guyễn Thị Lệ Quyên, Supervisor of the Fund Dong Hoi, Discussion Direct beneficiary F
for Women's Development in Quang Binh Quang Binh
Province
138. V õ Thị Mỹ Hồng, Chairman of Women's Nhan Trach, Discussion Direct beneficiary F
Union in Nhan Trach Commune, Bo Trach Quang Binh
District, Quang Binh Province
139. N guyễn Thị Thành, Communication officer of Dong Hoi, Discussion Direct beneficiary F
the Quang Binh Provincial Women's Quang Binh
Development Support Fund project
140. N guyễn Thị Nguyệt, Citizen in Nhan Tien Nhan Trach, Discussion FB F
Village, Nhan Trach Commune, Bo Trach Quang Binh
District, Quang Binh Province
Quang Binh Rural Development and Poverty Reduction Fund (RDPR)
141. Ph ạm Mậu Tài, RDPR Director Dong Hoi, Discussion Direct beneficiary M
Quang Binh
142. H oàng Thị Phương Thảo, RDPR Officer Dong Hoi, Discussion Direct beneficiary F
Quang Binh
143. V õ Thành Đồng, Vice President of Truong Quang Ninh Discussion Direct beneficiary M
Xuan Ward People Committee, Quang Ninh District,
District, Quang Binh Province Quang Binh
144. N guyễn Văn Hiển, Justice Officer of Truong Quang Ninh Discussion Direct beneficiary M
Xuan Ward People Committee District,
Quang Binh
145. N guyễn Thị Quyên, Citizen of Truong Xuan Quang Ninh Discussion FB F
Ward District,
Quang Binh
146. H ồ Thị Mai, Citizen of Truong Xuan Ward Quang Ninh Discussion FB F
District,
Quang Binh
147. H ồ Thị Thế, Citizen of Truong Xuan Ward Quang Ninh Discussion FB F
District,
Quang Binh
Disability Research and Capacity Development Center
(DRD) and beneficiaries of DRD
148. N guyen Van Cu, Deputy Director of DRD HCMC Discussion Direct beneficiary M
149. N guyen Thanh Tung, Project Officer DRD HCMC Discussion Direct beneficiary M
150. N guyen Ha Bich Phuong, DRD HCMC Discussion Direct beneficiary F
Communication Officer
151. Tr uong Thi Hoa, Lawyer, Representative of HCMC Discussion Direct beneficiary F
Law Office Truong Thi Hoa
11
152. La m Thi Kim Thao, member of a group of HCMC Discussion Direct beneficiary F
legal aid collaborators in Ho Chi Minh City,
Chairman of the Association of the Blind in
District 1.
153. V u Huy Tuong Nha, member of a group of HCMC Discussion Direct beneficiary M
legal aid collaborators in Ho Chi Minh City,
Chairman of the Association of the Blind in
District 10
154. N guyen Cong Minh, beneficiary in HCMC HCMC Discussion FB M
155. N guyen Thi Thanh Huong - project officer in Dong Hoi, Discussion Direct beneficiary F
Quang Binh Quang Binh
156. Tr uong Minh Hoc - member of a group of Dong Hoi, Discussion Direct beneficiary M
legal aid collaborators in Quang Binh Quang Binh
157. H oang Van Luu - member of a group of legal Dong Hoi, Discussion Direct beneficiary M
aid collaborators in Quang Binh Quang Binh
158. N guyen Dinh Thi - member of a group of legal Dong Hoi, Discussion Direct beneficiary M
aid collaborators in Quang Binh Quang Binh
159. N guyen Thi Luyen - member of a group of Dong Hoi, Discussion Direct beneficiary F
legal aid collaborators in Quang Binh Quang Binh
160. N guyen Thi Tuyet Hanh - Beneficiary in Dong Hoi, Discussion FB F
Quang Binh Quang Binh
161. D o Thi Lien - Beneficiary in Quang Binh Dong Hoi, Discussion FB F
Quang Binh
Social Development Training Center (SDTC), Ton Duc
Thang University
162. V ũ Văn Hiệu, Project Coordinator of the HCMC Discussion Direct beneficiary M
SDTC
163. Tă ng Hữu Tân, Director of the SDTC HCMC Discussion Direct beneficiary M
Social Sciences and Humanities Research Center
(SHRC), and Justice Department of Dong Thap Province
164. N guyen Truc Lam: Director of the Center for Dong Thap Discussion Direct beneficiary M
Research in Social Sciences and Humanities
165. N guyen Van Trung: Director of the State Dong Thap Discussion Direct beneficiary M
Legal Aid Center of Dong Thap Province
166. Ly Ngoc Binh: Head of Branch No. 02: State Dong Thap Discussion Direct beneficiary M
Legal Aid Center of Dong Thap Province
167. H uynh Thi Phuong Thinh: Deputy Head of Dong Thap Discussion Direct beneficiary F
Legal Education Department - Department of
Justice of Dong Thap province
168. Th ai Huynh Phuong Lan: Project Coordinator Dong Thap Discussion Direct beneficiary F
169. M ai Thi Van: Project officer Dong Thap Discussion Direct beneficiary F
12
170. Q uach Thi Hong: Project officer Dong Thap Discussion Direct beneficiary F
171. Le Thi Hong Hanh: Project officer Dong Thap Discussion Direct beneficiary F
Total: 171 consulted persons (117 female, 52 male), in 32 institutions/units.
9.8 List of documentation and literature consulted
• Multi-Annual Indicative Programming for the NDICI-Global Europe Thematic Programme on
Human Rights and Democracy 2021-2027, available at https://ec.europa.eu/international-
partnerships/system/files/mip-2021-c2021-9620-human-rights-democracy-annex_en.pdf<<last
visited 8.01.2022>>
• Viet Nam’s Voluntary National Review- Key Messages. Voluntary National Review 2018.
Available at
https://sustainabledevelopment.un.org/content/documents/19297VIET_NAM_VNR_Key_Mess
agesViet_Namedited.pdf, last visited <<1.01.2022>>
• HRC Recommendation 143.94 “Consider at least further restricting the use of the death penalty
only for the most serious crimes, as stated in article 6 of ICCPR with a view to soon adopting a
de facto moratorium on executions” (A/HRC/26/6)
• Civil Society Report on the Implementation of the ICCPR (Replies to the List of Issues
CCPR/C/VNM/Q/3). Review of the third State Report of Viet Nam (CCPR/C/VNM/3) At the
125th session of the Human Rights Committee. Geneva, 4 – 29 March 2019.
• Information received from Viet Nam on follow-up to the concluding observations on its third
periodic report. CCPR/C/VNM/FCO/3. April 2021
• Understanding Effective Access to Justice. 3-4 November 2016. OECD Conference Centre, Paris
• Support to Programming of ODA 2014-2020 in Vietnam. Formulation report. April 2014.
• The New European Consensus on Development ‘Our World, Our Dignity, Our Future’.
A/Res/71/256
• Overview of the Legal System of Vietnam Council of ASEAN Chief Justices (no date). ASEAN
Chief Justices.
• Climate Change and Environment. Gender Action Plan III: An Ambitious Vision on Gender
Equality and Women’s Empowerment for EU External Action. EC. 2021
• JIFF’s 4 Annual Report. 1 November 2020 – 31 October 2021
13