Final Report
Final Report
Strategic Positioning Evaluation of the
UNICEF Afghanistan Country Programme
2015–21
4 August 2021
Authors: Pierre Townsend, Natalie Hicks, Enrico Leonardi, Katie Tong
Submitted by Itad
Itad 4 August 2021
Final Report
Acknowledgements
The evaluation team would like to thank all those who have supported and informed this Report on the
Strategic Positioning Evaluation of the UNICEF Country Programme 2015–21. We are particularly
grateful to the core UNICEF team members who have been involved in the evaluation – Tom Pellens,
Esther Kaggwa, Stanley Gwavuya, Ivan Ssenkubuge and Minaa Rayan – the UNICEF Afghanistan Country
Office, the UNICEF Regional Office for South Asia and the Evaluation Reference Group, which have guided,
informed and supported the inception phase, provided access to key documents, and facilitated
discussions with key stakeholders.
This report was co-written by Pierre Townsend, Evaluation Team Leader; Natalie Hicks, Senior Advisor,
and Katie Tong and Enrico Leonardi, Core Team Members. The evaluation team would like to thank: David
Fleming, Quality Assurance Lead, for the Quality Assurance of this report; Becka Kindler, Project Manager;
and Vince Evans-Gutierrez, Project Officer.
Disclaimer
The views expressed in this report are those of the evaluators. They do not represent those of UNICEF or
of any of the individuals and organisations referred to in the report.
‘Itad’ and the tri-colour triangles icon are a registered trademark of Itad Ltd.
Itad 4 August 2021 i
Final Report
Contents
Contents 2
List of acronyms 4
Executive Summary 8
Introduction 15
Evaluation Background 15
Context 15
Evaluation Timeline 15
Evaluation Purpose and Intended Use 15
Evaluation Objectives and Scope 16
Evaluation Methodology 18
Overall Design, Evaluation Questions and Criteria 18
Data Collection Methods, Sampling and Analysis 19
Data Collection Methods 19
Sampling 21
Data Analysis Methods 25
Integration of Gender, Equity and Human Rights in Methods, Sampling and Analysis 26
Ethical Considerations and Quality Assurance 26
Ethical Considerations 26
Quality Assurance 27
Limitations 27
UNICEF’s Country Programme and its Context 29
The Afghanistan Country Programme 29
Programme Content and Operational Structure 29
The 2017 Mid-Term Review 30
The Evaluation’s Key Focus Areas and their Relevance to the ACP 31
Context of the Intervention 32
Developments in the Political and Security Landscape 32
Changes in National Policy Frameworks During the Period of Study 33
Impact of the Context on the ACP since 2015 35
Balancing Strategic Objectives with Escalating Needs 35
Progress in Implementing the Triple Nexus 35
Strategy to Achieve Access, Coverage and Equity for Women and Children 36
Capacity Building 37
Itad 4 August 2021 2
Final Report
Gender Integration 37
Findings 38
Focus Area 1: the Nexus 38
Programme Design and Internal Positioning in Support of the Triple Nexus 38
4.1.2 System-Wide Engagement and Positioning in Support of the Nexus 48
Focus Area 2: Coverage and Access 51
Equity and Multi-Sectoral Programming for the Welfare of Children 51
Approaches to Access 56
Focus Area 3: Partnerships and Capacity Building 66
Partnerships with Governmental and Non-Governmental Actors 66
Focus Area 4: Gender Integration 73
Gender Integration in Programme Planning and Practice 73
UNICEF Partnerships and System-Wide Positioning to Promote Gender 80
Conclusions, Lessons Learned and Recommendations 83
Focus Area 1: The Nexus 84
Focus Area 2: Coverage and Access 85
Focus Area 3: Partnerships and Capacity Building 87
Focus Area 4: Gender 88
Recommendations 89
Annexes 93
Terms of Reference 93
Evaluation Matrix 122
Sampling Principles and Guidelines for the Evaluation 133
Key Informant Question Guide 139
List of Key Informant Categories and Interviewees 157
Survey Questions 162
Disaggregation of Respondent Sample 170
Budgetary Categorisation of ACP Outputs 173
Bibliography 177
Itad Principles and Values 180
Overview of Itad’s approach to QA 181
Itad 4 August 2021 3
Final Report
List of acronyms
AAA ActionAid Afghanistan
ACO Afghanistan Country Office
ACP Afghanistan Country Programme
ALNAP Active Learning Network for Accountability and Performance
AMP Annual Management Plan
ANDP Afghanistan National Development Strategy
ANPDF Afghanistan National Peace and Development Framework
AoR Area of Responsibility
A-SDG Afghanistan Sustainable Development Goal
AWLI Afghan Women’s Leadership Initiative
AWP Annual Work Plan
BPHS Basic Package of Health Services
C4D Communication for Development
CAHD Community Approaches to Handicap in Development
CB Capacity Building
CBE Community-Based Education
CBI Cash-Based Intervention
CBS Community-Based School
CCCs Core Commitments for Children
CDC Community Development Council
CEDAW Committee on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women
CEO Chief Executive Officer
CFS Child-Friendly School
CHW Community Health Worker
CLTS Community-led Total Sanitation
CMT Country Management Team
CoAR Coordination of Afghan Relief
CP Child Protection
CPAN Child Protection Action Network
CPAP Country Programme Action Plan
CPD Country Programme Document
CRC UN Committee on the Rights of the Child
CS Conflict Sensitivity
CSO Civil Society Organisation
DACAAR Danish Committee for Aid to Afghan Refugees
DAD Development Assistance Database
DOE Department of Education
DOLSA Department of Labour and Social Affairs
DOPH Department of Public Health
DRRD Department of Rural Reconstruction and Development
ECHO European Civil Protection and Humanitarian Aid Operations
EiE Education in Emergencies
EOC Emergency Operations Centre
EPI Expanded Programme of Immunisation
EPP Emergency Preparedness Platform
ER Emergency Response
ERG Evaluation Reference Group
ET Evaluation Team
EU European Union
EVAW End Violence Against Women
Itad 4 August 2021 4
Final Report
FA Focus Area
FO Field Office
GAP Gender Action Plan
GATE Girls’ Access to Teacher’s Education
GBV Gender-Based Violence
GDP Gross Domestic Product
GDI Gender Development Index
GEM Gender Equality Marker
GIRoA The Government of the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan
GPE Global Partnership for Education
GPR Gender Programmatic Review
GRIP Guidance on Risk-Informed Programming
HNO Humanitarian Needs Overview
HNTPO HealthNet Transcultural Social Organisation (NGO)
HP Harmful Practices
HQ Headquarters
HRDA Human Resources Development Agency (NGO)
IASC Inter-Agency Standing Committee
ICN Immunisation Communication Network
IDP Internally Displaced Person
INGO International Non-Governmental Organisation
IP Implementing Partner
IRC International Rescue Committee
ISAF International Security Assistance Force
JCMB Joint Coordination Monitoring Board
KAP Knowledge Attitude Practice Survey
KEQ Key Evaluation Question
KII Key Informant Interview
KM Knowledge Management
LHD Linking Humanitarian and Development
LoE Level of Effort
LTA Long-Term Agreement
M&E Monitoring and Evaluation
MHM Menstrual Health Management
MNCH Maternal, Newborn and Child Health
MoE Ministry of Education
MoJ Ministry of Justice
MoLSA Ministry of Labor and Social Affairs
MoPH Ministry of Public Health
MRRD Ministry of Reconstruction and Rural Development
MSP Multi-Sectoral Programming
MTR Mid-Term Review
NAP National Action Plan
NESP National Education Sector Plan
NGO Non-Governmental Organisation
NPP National Priority Programme
NTA National Technical Advisor
NUG National Unity Government
ODK Open Data Kit
OCHA United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
Itad 4 August 2021 5
Final Report
OECD-DAC Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development’s Development
Assistance Committee
OH Outcome Harvesting
OIC Organisation of Islamic Cooperation
OR Other Resources
P&M Planning & Monitoring
PCA Project Coordination Agreement
PIDB Programme Information Database
PO Project Officer
PSEA Protection Against Sexual Exploitation and Abuse
PSN Programme Strategy Note
QA Quality Assurance
RAM Results Assessment Module
RIP Risk-Informed Programming
ROSA Regional Office of South Asia
RR Regular Resources
RWP Rolling Workplan
SDG Sustainable Development Goal
SIDA Swedish International Development Agency
SIGAR Special Inspector General for Afghanistan Reconstruction
SLT Saving Lives Together
SMQ Strategic Monitoring Question
SOP Standard Operating Procedure
SPE Strategic Positioning Evaluation
SPEAR Social Policy Evaluation and Research
SRM Security Risk Management
TA Technical Assistant
ToC Theory of Change
ToR Terms of Reference
TPM Third-Party Monitor
UK United Kingdom
UN United Nations
UNAMA United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
UNCT United Nations Country Team
UNDAF United Nations Development Assistance Framework
UNDP United Nations Development Programme
UNDSS United Nations Department for Safety and Security
UNEG United Nations Evaluation Group
UNFPA United Nations Population Fund
UNHCR United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
UNICEF United Nations Children's Fund
UNSCR United Nations Security Council Resolution
US United States of America
USAID United States Agency for International Development
VWO Voice of Women Organization
WADAN Welfare Association for the Development of Afghanistan
WASH Water, Sanitation and Hygiene
WASSA Women Activities & Social Service Association
WCUK War Child – United Kingdom (NGO)
WEE Women’s Economic Empowerment
WoA Whole of Afghanistan
Itad 4 August 2021 6
Final Report
WHO World Health Organization
WFP World Food Programme
Itad 4 August 2021 7
Final Report
Executive Summary
Purpose
The Strategic Positioning Evaluation (SPE) of the United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF)
Afghanistan Country Programme (ACP) 2015–21 was commissioned by the UNICEF Regional Office of
South Asia (ROSA) and conducted by Itad. The purpose of this evaluation is threefold. First, it aims to
inform the design at country level of the next country programme 2022–25. Second, it aims to foster
organisational learning about what works and does not work within a fragile and conflict-affected
setting like Afghanistan. Third, the evaluation serves an accountability purpose. The evaluation was
organised around four focus areas (FAs) in line with the purpose and objectives of the evaluation: (1)
integration of and positioning for a strengthened humanitarian, development and peace nexus; (2)
coverage and access to achieve equitable results for children at scale; (3) partnerships and
institutional strengthening and capacity building (CB); and (4) gender integration into programme
and advocacy work.
Methodology
Data collection for the evaluation was conducted between February and April 2021, and drew on a
mix of qualitative and quantitative methods, consisting of a document review, key informant
interviews (KIIs) and online surveys. Data collection on the ground focused on a geographical sample
comprised of the Southern and Eastern regions of Afghanistan and a sectoral sample consisting of
Health, Education, Child Protection and Water, Sanitation and Hygiene (WASH), for study at national
and subnational levels.
Respondent samples sought to achieve gender balance where possible, and were assembled from
UNICEF staff and contracted personnel, other UN agency personnel, local and international non-
governmental organisations (NGOs), donors, government representatives, and province-based
respondents, including frontline workers.
Summary of Findings and Conclusions
Focus Area 1: The Triple Nexus
Internal Positioning in Support of the Triple Nexus
The evaluation team found that a significant gap exists between nexus policy and planning, which
are advanced in their development, and nexus implementation at programme level, which is heavily
constrained by an adverse operating environment.
In all sectors examined, humanitarian delivery aims to draw on local capabilities which the
Afghanistan Country Office (ACO) is actively helping to develop. Overall, about the same amount of
resources is budgeted per sector outcome to development interventions (CB, resilience) as to
humanitarian ones. This denotes that humanitarian and development outputs are designed to work
in concert, and to contribute jointly to sector results. Despite the building of local capacities, this
close integration in programme design does not always cross over to implementation, where
humanitarian-development linkages are heavily undermined by contextual obstacles outside the
scope of programming. The nexus is an imperfect paradigm for some of UNICEF’s activities in
Afghanistan. Nonetheless, in their implementation, development and humanitarian interventions
can generally complement each other well if the context allows, and the synergistic relationship
between humanitarian and development activities was generally viewed as self-evident by ACO and
other United Nations (UN) personnel.
There are mixed perceptions around the strength of ACO’s practical understanding of peacebuilding
objectives and how to integrate them at programme level, and, while respondents provided
examples of the ACP’s contribution to peace, evidence to support this is anecdotal. Further, there is
Itad 4 August 2021 8
Final Report
limited understanding and use among staff of UNICEF guidance on peacebuilding and conflict
sensitivity.
UNICEF Comparative Advantage in Promoting the Nexus
In Afghanistan, UNICEF’s comparative advantage derives mainly from its dual mandate and its
sectoral expertise, including in education, child protection, WASH and immunisation. In its work to
advance the humanitarian-development nexus, ACO has generally used this advantage well, notably
by building linkages across the two pillars of its country programme. Risk is proactively managed and
widely understood to be an entry point for furthering humanitarian-development integration. This is
illustrated well in ACO’s response to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Risk Management, Risk-informed Programming and Preparedness
In managing risk and preparing for it, ACO largely complies with formal process requirements.
However, there is little evidence that this contributes to better risk preparedness and management.
Rather, alongside its compliance with formal systems and processes, ACO manages risk on a largely
ad hoc and tactical basis. This approach is better suited to Afghanistan’s operational environment, in
which risk is widespread, multi-faceted and fast-changing. The formal risk management and
preparedness systems in place are not agile enough to support appropriate programme responses in
the local context. They do, however, help to ensure that minimal standards are met in programme
preparedness.
Although field offices feed into risk management and context analysis processes, the extent to which
their inputs is taken up in ACO-wide risk analysis appears limited. Their more active participation in
these processes would improve the overall quality of analysis used to inform ACO-wide
programming.
Leadership in Integrating Humanitarian, Development and Peacebuilding Across the Aid System in
Afghanistan
While there is good evidence to show that ACO has proactively engaged with stakeholders in
support of the nexus, it is equally notable that it has—rightly—resisted pressure to do so when the
likelihood of success was limited.
ACO’s presence on sector-specific platforms is prominent and well received. However, advocacy
work in support of the nexus for the welfare of children is generally viewed as overly cautious by
partners and donors. There is also a sense that ACO should invest more resources and senior
management time in stakeholder engagement and outward-facing positioning.
Focus Area 2: Coverage and Access
Equity
Following the Mid-Term Review (MTR) of the ACP conducted in 2017, ACO has largely abandoned its
approach to prioritising needs on the basis of focus provinces. Since the MTR, it has also acquired
greater risk appetite in accessing hard-to-reach areas. This has allowed it to be more successful in
achieving a good balance between addressing the needs of the most vulnerable and expanding the
surface of its programme coverage. However, the ACO continues to face significant challenges in
assessing needs in hard-to-reach areas and in its monitoring of results in these areas, and this
constrains its ability to address equity.
In the past three years, ACO’s approach to equity has been pragmatic rather than being guided by a
set prioritisation strategy. This pragmatism has helped it navigate the significant contextual
challenges to achieving equity in programme coverage. The diversity in approaches can yield
valuable lessons and can serve to develop good practices around which programme sectors can
gradually cohere to yield combined equity gains. A pragmatic approach is well suited, and the
resulting lack of consistency in approaches is not a concern per se. However, it does call for clarity
Itad 4 August 2021 9
Final Report
on red lines and best practice in expanding coverage, as without guiding principles the multiple
approaches used in the pursuit of equity in programming may become disparate over time.
Multi-Sectoral Programming
Since 2020, ACO’s approach to multi-sectoral programming has become less theoretical and better
rooted in implementation and practice. ACO has made good use of strategies and guidelines in this
area. It has also seized opportunities to formalise and consolidate programme convergence, when
circumstances on the ground had caused programmes to converge spontaneously. But multiple
obstacles still exist to further progress in multi-sectoral programming, including sector siloes, the
slow pace of decentralisation, a supply-side approach to programme selection, and the sector-
specific dynamics of cooperation with line ministries.
Programme Strategy and Implementation in Support of Access
ACO does not have a formal strategy to access areas outside immediate government control, and
this gives it some latitude to pursue access pragmatically. Of the multiple approaches used, the most
successful are: to secure access through local implementing partners or extenders and frontline
workers; and to leverage acceptance gained among local stakeholders through the delivery of
programmes at community level. The reliance on partners and contractors to secure access entails
risks both to these actors and to ACO. While formalising a strategy on access may ultimately prove
constraining, there is evidence of a need to more clearly spell out red lines and good practices in
securing access.
Across the ACP, improvements in programme agility and adaptiveness are closely tied to progress in
decentralisation and to the provision of increased support and latitude needed by field offices to
respond more autonomously to changes in their immediate environment (‘Freedom in a
Framework’), i.e. in the conduct of context analyses and in the staging of the required programme
responses on the ground.
Conflict Sensitivity
With one exception in WASH, conflict sensitivity is currently not applied to ACO programming. ACO
staff had a very generic understanding of the concept and application of conflict sensitivity, which
aims to minimise the risk that aid interventions unwittingly fuel conflict or other adverse events.
Related UNICEF guidance which prescribes conflict sensitivity as a minimum requirement in peace
programming was not widely known by ACO staff, and there are multiple interpretations of what
conflict sensitivity means in terms of programming. The fluidity and complexity of the operating
environment in Afghanistan makes it very difficult to apply conflict sensitivity principles in
programming, and the high granularity required for this is not typically present in the analysis work
conducted by ACO. Limited use is made of contextual knowledge held by partners and contractors.
In addition, the complex interplay between conflict sensitivity, stakeholder engagement and routine
programme processes is not well understood.
Utilisation of Extenders and TPMs
Increasing use has been made of extenders during the current ACP period, primarily to expand
programme coverage in contested areas. The deployment of female extenders has been constrained
by cultural barriers, but the use of males to escort them has partly remedied this.
Although extenders have been key to programme expansion, their increased use has come with new
risks, including that of blurring the accountability of ACO staff for last-mile programme delivery. New
standard operating procedures (SOPs) have helped remedy this, but there remains room for
progress. The monitoring of extenders and the verification of information reported by them are also
areas in need of improvement.
The use of third-party monitors (TPMs) is currently limited in the ACP, due to problems encountered
with contractors. While TPMs are not intended to replace the regular field monitoring of the ACO
Itad 4 August 2021 10
Final Report
staff, extenders, or the implementing partners, their limited use is causing an over-reliance on these
other monitoring actors. This is true even as these actors cannot substitute for the independence of
TPMs, given their active involvement in the monitored programmes. Additionally, a lack of an
additional verification and validation layer in the overall monitoring architecture of the ACO has led
to a piecemeal approach that falls below accountability and learning requirements. Further human
and resource investments are required to institute a comprehensive TPM system that is fit for
purpose.
Focus Area 3: Partnerships and Capacity Building
Cooperation with the Government
At the technical level, ACO generally enjoys good working relations with governmental counterparts.
A complex political environment has constrained the application of the partnership strategy
announced in the ACP document. By default, programme sectors have had to rely on rolling
workplans (RWPs) to guide their partnerships with the government. Further progress requires
concerted action across the range of aid actors in Afghanistan.
Although generally positive, partnerships with line ministries are often constrained by a lack of
capacity and public resources, which ACO alone cannot resolve. Cultural barriers and sensitivities
surrounding programme coverage in contested areas inhibit further progress in some partnerships,
notably in the child protection and education sectors.
Partnerships with NGOs
UNICEF is viewed as a reliable partner but there is a perception among NGOs that their relationship
with ACO is asymmetrical, and would gain from more inclusiveness in programme decisions, as well
as partnerships set in a multi-year timeframe. In the course of interviews with NGOs, there was a
sense that, while partnerships do generally yield the intended programme results at output level,
ACO may have missed opportunities to fully leverage the potential offered by NGOs in terms of their
knowledge of the local context, and their often better access to community-based leaders and hard-
to-reach area proxies. A broader and more strategic approach to partnerships with NGOs should be
considered, to encompass joint objectives in non-programme areas, including advocacy and
engagement.
In line with the Core Commitments for Children (CCCs), ACO has entered into partnerships with a
range of national NGOs. However, localisation goals remain distant, as these partners continue to
lack viable capacity and rely heavily on ACO for support. Revised SOPs have been introduced to
improve partner selection, but the general view among ACO staff was that they are not taken into
account in the selection of local NGOs by government counterparts.
Alignment of Partnerships with Cooperation Frameworks
The evaluation team found that the ACP aligns with ministerial priorities, but alignment is less clear
with National Priority Programmes (NPPs). There is a widely held view that the One UN Framework
does not serve its intended purpose of enabling alignment between the international aid effort and
the development goals of the Afghan government. Likewise, the Framework has limited use as a
platform for the convergence of UN and other aid actors around the sustainable development goals
(SDGs). These limitations severely constrain progress towards capacity-building objectives, and limit
the role which ACO might play in contributing to intended results. Renewed engagement efforts are
needed to make up for the limitations of the One UN process, by forging ad hoc alliances with like-
minded stakeholders including UN actors and donors.
Institutional Strengthening
The lack of a strategic framework for capacity-building (CB) has given each sector some flexibility to
develop its own sector-appropriate approach. But this has also come at the cost of a clear long-term
Itad 4 August 2021 11
Final Report
vision against which outcome- and impact-level results might be measured. To a significant extent,
approaches in capacity-building have been shaped by contextual opportunities or constraints, as
well as fluctuating levels of funding and the vagaries of relationships with counterparts. In this
context, UNICEF has had notable successes at output level, but it remains uncertain whether these
successes can be sustained or can translate into the desired change at impact-level. There has been
growing recognition by ACO of the need to strengthen existing training systems and curricula with
an approach to CB that is an integral component of long-term partnerships, rather than as a
succession of add-on activities. Again, it is uncertain whether the operating context in the next
planning cycle will enable this more integrated, long-term approach to take root at programme
level, and to yield the desired outcomes.
Comparative Strengths in Capacity Building
There is recognition that UNICEF’s dual mandate, spanning multiple sectors, puts it in a strong
position to intervene in CB. There is generally broad recognition of the positive impact of specific
capacity-building initiatives, resulting from UNICEF’s expertise in specific sectors. However,
outcomes in this area are shaped less by comparative advantage than by contextual factors and
established good practice shared by all aid actors. In Afghanistan, significant contextual obstacles
stand in the way of building sustainable partner capacity, and consensus is growing among donors
and across the aid community that barriers to programme sustainability are far greater than a lack of
capacity alone. In these conditions, ACO’s acknowledged sectoral expertise may not be enough to
bring about lasting capacity gains among its partners in key sectors. This challenging environment
presents an opportunity for ACO to substantively review the working assumptions, principles and
approaches that underpin its capacity-building activities in Afghanistan.
Use of National Technical Assistants (NTAs)
In the context of CB, the use of NTAs has become increasingly controversial, with some well-founded
claims that it is unaccountable and has had unwanted consequences. In a war economy in which aid
streams account for a large proportion of public revenue and elite capture is widespread, the
continued use of NTAs must come with solid safeguards to protect against reputational and
programme risks. ACO is planning to review and rationalise its use of the NTA system, but these
measures come late.
Focus Area 4: Gender Integration
Strengthening of Gender at Organisation Level
UNICEF Afghanistan has made significant efforts and substantive progress in recent years in terms of
investment and real commitment to Gender Action Plan (GAP) priorities and has done so in a
challenging context. Considerable progress has been made in integrating GAP priorities into
programming and there is evidence of systematic investment in gender evidence, analysis and
knowledge management within UNICEF.
ACO work with adolescent girls is not just siloed in education but rather takes a cross-sector
approach. For girls’ education, the recruitment and retention of female teachers is recognised as a
critical factor of success, particularly for the community-based education (CBE) approach.
Due to these advances, ACO is currently considered a ‘role model’ for application of the global GAP
staffing and programmatic guidance. Further work is needed, however, to translate these
achievements into consistent and well-evidenced approaches to gender-responsive and
transformative outcomes in ACO programming. Evidence suggests that significant variations remain
across sectors in the fulfilment of GAP priorities, and in the capture of results data to document
progress towards them.
Itad 4 August 2021 12
Final Report
UNICEF Partnerships and System-Wide Positioning to Promote Gender
UNICEF Afghanistan has significantly stepped up its promotion of gender integration with
implementing partners, but there is less evidence that this has translated into substantive support
and capacity-building for doing so.
ACO is well recognised within the UN system and among NGOs and partners as a leading voice on
gender, most notably as it relates to the priority areas of girls’ education and child marriage. While
UNICEF programming is widely viewed to be robust in its gender-responsiveness, there was a
perception among some interviewees that ACO could do more in the areas of gender advocacy and
gender transformation. In the context of Afghanistan, the evaluation team found that high-profile
advocacy could alienate or antagonise key audiences, and that opportunities for rapid gender
transformation are in fact very limited. In this context, an incremental approach is likely to yield the
best results. Importantly, however, this should be accompanied by better messaging to enable ACO
partners and stakeholders to gain a nuanced appreciation of the risks and considerable challenges
which gender workstreams must typically reckon with in the Afghan context.
Summary of Recommendations
SUMMARY OF RECOMMENDATIONS Action to be Led Relevant
FOCUS AREA 1: THE NEXUS by Report
Section
1 Until the actual and potential peacebuilding outcomes of ACO Dep. Rep. 4.1.1.
operations are better understood, refrain from prioritising
peacebuilding in the next CPD.
2 As Afghanistan enters a period of significant uncertainty, Dep. Rep, Sector Chiefs, 4.1.1.
recognise advocacy and stakeholder engagement as central to Comm. Chief
ACO positioning, and to the promotion of an enabling
environment for the nexus and other strategic objectives.
3 Increase the participation of Field Offices and Implementing Dep. Rep, Sector Chiefs, 4.1.1.
Partners in ongoing risk assessments; mainstream the practice of FO Chiefs
analysing risk in terms of vulnerabilities and affected groups.
FOCUS AREA 2: COVERAGE AND ACCESS
4 To enable further progress towards multi-sectoral programming Dep. Rep, Sector Chiefs, 4.2.1.
and results-based management, continue to support a shift from FO Chiefs
a ‘planning per sector’ to a ‘planning per need’ approach.
5 While reforms at scale are conducted to enable further Dep. Rep, Sector Chiefs, 4.2.2.
decentralisation, foster ACO’s operational agility and FO Chiefs
adaptiveness by enabling the better capture of programme-
critical information.
6 Invest in developing in-house conflict sensitivity (CS) capacity, Dep. Rep, Sector Chiefs, 4.2.2.
starting with simplifying and contextualising the existing UNICEF FO Chiefs
Conflict Sensitivity and Peacebuilding Programme guidelines.
7 In the next programme cycle, expand the use of TPMs for Dep. Rep, Chief Planning 4.2.2.
independent results verification; complement and better and Monitoring, Sector
Chiefs, FO Chiefs
harmonise the use of TPMs with monitoring activities conducted
internally.
FOCUS AREA 3: PARTNERSHIPS AND CAPACITY BUILDING
8 In preparation for a degraded operating environment in the next Dep. Rep., 4.3.1.
planning period, build more inclusive and consultative working Sector Chiefs
relationships with NGO and civil society partners.
9 In consultation with other UN actors, accelerate efforts to review Dep. Rep., 4.3.1.
the use of NTAs in programmes. Sector Chiefs
FOCUS AREA 4: GENDER INTEGRATION
Itad 4 August 2021 13
Final Report
10 Use the opportunity of the next ACP planning cycle to update Dep. Rep., Gender 4.4.1.
ACO’s gender strategy and to instil new momentum in its Advisors,
Gender Specialists,
implementation.
Sector Chiefs
11 While recognising the significant barriers to gender- Dep. Rep., Gender 4.4.2.
transformative goals in Afghanistan, continue to pragmatically Advisors,
Gender Specialists
seek out opportunities for progress towards these goals
wherever possible.
Itad 4 August 2021 14
Final Report
Introduction
Evaluation Background
Context
The Strategic Positioning Evaluation (SPE) of the United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF)
Afghanistan Country Programme (ACP) 2015–21 was commissioned by the UNICEF Regional Office of
South Asia (ROSA) and conducted by Itad, a UK consulting firm specialising in monitoring and
evaluation (M&E). It was considered an opportune moment to commission this evaluation given the
requirement for country programmes to undergo a Country Programme Evaluation1 and that a new
Afghanistan Country Programme Document (CPD) was planned to be developed during 2021. As
such, the evaluation aimed to support the drafting of UNICEF’s new CPD for Afghanistan. It updates
and complements the 2017 Mid-Term Review (MTR) of UNICEF’s ACP. In its design and
implementation, it also builds on the 2020 evaluation of UNICEF Afghanistan’s coverage and quality
in complex humanitarian situations.2
Evaluation Timeline
The evaluation was conducted between January and July 2021 and split into three phases:
Phase 1: Inception – During this period, the Itad evaluation team conducted an initial document
review and had calls with the ROSA Evaluation Advisor and Multi-Country Evaluation Specialist, and
other key stakeholders, to further refine the evaluation design and methodology outlined in the
proposal. It culminated in the submission of an inception report in February 2021.
Phase 2: Implementation – This phase primarily consisted of data collection and triangulation,
including field visits in March 2021. After in-country data collection and analysis, the team
developed preliminary findings and presented these to the core UNICEF team for this evaluation
during a meeting in May 2021 (see Section 2 for more information on methodology).
Phase 3: Finalisation and Communication - The evaluation team facilitated two sensemaking
meetings, one with ACO staff Evaluation Reference Group (ERG) members and the other with the
ROSA ERG members, to help inform the final draft report’s findings and recommendations in May
and June 2021. The findings have already been used to inform the development of the CPD and were
presented during the Strategic Moment of Reflection in May 2021. The finalisation of this report
marks the end of this period, with a final dissemination event of the Afghanistan SPE due to take
place July 2021.
Evaluation Purpose and Intended Use
The overall aim of this SPE is to assess how well the ACP has contributed—in terms of strategies,
approaches and implementation—to the achievement of UNICEF’s strategic goals and mandate, as
well as strategically positioning UNICEF within the development/humanitarian system and among
national partners in Afghanistan. The purpose of the evaluation is threefold:
▪ To inform programme design and support managerial decision-taking at the country office level
in preparation of the next country programme.
▪ To contribute to organisational learning about what works and does not work, especially in areas
where the country programme has taken a leadership position, such as linking development with
1 Requirement introduced in 2018 under the revised UNICEF Evaluation Policy.
2 Andrew Featherstone and Charlotte Lattimer, Evaluation of UNICEF’s Coverage and Quality in Complex Humanitarian Situations:
Afghanistan Evaluation Report, August 2020.
Itad 4 August 2021 15
Final Report
humanitarian action and gender integration, and within a fragile and conflict-affected setting like
Afghanistan.
▪ To support accountability by providing an independent assessment of how selected strategies
and UNICEF’s positioning have contributed to supporting the progressive realisation of rights for
all children, especially the most vulnerable.
The central assumption of the evaluation team is that programme convergence and the triple nexus
form the core underlying themes that cut across the scope of this evaluation. These themes, and
related approaches and strategies, are also key to informing UNICEF positioning, both internally in
terms of building strategic coherence across UNICEF’s Afghanistan programme and externally in
terms of advocacy, engagement and partnerships.
The primary intended user of the evaluation is the Afghanistan Country Office (ACO) management
and programme staff, to inform them in the design of the next CPD. ROSA management and advisors
are also primary users in their capacity to support ACO in the development of the new CPD and fulfil
their oversight function. Secondary audiences are other stakeholders of the country programme, to
inform them transparently about the relevance, coherence, effectiveness and equity of the
Afghanistan programming strategies.
Evaluation Objectives and Scope
There are three evaluation objectives, as stated in the Terms of Reference (ToR):
▪ Provide an independent assessment of the strategies and approaches adopted by the country
programme with regards to specific areas of interest, and how well these have contributed to the
achievement of UNICEF’s strategic goals and mandate.
▪ Provide an independent assessment of UNICEF’s positioning within the
development/humanitarian system and among national partners with regard to specific areas of
interest. ‘Strategic positioning’ refers to UNICEF’s ability, through its country programme, to
positively influence national agendas, leverage relationships, operate in areas of comparative
strengths and take up a leadership role in order to advance its strategic goals and children’s rights
in the country.
▪ Draw key lessons from the innovative and adaptive capacity of the Country Programme design
and implementation and provide a set of forward-looking and actionable recommendations for
the next programming cycle.
The temporal scope of the evaluation is the Country Programme from 2015 to 2020. Information
pre-dating this period was considered insofar as it illuminates issues in the current programme. The
geographic scope is national, but with a key focus on the Southern and Eastern regions in order to
gain a greater insight into implementation at a subnational level. The rationale for this sampling is
further elaborated upon in Section 2.2.2 of this report.
The thematic scope of the evaluation covers the four areas of strategic interest identified during the
evaluation scoping between ACO and ROSA, and subsequently covered in the ToR. Evidence and
recommendations about these issues are considered of particular relevance for the strategic
direction, management and positioning of the new country programme, and complement the 2017
MTR. During the inception stage, the four areas of strategic interest were slightly reframed into four
focus areas (FAs) to enable analytical cohesion within each area of focus in the evaluation: (1)
integration of and positioning for a strengthened humanitarian, development and peace nexus; (2)
coverage and access to achieve equitable results for children at scale; (3) partnerships and
institutional strengthening and capacity building; and (4) gender integration into programme and
advocacy work.
Itad 4 August 2021 16
Final Report
The entirety of the UNICEF country programme within the context and development-humanitarian-
peace system of Afghanistan is the unit of analysis to examine these focal areas. However, the
specific sectors of education, health (with a strong focus on polio), water, sanitation and hygiene
(WASH) and child protection were identified for specific attention because of their value to
contributing to the evaluation objectives. The selection criteria used to explain the focus on these
four areas is elaborated upon in Section 2.2.
Itad 4 August 2021 17
Final Report
Evaluation Methodology
Overall Design, Evaluation Questions and Criteria
This evaluation was designed as a process evaluation to meet the objectives of this assignment. This
design enabled the evaluation team to evaluate how the programme is working and to unpack the
factors, modalities and partnerships which are most effective in positioning UNICEF Afghanistan to
deliver its strategic goals, including advancing the triple nexus.
Alongside this focus on process, feedback from UNICEF on the Inception Report highlighted a desire
for the evaluation team to review country programme results data in order to understand whether
(and which) programme processes and approaches are most effective in delivering the results
envisaged. It was agreed between UNICEF and the evaluation team during inception that results
would be assessed where this was demanded by the evaluation questions; it was also agreed that
this review of results will consider aggregate reporting rather than data at the implementation level
and the evaluation will not consider impact.
The evaluation team initially proposed to embed outcome harvesting (OH) within the overarching
process evaluation design. However, further investigation during the inception phase showed that
some of the methods that were proposed to deliver OH were not practical in the current field
context, and the evaluation team therefore pivoted to adopt a lighter-touch approach to OH by
incorporating outcome questions in the closing parts of the key informant interviews (KIIs) for
UNICEF staff only.
The evaluation is founded on a number of principles, including:
▪ Utilisation-focus: The evaluation is designed to foster a strong sense of engagement and
ownership of the evaluation process and outputs among the primary intended users within
UNICEF.
▪ Formative based on results: The evaluation is formative but well-grounded in evidence-based
results, focusing on analysis and evaluative judgements that will help to shape future activities
and decisions.
▪ Participatory, collaborative and inclusive: The evaluation is designed to ensure a high level of
engagement throughout the evaluation process and to leverage insights from a broad range of
stakeholders.
▪ Integral focus on gender in the approach, the evaluation team, data analysis and the forward-
looking aspects of the evaluation.
The evaluation framework, including evaluation questions, is organised around the four focus areas
in line with the objectives of the evaluation. The evaluation team mapped the nine key evaluation
questions (KEQs) proposed in the ToR to these focus areas, as indicated in Table . A set of sub-
evaluation questions, indicators and benchmarks was defined in the evaluation matrix (Annex 6.2).
Within these four focus areas, feedback from UNICEF during the inception period indicated that
Focus Area 1 (nexus) and Focus Area 2 (coverage, access and equity) are the critical priorities for this
evaluation, alongside the effective mainstreaming of gender. The evaluation team has therefore
sought to strike an appropriate balance between breadth and depth of enquiry throughout the
evaluation, with additional weighting towards Focus Area 1 and Focus Area 2 in data collection and
analysis.
Itad 4 August 2021 18
Final Report
Table 1: Focus Areas, DAC Criteria and Key Evaluation Questions
Focus area KEQ
1. Integration and positioning for a strengthened KEQ 1. To what extent has UNICEF re-positioned
humanitarian-peace nexus itself to contribute coherently to joint
humanitarian-development and peacebuilding
objectives?
Related DAC Criteria:
Relevance (KE1 and KE2) Coherence (KE2)
KEQ 2 To what extent is UNICEF strategically well
Effectiveness (KE1 and KE2)
positioned to enhance the humanitarian-
Equity (KE3)
development-peace nexus within the national
development system to the advancement of
children’s rights in the country?
2. Coverage and Access: Geographical coverage KEQ 3 To what extent have UNICEF’s programme
and access to achieve equitable results for strategy and implementation coherently and
children at scale consistently fostered multi-sectoral programming
to respond holistically to children’s needs at scale
and protect the rights of children everywhere?
Related DAC Criteria:
Relevance (incorporating dynamic efficiency
EQ 4 How well have UNICEF’s programme strategy
KE3), Coherence (KEQ 3 and KEQ 4)
and implementation effectively and coherently
Effectiveness (KE4, KE6)
enhanced access to hard-to-reach areas ?
Equity (KE3)
KEQ 6 How well has UNICEF utilised extendersand
third-party monitors (TPMs) to enhance
programme delivery?
3. Partnerships and institutional strengthening KEQ 5 How well is UNICEF positioned to ensure
and capacity building effective programme delivery through government
and NGO partnerships and coordination with other
UN agencies?
Related DAC Criteria:
Relevance (KE5, KE7)
KEQ 7 To what extent has UNICEF contributed to
Coherence (KE5)
institutional strengthening and government
Effectiveness (KE5, KE7)
capacity building in accordance with its
comparative strengths?
4. Gender integration into programme and KEQ 8 Is gender being integrated in programme
advocacy work planning and practice based on evidence
generated and lessons learned?
Related DAC Criteria:
KEQ 9 How well is UNICEF leveraging its position in
Equity (KEQ 8, KEQ9)
strategic partnerships to promote gender in
Coherence (Internal KEQ8 and External KEQ9)
evidence generation, policies and programming?
Data Collection Methods, Sampling and Analysis
Data Collection Methods
Data collection for the evaluation was conducted between February and April 2021, drawing upon a
mix of qualitative and quantitative methods and primary and secondary sources. In the
Itad 4 August 2021 19
Final Report
circumstances of the continued global COVID-19 pandemic, the evaluation sought to make best use
of existing secondary data sources and to use remote data collection techniques where possible,
especially where face-to-face interviews would be difficult to arrange. In designing its research
methods and tools, the evaluation team referred back to the evaluation framework to ensure that
the data collected was both relevant and sufficient to critically examine the topics of interest under
each of the KEQs and to identify the factors which explain how and why changes have come about.
Data collection methods included:
1. Systematic review of secondary literature and UNICEF results data and financial reporting
With the help of ROSA and ACO, the evaluation team compiled and reviewed an extensive set of key
documents relating to the country programme. It also conducted a review of more general literature
on the humanitarian and development situation in Afghanistan, to inform contextual analysis. These
documents were coded in line with the evaluation matrix, and evidence was captured in the
evidence framework designed for the evaluation.
The evaluation team received more documents from ACO than it had resources to review. It
therefore prioritised documents produced since the 2017 MTR in 2017, as well as material directly
relevant to the four focus areas under study. In total, more than 430 written sources were
consulted.
Alongside this review of secondary literature and documentation, the evaluation team aimed to
draw on UNICEF quantitative results data, particularly that captured in the Strategic Monitoring
Questions (SMQs), which are used to monitor progress against UNICEF's Strategic Plan, and in the
Results Assessment Module (RAM), which is UNICEF’s programme performance management and
reporting platform. As noted in the limitations section below, however, potential disparities were
noted between SMQ and RAM data on the one hand and qualitative evidence collected in KIIs on the
other. The evaluation team investigated these with the support of ACO staff. However, this line of
research was inconclusive, and the decision was therefore taken not to make use of SMQ and RAM
data in the evaluation.
Further details of the documents reviewed are provided in Annex 6.9.
2. In-person and remote semi-structured key informant interviews
In total, 124 respondents were interviewed for the evaluation, either in person or remotely.
Respondents spanned a range of stakeholder groups at national, subnational and supranational
levels,3 including UNICEF staff, government and non-governmental organisation (NGO) partners, and
donors (see Section 2.2.2 below on sampling, and further information of their position and
organisations in Annex 6.5).
In the evaluation team’s approach to selecting KII respondents, considerations relating to the
feasibility and cost-efficiency of data collection weighed heavily, given the significant logistical
constraints involved in collecting evidence in complex environments, and in obtaining the
preliminary data needed to inform a high-resolution sampling strategy. The overriding objective was
to ensure balanced representation across the programme sectors and geographical areas covered in
the evaluation. Beyond this objective, the main criterion in stakeholder sampling was the depth and
relevance of knowledge held of the policy and operational dimensions of the ACP – i.e. the aim was
to prioritise sectoral and thematic expertise over further diversity inside each of the stakeholder
groups.
KIIs were designed in a qualitative, semi-structured format tailored to elicit information along the
key lines of enquiry for the four FAs. Interview transcripts were coded and classified on the basis of
the four FAs and entered into the evaluation’s purpose-designed matrix. As noted above, this tool
was also used to code and classify evidence generated in the course of desk work. This enabled the
3 UNICEF Regional Office for South Asia and UNICEF Headquarters.
Itad 4 August 2021 20
Final Report
evidence collected in both methods of data collection to be triangulated, and provided the main
basis for synthesis and analysis.
During the design phase of the KII tools, the evaluation team took into account recently conducted
KIIs undertaken by the ongoing ROSA Humanitarian/Development Nexus Phase 3 review being
conducted by UNICEF.4
Further details of the characteristics of respondents interviewed through KIIs for this evaluation are
provided in Annex 6.5.
3. Remote surveys with key informants
Three remote surveys were administered, generating a total of 198 responses. They consisted of the
following:
1. An English language online survey delivered in SurveyMonkey to UNICEF staff. This spanned
senior management, sector specialists and managers located both in Kabul and in field and
outposts (see detail, Figure 2 below). In total, 63 staff members responded to this survey.
2. An English language online survey delivered in SurveyMonkey to other stakeholders, including
staff of other UN agencies, national and international NGOs, and donor agencies. These
respondents were located in Kabul and in the Southern and Eastern provinces. In total, 45
respondents completed this survey.
3. A mobile phone survey conducted in Pashtu and Dari, and complemented by an email survey
with the same questions where phone contact proved difficult. These surveys were aimed at
extenders, National Technical Assistants (NTAs) and frontline workers in the two regions
sampled for this evaluation, as well as in Kabul. In total, 90 respondents completed these
surveys.
All of the online surveys were designed to be relatively light-touch (25 or fewer questions) to reduce
the burden on respondents and to encourage as high a response rate as possible. They were
principally designed in light of trends identified from an initial analysis of the data collected through
the KIIs, to deepen the evidence base and triangulate information around emergent themes. The
evaluation team had initially intended to conduct very light-touch ‘spot surveys’ in advance of KIIs,
but these were determined at the beginning of the implementation phase to be impractical, given
the timeline for the evaluation.
Sampling
A purposive sampling strategy was used covering three main categories: programme sectors,
geographic locations, and stakeholder groups of high relevance to the evaluation.
1. Sectoral sample
During the inception phase, the evaluation team reviewed the six programme sectors that comprise
the ACP, and selected a sample of four sectors based on seven selection criteria, which included:
their alignment (at output and outcome levels) with the evaluation FAs (especially human rights
approaches and gender empowerment); their relevance (at activity level) to nexus and multi-
sectoral implementation; their geographic coverage; their budget ceiling; and their use of extenders
and TPMs.
By applying these criteria, the evaluation team identified a final sectoral sample consisting of:
Health, Education, Child Protection and WASH, for study at national and subnational levels. A
detailed explanation for each of the selected sectors against the seven selection criteria is provided
in Annex 6.2
4 Emily Wylde, ROSA Humanitarian-Development Nexus – Phase 3, Inception Report, January 2020.
Itad 4 August 2021 21
Final Report
Geographic sample
The evaluation team used ACO’s organisational units as a basis for geographic sampling. By
examining ACP activities at field office level, the team could gain practical insights into how
programmes are being implemented on the ground, and explore issues of efficiency and coherence
in the relationship between field offices and the national office.
The team applied seven criteria to draw the sample at this level, including conflict intensity and
humanitarian needs, social and cultural context, preliminary evidence of progress in UNICEF
decentralisation, access and hard-to-reach areas.
By applying these criteria, the evaluation team identified a final geographic sample that consisted of:
▪ The Southern region, comprising the provinces of Nimroz, Helmand, Urazgon, Zabul and
Kandahar. The evaluation team was heavily reliant on remote interviews and surveys in these
provinces.
▪ Eastern region, comprising the provinces of Nuristan, Nangahar, Kunar and Laghman. The
evaluation team was able to travel in person to Nangahar, Kunar and Laghman.
2. Key stakeholder groups
Respondent samples were drawn from directories provided by UNICEF and supplemented by the
team’s own research. A full breakdown of KII and survey respondent by type is provided in Annex
6.7.
Sampling was carried out across eight stakeholder groups with direct relevance to ACO. They
consisted of the following:
• UNICEF staff
• Other UN agency staff
• Government officials
• NGO staff
• Donor and diplomatic representations staff
• Extenders
• NTAs
• Frontline workers
Sampling was purposive to ensure a balanced representation of respondents across the stakeholder
groups. In line with the objectives stated above, sampling aimed primarily to target respondents
with the most direct and relevant knowledge of UNICEF operations. In the case of government and
NGO staff, respondents were targeted from among line ministries and NGOs engaged in ongoing
partnerships with UNICEF. Among donors, respondents were targeted on the basis of the level of
their financial support of the ACP. Similarly, UN agency staff were selected from among agencies
active in the same programme areas as ACO, or cooperating with it on joint initiatives.
In the case of NTAs, extenders and frontline workers, respondent lists covered each of the four
programme sectors examined in the evaluation. For frontline workers, lists could only be obtained
for the health and education sectors.
Where possible, respondents were targeted on the basis of the number of years they had spent
working for or alongside UNICEF. For extenders and NTAs, the time spent with UNICEF among
targeted respondents was no less than two years, and up to four years. For frontline workers this
information could not be obtained. After respondents were long-listed on the basis of programme
sector, time in role and gender, random dialling was then applied to the long lists.
Itad 4 August 2021 22
Final Report
Among UNICEF, other UN, NGO and donor sample groups, no gender bias was introduced in favour
of women respondents to KIIs and surveys, as it was assumed that these groups were broadly
gender-balanced and that this would carry over to the respondents approached.
In the case of government officials interviewed in KIIs, little could be done to correct the significant
gender imbalance among this group; the relevance of the respondent to the subject matter was
given priority over their gender.
For NTAs, extenders and frontline workers surveyed, a deliberate effort was made to target as many
women as possible. Success in this was relatively limited among extenders and NTAs, where women
account for less than 5% of this population. In all, efforts at gender-biased purposive sampling
allowed 22% women among the 34 extenders and NTAs to be successfully contacted. The proportion
was significantly higher among frontline workers, which are numerous enough in absolute terms to
include a sizeable number of women. In this group, 55% of the 56 respondents were respondents.
Figure 1. KIIs by region
KIIs by region (n=124)
Southern
(Kandahar, incl.
Spin Boldak)
27%
National
40%
Eastern ( Jalalabad,
Kunar, Laghman)
33%
Despite efforts at purposive sampling, the practical and logistical constraints inherent in the Afghan
environment were key factors in determining the final profile of sample groups. The most severe of
these constraints applied to NTAs, among whom a very low response rate was obtained. In all, only
eight NTAs, all of them male, could be contacted or agreed to take part in phone or email surveys. In
KIIs, likewise, some sample groups were slightly under-represented in relation to others, due largely
to travelling, access or scheduling constraints. For example, fewer respondents than initially planned
could be interviewed from among national civil society organisations (CSOs). This slightly uneven
representation across stakeholder groups had a small but discernible impact on the quality of
evidence obtained.
Across KIIs, the sampling achieved a balanced representation between respondents in the Southern
and Eastern region and those stakeholders at national level in Kabul (see Figure 1). The response
rates of the surveys were 44% for UNICEF staff and 40% for the other stakeholders, including staff of
other UN agencies, national and international NGOs, and donor agencies. The English and Dari and
Pashto surveys had good coverage across sectors (health, education, child protection, WASH and
other) (see Figures 2 and 3) and across UNICEF ranks (see Figure 4), with a high representation of
national staff. 63% of Dari and Pashto survey respondents were at district level, which was critical
for capturing local perspectives and avoiding urban bias.
Itad 4 August 2021 23
Final Report
Figure 2. UNICEF staff survey responses by sector
Survey Responses by sector (n=108)
40
Health, 34
35
Multiple Sectors, 29
30
s
t n Child Protection, 13
e d 25
n
o
p 20 Education, 18
s e Water & Sanitation,
r f o 15 14
.o
N
10
5
0
Sector
Figure 3. Dari and Pashto survey responses by sector
Survey Responses by sector (n=90)
45
40 Education, 42
35
Health, 31
s
t n 30
e
d
n 25
o
p
s
e r 20
f
o
.o 15 Other / Multiple
N
Sectors, 10
10
Child Protection, 7
5
Water & Sanitation, 2
0
Sector
Itad 4 August 2021 24
Final Report
Figure 4 Other stakeholder survey responses by organisation
Survey responses by organisation (n=124)
40
Government, 34
35 ACO, 33
s 30
t
n
e
d 25
n
o Other (including
p s 20 extenders), 17
e
r
f o 15 ROSA/HQ, 11 Other UN, 11 NGOs, 12
.o
N 10
Donors, 6
5
0
Organisation
Data Analysis Methods
The evaluation adopted a pragmatic but systematic approach to analyse and synthesise data
collected. An assessment matrix designed for this evaluation was used to code and classify the
evidence collected from the document review and KIIs on the basis of the four focus areas as well as
the source of the evidence. This tool was used for both KIIs and documentary sources, and enabled
the triangulation of evidence from across the range of sources used. Coding was done manually,
using the standard Itad coding system which enables data sources to be anonymised. Codes were
generated in chronological order, with an alphanumeric prefix denoting the category of the source
(KII or document). Each code was unique to the corresponding source, which was catalogued on a
separate listing complete with relevant details.
Evidence entered in the assessment matrix was reviewed against quantitative data received across
the four focus areas, consulting with UNICEF teams to confirm the data and their findings.
This approach to analysis enabled the team to identify causal pathways and to link evidence with
findings and conclusions relating as closely as possible to the evaluation questions. Where a line of
inquiry did not lead to conclusive evidence, no finding was formulated. This occurred in a number of
sub-evaluation questions, which were flagged to UNICEF.
Data analysis followed the following key steps:
• Step 1. Deductive and inductive data coding against the KEQs
• Step 2. Iterative identification and mapping of themes
• Step 3. Systematic review of emergent themes and triangulation across data sources
• Step 4. Evidence summary
Within these steps, the evaluation team adopted a gendered approach to data analysis that was
aligned to UNICEF guidance, which included guidance on integrating gender within evaluation based
on definitions of programming, approaches, strategies, activities and results.
Unfortunately, it was difficult to include RAM data in the evidence base for this evaluation. Difficulties
were encountered both in obtaining the data and in analysing it. For example, 2018 RAM results were
reported against only one of the four focus areas (education) and, while none of the indicators for
education was ‘on track’ at the time, the results achievement report for education overall was rated
as ‘on track’ for that period. A 2019 audit identified similar shortcomings, and in addition found that
Itad 4 August 2021 25
Final Report
some of the results on RAM were not supported by sufficient evidence (means of verification). Since
2019, RAM reporting has improved and is overall more coherent and complete, although there is
scope for further improvements, for example by improving the consistency of how progress is rated.
Due to the improved reporting, the evaluation team was able to plot quantifiable results vs targets for
all four FAs between 2019 and 2021; however, the data was later invalidated by a member of UNICEF
staff, rendering it unusable in the evaluation.
Integration of Gender, Equity and Human Rights in Methods, Sampling and
Analysis
During data collection and analysis, progress towards strategy and programme goals was assessed
using a rights-based approach, as well as a gender and equity perspective where possible. This was
done by drawing on key UNICEF policy guidance and orientations, including the Core Commitments
for Children (CCCs), which approach vulnerabilities from a rights-holder perspective, as well as an
equity- and gender-based one. During data collection, the evaluation team sought to achieve the
inclusion of a meaningful proportion of women in the respondent samples; in the case of the survey
of frontline workers, gender balance was achieved. In arranging interviews, a gender-sensitive
approach was taken to ensure locations and times were selected that were accessible to female
stakeholders. Data collection methods were also designed to be gender-aware, noting any barriers
or bias that may occur.
Equity is a key area of inquiry in this evaluation and was investigated as far as conditions allowed. In
the Afghan context, this topic is highly complex and cuts across sociocultural, demographic, security
and programme considerations which deserve greater coverage than could be provided in this
report. Among the constraints met in researching equity in last-mile programme delivery, limited
access to project sites and community respondents were the most prominent. To mitigate them, the
evaluation team planned to collect evidence and insights from the third-party monitoring company
that was contracted by ACO on a pilot basis in 2020. However, as data collection concluded for this
evaluation, this company had not yet responded to the team’s requests for contact.
Ethical Considerations and Quality Assurance
Ethical Considerations
The evaluation was undertaken in line with the United Nations Evaluation Group (UNEG) Ethical
guidelines for Evaluations and the UNICEF Procedure on Ethical Standards in Research, Evaluation,
Data Collection and Analysis, adherence to which is signed and shared with UNICEF as an integral
part of Itad’s contract to deliver this evaluation.
Itad has internal policies governing the code of conduct of evaluation team members, safeguarding
and data protection all of which form part of the contracts signed by the evaluation team members.
These policies are attached as Annex 6.10, and meet the requirements of UNICEF and UNEG as
regards ethical standards.
Evaluation team members’ contracts also include clauses surrounding professional conduct, which
include a series of obligations around ethical integrity, as follows:
▪ Be independent and impartial. Any conflicts of interest or partiality will be made explicit
▪ Safeguard confidential, sensitive and personal data acquired through the project and not use it
for personal advantage or for the benefit of, or detriment of, third parties
▪ Be aware of the issues when interacting with vulnerable people and be sensitive to their needs
▪ Be aware of differences in culture, customs, religious beliefs and practices, and any implications
these may have in terms of interacting with people in the course of work
Itad 4 August 2021 26
Final Report
▪ Be sensitive to gender roles and issues of disability, age and ethnicity, and be mindful of the
potential implications of these differences when planning, carrying out and reporting on work
▪ Neither offer nor accept gifts, hospitality or services which could create, or imply, an improper
obligation
As part of its commitment to research ethics, the evaluation team reviewed secondary sources and
UNICEF data prior to the start of primary data collection in order to limit as far as possible the
amount of unnecessary primary data collected and to reduce the burden on respondents.
When conducting primary interviews, members of the evaluation team read from a prepared script
to inform interviewees on issues of anonymity, confidentiality, as well as their rights to refuse to
participate, or to stop the interview at any time, and to request that any UNICEF staff present leave
the interview if preferred. Informed consent was sought before each interview. ACO was consulted
for guidance on the usual customary practices and whether written informed consent is required.
To ensure the anonymity and confidentiality of the data stored in the evaluation framework, all
interviewees were allocated an anonymised ID code which allowed for disaggregation of data by
gender and location, etc. All data was safely stored in an encrypted format on Microsoft Teams
following Itad data security procedures.
Quality Assurance
Itad’s approach to quality assurance (QA) is informed by the system of academic peer-reviewing and
by established standards for evaluation quality, aiming to meet the Organisation for Economic Co-
operation and Development’s Development Assistance Committee (OECD-DAC) standards for
usefulness, cost-effectiveness, accuracy, credibility and equity.
The four-stage QA process was implemented throughout the evaluation. The process is summarised
in Annex 6.11.
From UNICEF, the evaluation was managed by the ROSA Regional Evaluation Advisor, who played a
key in ensuring quality. Responsibilities included the following:
▪ Coordination and supervision of all activities of the evaluation team, and decision making;
▪ Technical management of the evaluation, according to the ToR and stipulations of the Inception
Report;
▪ Facilitating internal and external review and QA processes;
▪ Approving all deliverables, with support from the core UNICEF evaluation team;
▪ Providing overall guidance to the evaluation team on UNICEF requirements and standards for
evaluative work.
Of key importance to the execution of the evaluation and responsible for the quality of the process
was the creation of an ERG. Their role was to facilitate access to documentation and communication
between the evaluation team and stakeholders. The ERG provided advice to the evaluation team,
reviewed the Inception Report, the draft evaluation report, and the draft and final draft reports, and
provided feedback on other issues as required. The ERG members included ROSA regional advisors,
ACO management team members, and UNICEF Headquarters (HQ) Evaluation Office.
Limitations
Balancing breadth and depth in evaluation design: the thematic and geographic breadth of this
evaluation is significant, and the evaluation team made a number of careful compromises in design
to balance the desire to cover as a wide a range of issues as possible with the need to interrogate
issues in sufficient depth. To do this, as set out above and in the Inception Report, the evaluation
Itad 4 August 2021 27
Final Report
team limited the scope of the evaluation to four sectors and two regions, based on a detailed
sampling approach.
Impact of the COVID-19 pandemic: the evaluation team carefully planned the evaluation to mitigate
the impact of the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic, including moving to a larger number of telephone-
based interviews and online surveys to minimise the risk for evaluation participants. Nevertheless,
COVID-19 has had some impact on the work of the evaluation team, including requiring the team to
cancel planned focus group discussions and substitute them with individual interviews, online
surveys and telephone-based interviews. Following Itad COVID-19 safe working guidelines,
international evaluators visiting Kabul self-isolated for three days on arrival, which slightly reduced
the time available for face-to-face interviews.
Security: the evaluation team carefully planned the evaluation to mitigate security risks. Fieldwork
for this evaluation has largely followed the expectations set out in the Inception Report, with the
team able to visit more field sites in the Eastern region than the Southern region.
Evaluation timing: the evaluation took place during a period of significant turnover of staff at Senior
Management Team (SMT) level. This had some impact on the evaluation in terms of reduced
institutional knowledge and bandwidth on the part of recent appointees. The team was able to
mitigate the impact of this limitation through additional interviewing and review of secondary
documentation.
Secondary documentation and data – the evaluation team is grateful to ACO for facilitating access
to secondary documents and data sets. However, as noted above with regard to RAM data in
particular, the team encountered access and data-sharing constraints which resulted in limitations in
the comprehensiveness of this data set. This affected its ability to analyse results data and budget
allocations at provincial and district levels.
Itad 4 August 2021 28
Final Report
UNICEF’s Country Programme and its Context
The Afghanistan Country Programme
The ACP initially covered the period 2015–20 and was extended until 2021. It aims to support the
government of Afghanistan (GIRoA) and its line ministries, as principal duty bearers, in progressing
towards the better realisation of the rights of children in the country. The overall goal of the ACP is
to address inequity so that all children, adolescents and women, as the main rights holders targeted
in the ACP, can have access to services needed to fulfil their rights to survival, development,
protection and participation.
The ACP is based on a detailed and equity-focused analysis of the situation of children and women in
Afghanistan. In its design, it aligns with the Afghanistan National Development Strategy (ANDP),
which provides a common framework for the overall development effort in the country. The ACP
was developed in close consultation with the key stakeholders involved; that is, the relevant GIRoA
line ministries as well as Afghan civil society. UN actors, as well as NGOs and members of the donor
community, were also consulted, given the key role of these stakeholders in contributing either
financially or as programme partners to development objectives closely aligned with those of the
ACP.
Programme Content and Operational Structure
At national level, the ACP aims to leverage the catalytic role of UNICEF to make sustainable changes
in systems, policy and programme implementation, addressing root causes of rights violations. It
supports nationwide access to care and basic services, including immunisation, polio eradication and
the provision of teaching-learning materials. In the Northern Region, the programme aims to reduce
vulnerability through a new focus on social protection, and the increased prioritisation of children’s
issues in local planning.
Under the ACP’s overall goal, six sector-specific outcomes were formulated in the areas of health
care, nutrition, child protection, education, water and sanitation, and social inclusion (see Table 2
below). Interventions focus on the most deprived provinces and areas, mostly in South, South East
and Western regions, where the programme aimed to better ensure the access of children and
women to basic services, and bring ongoing efforts to scale. To deliver on ACP outcomes, UNICEF in
Afghanistan relies on an operational set-up which has varied over the years, currently consisting of a
country office based in Kabul, supported by five field offices and six outposts.5 The total budget for
the CPD between 2015 and 2021 was USD 1,185,868,000, and Figure 2 provides an overview of the
annual resources by programme component (2015–19) and averaged annual CPD extension (2020–
21).
5 UNICEF Afghanistan Organogram, June 2020.
Itad 4 August 2021 29
Final Report
Figure 5. ACP resources by sector
Annual resources by programme component (2015–19)
and averagedannual CPD extension (2020–21)
160
140
) n 120 Social Inclusion
o
illim
100
Child Protection
(
D
S 80
U
Nutrition
60
Water, Sanitation
40
and Hygiene
20 Cross-sectoral cost
0
Education
2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021
Year
Health
Key stakeholders of the ACP, at national and supranational levels, include internal UNICEF staff from
the ACO, including the Representative, the Deputy Representative, Chiefs of programmes, Chiefs of
cross-cutting sections and units, the Deputy Representative - Operations, and the UNICEF Regional
Office of South Asia and UNICEF HQ. External key stakeholders include government representatives
in major line ministries, including Public Health, Education, Foreign Affairs, Economy, Women’s
Affairs and Social Affairs; other UN agencies, including United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA), the World Health Organization (WHO), the United Nations Population Fund
(UNFPA), the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), the World Food Programme
(WFP), the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) and the United Nations Country Team
(UNCT); international and national NGOs; and donors. At provincial, regional and local levels, key
stakeholders include UNICEF ACO Chief of Field Operations and Chief of Field Offices, government
provincial directorates of key line ministries, NGOs, community-level influencers (religious leaders
and elders), local service providers/frontline workers (teachers, health workers), local media and
community members.
The 2017 Mid-Term Review
As described in further detail in Section 3.2 below, the security situation in Afghanistan began to
deteriorate significantly in the years following the finalisation of the ACP document. This prompted
UNICEF to conduct an MTR of the ACP in 2017, to take stock of changes in the operating
environment and reorient the ACP accordingly. Following the MTR, the ACP was consolidated, and
planned results were streamlined. Further alignment was also sought between ACP objectives and
key strategic frameworks, including the ANDP and the sustainable development goals (SDGs).
The substantial redesign of the ACP that followed the MTR is best illustrated by its new results
framework. While the number of sector outcomes remained unchanged with one outcome per
sector, the total number of outputs was almost halved, from 60 to 38.6 Equity remained a central
theme in programme redesign that followed the MTR, with continued priority placed on the most
6 Revised ACP Results Framework, March 2020.
Itad 4 August 2021 30
Final Report
deprived areas and vulnerable groups. As discussed further below, however, the MTR found that the
geographical approach to prioritisation used in the ACP was not well suited to ensuring equitable
programme coverage.
Table 2 Summary of sector outcomes in the ACP
Health WASH Nutrition Education Child Social
Protection Inclusion
Improved access to Increased and Increased Improved access Improved Stronger
health and equitable use coverage of to quality primary protection of boys priority placed
immunisation for of safe drinking nutrition education for and girls by on child rights
mothers, infants, water and services for school-age boys national law and and gender
children and sanitation, and infants, and girls public services and equality in
adolescent girls better children, systems public policy,
sanitation adolescent girls national law
and mothers and social
protection
systems
protection
systems
The Evaluation’s Key Focus Areas and their Relevance to the ACP
The evaluation’s four key areas were identified and selected on the basis of their relevance to the
ACP and its implementation in Afghanistan’s highly challenging context:
▪ The triple nexus is central to programming in protracted emergencies where chronic and acute
vulnerabilities have their roots in the failure of core state functions, including basic service
delivery and the rule of law. In UNICEF programmes, the nexus implies the implementation of
risk-informed and conflict-sensitive programming that strengthens national and local systems.
The ACP’s objectives, and the CCCs which underpin them, imply a dual focus on addressing
immediate humanitarian needs and developing local capacities to address the root causes of
inequity and deprivation.7
▪ Programme coverage and access are critical to equity, not only in terms of service provision but
also in terms of needs assessments and results measurement. In the Afghan context, access and
coverage must be approached alongside a good understanding of the mandated relationship
between development actors and the state, and what this implies in terms of addressing needs in
areas outside government control.
▪ Partnerships and capacity building are at the core of prevention, preparedness, resilience and
sustainability, as prescribed in the nexus paradigm.8 They entail the provision of support to local
stakeholders in joint efforts to address the root causes of inequity and deprivation, and to
provide rights holders with assistance and sustained protection from harm. In accordance with its
mandate, UNICEF in Afghanistan engages primarily with the government in its efforts to build
sustainable capacity.
▪ Gender integration is central to equity and the advancement of rights for women and girls. This
entails fighting gender-based violence, achieving the greater representation of women and girls
among UNICEF stakeholders – including in programme design – and ensuring that UNICEF
7 UNICEF, Core Commitments for Children in Humanitarian Action, 2020.
8 OECD, DAC Recommendation on the Humanitarian-Development-Peace Nexus, OECD/LEGAL/5019, 2021.
Itad 4 August 2021 31
Final Report
interventions are better suited to their specific needs.9 By promoting equal rights for women and
girls, gender integration aims to increase their fuller participation in public life, and unleash
untapped potential in support of development for all.
Context of the Intervention
Developments in the Political and Security Landscape
Beginning with the drawdown of the NATO-led International Security Assistance Force (ISAF) in
2014, the period covered by this evaluation is marked by growing uncertainty, during which security,
rule of law and governance gains made over the previous decade have often been reversed. In
recent years, the power vacuum caused by the phase-out of ISAF has caused an escalation of
hostilities on the ground, with far-reaching humanitarian consequences and profound implications
for the delivery of both emergency relief and development programmes. By 2018, about half of the
national territory was under Taliban control or was contested, raising fundamental issues around
coverage and access and, ultimately, the equity of approaches that bypass non-state actors and their
systems of governance. 10 Developments of particular note include:
Increasing conflict intensity, initiated by various actors. This poses an overwhelming security and
humanitarian challenge, and this situation prompted the UN to declare in August 2017 that
Afghanistan was no longer in a post-conflict situation but was a country undergoing active conflict.
This security situation is likely to deteriorate further following the upcoming withdrawal of all
remaining US forces.
The social contract is attenuating as a result of fractured state structures, weak government
capacity, limited public service provision and systemic corruption. The presidential elections held in
2019 were contested and marred by violence which resulted in over 450 civilian casualties, largely
caused by the Taliban, which has further undermined confidence in the electoral process in some
sections of the community.11 Swathes of Afghanistan are now governed by the Taliban shadow
government and, in both hard-to-reach and GIRoA-controlled areas, informal and formal justice
systems serve to perpetuate inequalities and human rights abuses.
Natural disasters and COVID-19. In 2017–18 Afghanistan experienced significant food insecurity,
brought about by five consecutive years of low-yield wheat harvests, made worse by a severe
drought in 2018 which affected over two-thirds of the country, putting 3.6 million people in need of
life-saving assistance, and displacing 280,000. An already precarious situation has been exacerbated
in 2020 by the COVID-19 pandemic; in November 2020 UNDP assessed that the impact of COVID-19
in Afghanistan would result in a GDP loss of 6% in 2020, leading to a cumulative real GDP loss of
12.5% by 2024 unless an effective recovery policy and strategy is put in place,12 while the 2021
Humanitarian Needs Overview (HNO) notes that the effects of conflict, economic decline, natural
hazards, and now COVID-19, have contributed to even greater deterioration in food security in 2020.
Impact on women, girls and boys: Afghanistan has the second lowest score on the UN gender
development index (GDI) globally, with Yemen scoring lowest.13 The deteriorating political and
security landscape has had particular impacts for women, girls and boys. The UN gender index
reports the percentage of women experiencing intimate partner violence between 2005 and 2019 as
50.8%; however, in reality this may be much higher, as monitoring is hindered by instability and
deeply discriminatory social norms.
9 UNICEF, Core Commitments for Children in Humanitarian Action, 2020.
10 On non-state systems of governance in Afghanistan, see, for example, Ashley Jackson, Life under the Taliban Shadow Government,
Overseas Development Institute, 2018.
11 OCHA, Humanitarian Needs Overview 2020.
12 UNDP, Covid-19 Socio-Economic Impact Assessment Fiscal Options in Response to the Coronavirus Crisis, November 2020.
13 UNDP, ‘Human development reports’, available at: http://hdr.undp.org/en/indicators/68606
Itad 4 August 2021 32
Final Report
As the conflict has intensified, women, girls and boys have increasingly become victims of violence,
and conflict-related sexual violence remains a serious issue including against boys.14 2015 was a
particularly deadly year. Insurgents improved their ability to exploit Afghan forces, leading to
increased ground fighting and suicide and other attacks in major cities. UNAMA documented 11,002
civilian casualties (3,545 deaths and 7,457 injured), which represented a 37% increase in women
casualties and a 14% increase in child casualties from the previous year, with one in four casualties
in 2015 being children.15
The deteriorating political and security landscape is resulting in an increasingly precarious livelihood
situation for Afghans, with particular consequences for women and children. The 2019 Whole of
Afghanistan (WoA) Assessment estimated that more than 80% of the population was living on less
than USD 1.90 per day, which is pushing people into debt. Travel bans and lockdowns are also
furthering the gender livelihood gap as informal sectors close down, where women make up the
majority of the workforce.16 Impoverished and displaced households are coming under increasing
pressure as a result of recent shocks, with evidence suggesting that more households are resorting
to customary negative coping mechanisms. For example, many children are driven into child labour
before they are old enough to go to school, contributing to low education enrolment rates – nearly
half of all school-age children in Afghanistan are not in formal education.17 The issue is particularly
pronounced for girls – 60% of all out-of-school children are girls – and child marriages are also
increased under economic strain: in July–October alone, 162 cases of child marriage or betrothal
were registered among displaced people.18
In 2019, 3.8 million children were in need of life-saving interventions due to rising security incidents,
internal displacements and food insecurity from drought.19 The delivery of humanitarian
interventions to affected populations is impeded by weak infrastructure and extreme geographical
terrains, making it difficult to reach widely scattered communities. In addition, as of 31 January
2020, 229 districts were under the Afghan government’s control, which is only about 56.3% of the
total Afghan districts.20 Together, these factors throw up access obstacles to delivering services,
collecting data and monitoring results.
The ACP notes that there have been some improvements in social service provision in recent years;21
however, access is not always equitable, with geographic differences, an urban/rural divide and
societal norms having a negative impact on women and girls in particular. As districts slip out of
government control, women and girls are also increasingly disadvantaged; the CEDAW 2020 report
highlights, for instance, that ‘many cases of gender-based violence and discrimination against
women and girls are referred to jirgas and shuras for advice or resolution, especially in rural and
remote areas. Furthermore, the decisions made by the informal justice mechanisms were reported to
frequently discriminate against women’.
Changes in National Policy Frameworks During the Period of Study
During the period of study, GIRoA has promulgated a number of relevant enabling laws, strategies
and directives that have sought to improve the situation of women, girls and boys in Afghanistan. In
14 ‘Office of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict’, available at:
https://www.un.org/sexualviolenceinconflict/countries/afghanistan/
15 UNAMA Afghanistan: Annual report 2015: Protection of Civilians in Armed Conflict, February 2016.
16 Veronica Kamanga-Njikho and Qandigul Tajik, ‘Female-Headed Households Bear the Brunt of Covid-19 as Livelihood Gaps Increase’,
April 2020, available at: https://www.unicef.org/rosa/stories/female-headed-households-bear-brunt-covid-19-livelihood-gaps-increase
17 UNICEF, Gender alert on Covid-19 Afghanistan, July 2020.
18 UNICEF Afghanistan, Annual Report 2018.
19 UNICEF Afghanistan, Annual Report 2019.
20 ‘Special Inspector General for Afghanistan Reconstruction (SIGAR)’, available at https://www.sigar.mil/
21 The ACP notes, for example, the following results with regard to basic services in the 2010–14 ACP: a) that enrolment in basic
education rose from 7.3 million to 8.6 million between 2010 and 2012, although for girls this represented an increase of just 1%; b) routine
immunisation, newborn care and malnutrition interventions were scaled up; c) by the end of 2013 the CPAN network was active in 54
districts, with 11,354 cases of child rights violations cases reported since 2010.
Itad 4 August 2021 33
Final Report
general the implementation of these reforms has often been quite lacklustre, with a notable uptick
in activity prior to Joint Coordination Monitoring Board (JCMB) meetings and pledging conferences.
There have also been regular changes of senior staff in partner ministries, especially after the 2019
elections.
During the period of review, the Ministry of the Economy and the UNDP drafted the Afghanistan
Sustainable Development Goals (A-SDGs). This document presents the alignment of A-SDG targets
and indicators for with the Afghanistan National Peace and Development Framework (ANPDF) and
National Priority Programmes (NPPs). Following from this, the UN agencies further discussed ways to
optimise and harmonise their efforts and to increase efficiency and effectiveness. These exercises
led to the issuance of the ‘Afghanistan: “One UN – One Programme”’ document, submitted to the
Afghan President in November 2017.22 Ultimately, the coordination between GIRoA and the UN
culminated with the production in March 2018 of the ‘One UN for Afghanistan’ strategic
document,23 covering the period 2018–21, and the technical ‘One UN for Afghanistan Results
Framework’ in August of the same year.24
Other relevant policy changes of note include:
Table 2: Timeline of relevant policy changes
Year Relevant policy change
In July 2015 GIRoA launched its first UNSCR 1325 National Action Plan (NAP), which has been
2015
developed to address the challenges women face in the aftermath of war and conflict in
Afghanistan. However, this did not address disarmament issues or connect the proliferation of
weapons with women's insecurity, and it did not include an allocated or estimated budget or
provide a clear reference on the mechanism for civil society involvement.
2015 The Ministry of Public Health (MoPH) signed the ‘Kabul Declaration for Maternal & Child
Health’ which identified targets to reduce maternal, newborn and child mortality by 2020.
2016 Finalisation of the National Education Sector Plan III (NESP III) by the Ministry of Education
(MoE), which includes an increased focus on addressing girls’ education. UNICEF contributed
technical assistance to the MoE in the formulation process.
2018 During 2018, GIRoA took important steps to generate data and establish a policy base for child-
sensitive social protection, including developing a Multidimensional Poverty Index. UNICEF
provided technical assistance to MoPH to develop the Reproductive Maternal Newborn Child
and Adolescent Health Strategy and financially supported the Afghanistan Central Civil Registry
Agency to develop an offline birth registration database which registered over 408,600
children during January–October 2018.
Also in 2018, a new penal code was adopted. Its draft had originally included a specific chapter
on the elimination of violence against women, but the final adopted version of the 2018 did not
include any reference to criminal offences of violence against women (with the exception of
rape). However, the code was later amended by presidential decree (number 262) which
criminalised all five serious offences against women mentioned in the End Violence Against
Women (EVAW) law.
2019 The country’s first Child Protection Law was passed by presidential decree. This is fully aligned
with the global Convention on the Rights of the Child and accompanied by a corresponding
National Child Protection Strategy. In 2019 further progressive legislation and strategies
included the National Public Nutrition Strategy (2019–23) and free legal aid for all children in
detention, along with psychosocial support and psychological counselling and an increase of
47% in the child protection budget of the Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs.
22 United Nations, Afghanistan: “One UN – One Programme”: 1 January 2018 – 31 December 2021, November 2017.
23 GIRoA and UN, One UN for Afghanistan: 1 January 2018 – 31 December 2021, March 2018.
24 The One UN Strategy document reviewed by the evaluation team is not signed by ether the UN or GIRoA.
Itad 4 August 2021 34
Final Report
Impact of the Context on the ACP since 2015
Balancing Strategic Objectives with Escalating Needs
During this highly dynamic period, characterised by a deteriorating political and security context and
escalating humanitarian needs, the UNICEF Country Programme is being guided by the 2014 Country
Programme Document (ACP 2014). An MTR was conducted in 2017, to inform a programme
response to the impact of the changing country context and escalating needs. The MTR
recommended that the country programme should demonstrate additional strategic commitment to
the more structured One UN environment, which aimed to supersede the UN Development
Assistance Framework (UNDAF) as the key system-wide platform to support progress towards the
SDGs. The MTR also called for greater focus on programme delivery against the Grand Bargain
commitments, the humanitarian-development nexus, and cross-cutting commitments now
embedded in UNICEF’s revised CCCs.
Since the MTR, the Afghan context has continued to deteriorate and humanitarian needs have
continued to escalate. This is emphasised in an HNO issued in December 2019 – i.e. for 2020 (with a
further update for 2021) – which stated that upward adjustments in needs have been required on a
year-by-year basis over the period of the ACP. As highlighted by interviews with ACO staff during the
inception period of this evaluation, in this period UNICEF has sought to continually adapt to ongoing
waves of contextual change and to continuously balance escalating needs with the strategic
objectives highlighted in the MTR.
ACO efforts to navigate this challenging environment have resulted in strategic and technical shifts
and structural reviews of ACO itself, including outposts, use of service providers, and staffing
structures. ACO has attempted to align its work with the overall humanitarian and development
community as the international community has shifted approaches between 2015 and 2020 with
regard to how acute and chronic need should be prioritised and responded to. These changes, as
noted by the 2020 UNICEF Coverage and Quality in Complex Humanitarian Situations Evaluation,
have constrained UNICEF’s targeting, mobilisation, and its options for inclusion in resilience
activities. A number of stakeholders in this evaluation pointed to the overwhelming levels of need
throughout the country. This may have increased the complexity for ACO to judge where the
appropriate balance between coverage and equity should lie.
Progress in Implementing the Triple Nexus
ACO documents for the period 2014 to 2020 reveal that convergence and integration of
humanitarian response (the double nexus) is a clear priority area for the country office. Previous
reviews during this period have highlighted that progress has generally been slow in this area but
that opportunities to build on good practice do exist. The 2017 MTR, for example, found continuing
evidence of siloed working and also noted that ACO lacked evidence that system or community-level
resilience is being recognised, assessed, and built upon in programming. The 2020 Coverage and
Quality Evaluation corroborates these findings but also identifies positive examples of integration
(such as the polio programme) and opportunities to build on these successes. Interviews conducted
during the inception period for this evaluation also highlight that this area of ACO’s work is
continuing to evolve, and identify this as a relevant area of focus for the SPE, for example to
determine if momentum is being maintained through mechanisms such as geographical focus,
access points and advocacy. It should be noted that challenges in implementing the triple nexus are
not unique to ACO. As detailed by other recent UNICEF global evaluations,25 UNICEF globally had, in
common with other organisations, struggled to provide staff with consistent definitions,
25 Andrew Featherstone and Charlotte Lattimer, Evaluation of UNICEF’s Coverage and Quality in Complex Humanitarian Situations:
Afghanistan Evaluation Report, August 2020; UNICEF, Global Evaluation of UNICEF’s WASH Programming in Protracted Crises. 2014–19,
2020.
Itad 4 August 2021 35
Final Report
terminologies, and guidance on linking humanitarian and development or nexus thinking, even as it
has maintained a commitment to the principles of nexus thinking over time.
While UNICEF’s focus on the double nexus is clear, evidence for its alignment to the triple nexus, and
its support to the peace component, has been more circumspect. In relation to the One UN
Framework, it has been questioned whether UNICEF has a mandate to be working on peace when
UNDP and UNAMA are mandated with this focus. However, in the context of Afghanistan, there are
a number of areas of UNICEF’s work which align to the triple nexus. These include, for example, the
importance of peace building to how UNICEF negotiates for access (at field level and in Doha) and
implicit relevance to its work with child soldiers. The SPE will examine broadly how much of the
UNICEF Conflict Sensitivity and Peace Building Programming Guide (2016) is considered in the design
and implementation of programming in Afghanistan.
Strategy to Achieve Access, Coverage and Equity for Women and Children
This SPE uses UNICEF’s definition of equity, which means that all children have an opportunity to
survive, develop and reach their full potential without discrimination, bias or favouritism. This
interpretation is consistent with the Convention on the Rights of the Child, which guarantees the
fundamental rights of every child regardless of gender, race, religious beliefs, income, physical
attributes, geographical location or other status. The equity-based approach in UNICEF’s
programmes and policies seeks to understand and address the root causes of inequity so that all
children, particularly those who suffer the worst deprivations in society, have access to education,
health care, sanitation, clean water, protection and other services necessary for their survival,
growth and development.
This evaluation has identified four informal strategies employed by UNICEF to gain access into hard-
to-reach areas: Decentralising ACO; responding to Taliban requests for the provision of services
and/or multi-sector packages of support; access through implementing partners, extenders and
frontline workers; and negotiating work agreements with the Taliban. These strategies have been
explored in the evaluation in terms of their contribution to the goal of leaving no one behind
(section 4.2.1 on Equity).
The MTR does not comment at length upon the issue of equity. It recommends that the overarching
goal is retained and was clear about the limits of the analytical approach used to prioritise at
province level to ‘achieve the dual goals of reducing inequity and increasing efficiency and
effectiveness’. The findings underpinning recommendation 35 suggest that in the view of the MTR
team, pragmatism was as important as the need to ensure equity in the selection of provinces. The
MTR concluded by stating that there was a need to ensure that every programme adhered to human
rights and equity principles and one of the eight strategic shifts recommended that ‘every
programme focused more on reducing gender inequality’. There was, however, no direct reference
to disability. The 2020 Coverage and Quality Evaluation referred several times to the data gaps and
the challenges of getting information about these needs, particularly in hard-to-reach areas-
controlled areas. The evaluation concluded that they could not determine the extent to which equity
(need and vulnerability) was informing coverage decisions. UNICEF’s target-driven approach to
monitoring was also found to impede coverage relative to need.
The Coverage and Quality Evaluation concluded that progress was being made on strengthening
gender integration across the ACO and programming, but not on inclusion of disability or securing
improved access to customised services by disabled persons. The evaluation documented multiple
processes and actions under way to remedy this issue, and also noted that the revised CCCs laid out
UNICEF’s corporate expectations clearly with regard to equity and, in particular, with regard to
gender and disability.
Itad 4 August 2021 36
Final Report
Capacity Building
UNICEF’s work is built on a large variety of partnerships and collaborations. Government
institutional capacity building is actioned through the use of NTAs, who comprise a large component
of the UN intervention in Afghanistan. NTAs are embedded throughout government line ministries
and agencies (at national and subnational levels) with the objectives of assisting in capacity building
and plugging capacity gaps. NTAs are paid by international partners and using Regular Resources
funds, and serve to increase GIRoA capacity beyond the formal civil service roster (tashkeel). GIRoA
has been the main implementing partner for the UNICEF ACO in terms of financing, sectoral and
geographic scope throughout the country. However, limited capacity, a lack of transparency and
curtailed access to extensive parts of the country have affected the quality of this collaboration. In
some instances, partnerships with CSOs have been forged to enable UNICEF to overcome these
challenges and to progressively expand its access into communities.26
Gender Integration
Within the 2015–21 CPD, gender was considered as a cross-cutting issue to be mainstreamed across
all programmes. The CPD highlights a two-pronged approach, including strengthening the realisation
of rights of all individuals (girls, boys, men and women) and strengthening institutional effectiveness,
with a focus on eliminating child marriage, improving access to health services, and education for
adolescent girls. There is limited additional analysis within the CPD of approaches to this, enabling
factors to leverage, barriers, or potential partnerships with other actors leading on gender
inequality.
Within the Afghanistan CPD extension request in 2018 there is no reference to gender, but it is
highlighted that one of the four headline results the CPD will continue to focus on will be increasing
girls’ access to education.27
The MTR found that a gender dimension was not ‘adequately and routinely included in data
collection, analysis, reports, and advocacy’ and that there was inadequate targeting of girls and weak
reviews of constraints and progress with regard to UNICEF contributions towards gender equality.28
The MTR recommended (recommendation 40) that this be reviewed across all programmes, and this
review was subsequently conducted in 2018. This was followed by the production of a detailed
gender strategy in 201929 that references the (new) UNICEF Strategic Plan 2018–21.30 The 2019 ACO
strategy commits to mainstreaming gender, and emphasises gender equality and the empowerment
of women and girls as a guiding principle, while introducing targeted gender priorities in line with
the UNICEF global Gender Action Plan (GAP).31 The GAP elaborates on gendered dimensions across
the five goal areas of the Strategic Plan with a vision of (a) accelerating gender programming to
expand to a broader range of issues and (b) institutionalising gender within systems and processes
within UNICEF.
26 Andrew Featherstone and Charlotte Lattimer, Evaluation of UNICEF’s Coverage and Quality in Complex Humanitarian Situations:
Afghanistan Evaluation Report, August 2020.
27 UNICEF, Afghanistan CPD Extension Request 2018.
28 GIRoA/UNICEF, Mid-Term Review of the Country Programme of Cooperation Islamic Republic of Afghanistan and UNICEF, Summary
Report 28 August 2017, p.17.
29 UNICEF, Gender Strategy 2019-2021 For the Afghanistan Country Office, 2019.
30 UNICEF, Strategic Plan 2018-2021, 2017.
31 UNICEF, Gender Action Plan 2018-2021, 2017.
Itad 4 August 2021 37
Final Report
Findings
The findings below are organised around four key thematic areas: i) the nexus, ii) coverage and
access, iii) partnerships and capacity building, and iv) gender integration.
Focus Area 1: the Nexus
This section examines how UNICEF has positioned itself and its activities to support the triple nexus
and to reinforce the coherence of the humanitarian, development and peacebuilding spheres, both in
its country programme and in a system-wide perspective.
Programme Design and Internal Positioning in Support of the Triple Nexus
Summary of findings:
In UNICEF’s ACP, humanitarian and development activities are tightly integrated and generally
complement each other well. There is a sense that UNICEF activities do, at least indirectly, help
build an environment conducive to peace. However, further evidence is needed to verify this and
inform programming. Its approach to risk has been consistent, but there is little evidence that it
has drawn on purpose-made tools and guidance for preparedness and risk-informed
programming. This is due mainly to the limitations of these tools in the Afghan context. The 2019
Procedure on Linking Humanitarian and Development Programmes has had limited impact so far
on the ACP; progress in applying the nexus to the ACP has resulted from opportunities taken
pragmatically at country level, rather than on the basis of the Procedure. Further progress on the
nexus is hampered by contextual obstacles that are generally known and well understood, yet
have not so far elicited clear positioning or policymaking on the part of ACO.
Internal Positioning in Support of the Triple Nexus
There is a very high degree of integration between humanitarian and development activities
planned in the ACP. For the purpose of this evaluation, the operative definition of the nexus is that
set out in the 2020 OECD-DAC Recommendation32 (see Box 1 below). By this benchmark, UNICEF’s
country programme in Afghanistan conforms closely to the nexus paradigm – at least as far as
humanitarian and development programming are concerned (See Section 4.1.2 below for a separate
discussion on peacebuilding).
At the planning level, the ACP results framework reflects a very high degree of integration between
humanitarian and development programming.33 Of the 53 groups of activity planned at output level,
well over half (34) are geared specifically to improving the sustainability of assistance provided,
through systems- or capacity building interventions aimed at government, community or civil society
partners. Where outputs are aimed at addressing emergency needs or acute vulnerability, the
preferred approach is to draw on local capabilities in doing so. For example, in the health sector,
humanitarian assistance to acutely deprived or vulnerable populations, including internally displaced
persons (IDPs), relies on local capacities in maternal, newborn and child health (MNCH) care, as well
as in vaccine management, social mobilisation for primary healthcare, and data collection and
analysis for health monitoring purposes. Where local capabilities are too weak to address acute
needs, resources are budgeted in the ACP to develop them. For example, in Water and Sanitation,
budgetary provisions have been made to build the capacity of the Ministry of Rural Rehabilitation
and Development (MRRD) as required to ensure its management of equitable and sustainable WASH
32 OECD, DAC Recommendation on the Humanitarian-Development-Peace Nexus, OECD/LEGAL/5019, 2021.
33 The version referred to here is that of March 2020, which was revised following the ACD MTR of 2017. The earlier version reflected a
comparable degree of integration between humanitarian and development programme strands.
Itad 4 August 2021 38
Final Report
programmes. In Education, likewise, budgets have been allocated to increase the capacity of the
MoE to progressively take over the management of community-based education (CBE). In Child
Protection (CP), budgets are similarly available to strengthen national and subnational management
capacity.
Across the majority of sector outcomes in the ACP, about the same amount of resources are
budgeted for systems and capacity building as for emergency or humanitarian assistance. This
budgetary balance between humanitarian and development outputs is illustrated in Figure 6 below,
and see Annex 6.8 for the budgetary categorisation that the evaluation team conducted. It reflects a
deliberate effort on the part of ACO to combine humanitarian and development outputs under the
same outcomes.
The nexus: an applicable definition for UNICEF in Afghanistan
This evaluation uses the definition of the nexus set out in the DAC Recommendation on the
Humanitarian-Development-Peace Nexus, released by OECD-DAC in 2020.
Central to this definition is the notion of interlinkages between humanitarian, development and
peace programming, at both policy and programme levels. Notably, the Recommendation posits
that development activities are key to enabling the better prevention and mitigation of
humanitarian crises. Implicit in this is the centrality of resilience and the strengthening of local
response capacities, which the Recommendation explicitly supports.
An important assumption in the DAC Recommendation is that linkages between the
humanitarian and development spheres require stronger partnerships between actors involved
in each of these two areas. Based on this assumption, the DAC Recommendation calls for
complementarity among aid actors, based on their comparative advantage. It is important to
note that, in the case of UNICEF, this dimension of the nexus has more limited relevance, as its
dual mandate spans both the humanitarian and the development spheres.
In engaging in the type of partnerships envisioned in the nexus, the key objective for UNICEF in
Afghanistan is therefore the pursuit of resilience and sustainability, underpinned by activities
aimed at developing the capacity of its partners.
Another element of the DAC Recommendation that is of immediate relevance to UNICEF in
Afghanistan is its call for proactive political-level engagement in advancing the nexus. This is in
recognition of the fact that a programmatic outlook alone is unlikely to generate the momentum
needed at political level to sustain system-wide efforts towards the nexus.
Finally, it is worthy of note that the DAC Recommendation places strong emphasis on conflict
sensitivity as a minimal requirement in peace programming. This is consistent with UNICEF’s own
guidance, as set out in the 2016 Programming Guide on Conflict Sensitivity and Peacebuilding.
Preparedness as a formal activity does not provide a strong basis for nexus programming. As
discussed in a finding below on risk management, the Emergency Preparedness Platform (EPP),
which is ACO’s main programme tool to ensure minimal standards in preparedness, is not well suited
to the Afghan context and is little used by ACO staff. Across the sectors examined, the evaluation
team found that preparedness activities consisted mostly of ad hoc risk analysis, assessment and
scenario planning. Due mainly to capacity and resource constraints, preparedness rarely extends to
physical measures such as, for example, community-based disaster risk management or stock pre-
positioning at district level. In the Afghan context, risk is multidimensional and omnipresent, and
preparedness necessarily implies trade-offs in contingency planning. In the words of one
interviewee, it is difficult in practice to ‘prepare for everything’ as this implies zero-sum decisions
between competing priorities. For example, preparing for floods in Parwan province may divert
Itad 4 August 2021 39
Final Report
resources away from drought preparedness in Badghis or Badakshan provinces. Given these
resource constraints, formal preparedness activities in Afghanistan appear unlikely to provide a
viable basis for nexus programming.
Rather than a formal approach to preparedness, the evaluation found that a more prevalent trend
across ACP programme sectors has been to use emergency responses as pragmatic entry points to
‘build back better’ interventions aimed, where possible, at better resilience and prevention. This
approach, which implies a crossover from humanitarian to development programming, is discussed
in more detail in a finding below.
Across UNICEF personnel in Afghanistan, there is good general knowledge of the humanitarian-
development nexus and how to apply it to programme activities. In the survey conducted for this
evaluation among UNICEF country office staff, 82.6% agreed or strongly agreed that ACO had a good
practical understanding of how best to integrate humanitarian and development objectives at
programme level. Among UN agencies, NGOs and donors surveyed, 69% agreed or strongly agreed
with the same statement.
Among ACO staff, 75.8% agreed or strongly agreed that their colleagues were familiar with the
nexus. In staff interviews, integrating humanitarian and development activities across the ACP was
also widely understood to be a desirable goal. One senior member of staff pointed out that the
pursuit of this goal had become established best practice among aid practitioners over a decade ago,
and was now accepted as a given by ACO sector chiefs. Another source pointed out that,
independently of formal policy guidance on the nexus, building local capacity to sustain programme
delivery was widely understood by staff to be an elemental part of risk management and mitigation.
Echoing this, one source said that in the protracted emergency context of Afghanistan, recurrent
emergencies over time had gradually caused development goals (i.e. resilience, sustainability, and
the implied strengthening of local capacities) to become integral to programmes aimed at
addressing acute humanitarian needs. This convergence of humanitarian and development strands
in programming occurred organically, as immediate circumstances allowed or called for, as well as in
a more planned manner. It is consistent with the fact that, as documented in research literature,34
any progress towards the nexus in complex emergencies will rarely be linear. Instead, it will tend to
involve an intermittent or even simultaneous focus on humanitarian and developments objectives.35
34 On the shift from a continuum to a contiguum model of the nexus, see, for example, Damian Lilly, Protection and the Nexus: Tensions
and Opportunities, Network Paper 82, HPN at ODI, April 2020.
35 Ibid., as well as, for example, Tasneem Mowjee, Donata Garrasi and Lydia Poole, Coherence in Conflict: Bringing humanitarian and
development aid streams together, DANIDA, November 2015.
Itad 4 August 2021 40
Final Report
Figure 6. Utilised Funds, by Programme Sector* (2015–20)
Utilised Funds, by Programme Sector
Child Protection
Development
Humanitarian
WASH
Other
r
o
t Education
c
e
S
Health
Total (4 sectors)
$0 $200 $400 $600 $800
USD (millions)
*Qualitatively assessed and categorised based on output statements. Source: Afghanistan Country Plan Results Framework,
March 2020.
The nexus is an imperfect paradigm for some of UNICEF’s activities in Afghanistan. Nonetheless, in
their implementation, development and humanitarian interventions can generally complement
each other well if the context allows.36 This is illustrated by ACO’s COVID-19 response. Across the
four sectors examined, approaches to the nexus varied. For some, the nexus provided an imperfect
paradigm. For example, some respondents pointed out that in the child protection, nutrition and
immunisation sectors, humanitarian and development programme strands are too closely
intertwined to be distinguishable. As illustrated by the training of frontline staff, addressing
humanitarian emergencies at scale in these sectors necessarily calls for the building of some local
capacity, which will naturally form the basis for development programmes, as long as the context
allows. Whether the activities involved belong to the ‘humanitarian’ or ‘development’ categories is
of little relevance to objectives pursued or to outcomes obtained. In this sense, the nexus as a
formal paradigm might be seen as an artificial construct or ‘a solution in search of problems’.
The synergistic relationship between humanitarian and development activities was generally viewed
as self-evident by ACO and other UN personnel queried on the subject. There was a sense among
interviewees that further progress towards the nexus depended not so much on better nexus
expertise but rather on the removal of structural or contextual barriers to progress, which were well
documented and well known to the aid community in Afghanistan. These obstacles, and ACO’s
response to them, are examined in detail in a finding below.
In the planning phase, ACO’s deliberate aim of achieving coherence between humanitarian and
development strands in its country programme is implicit in the ACP’s results framework. An
example of how this translates in practice is provided by its recent COVID-19 response, in which
emergency interventions drew heavily on local capacities built with UNICEF support in the preceding
36 For more detail on contextual obstacles to humanitarian-development coherence, see dedicated finding below.
Itad 4 August 2021 41
Final Report
years.37 Referring to the COVID-19 response, multiple ACO interviewees for this evaluation noted
that the pandemic in Afghanistan had provided an entry point for further development work in a
Build Back Better perspective.38 This latter component of ACO’s response is less likely to be followed
through to its intended outcomes, judging by prior emergencies in which interventions remained
confined mainly to urgent humanitarian support and did not prompt a consolidation of development
gains.39 The evaluation team could not conduct in-depth research into the root causes of this bias,
but there is some evidence to suggest that it may have been due to budget constraints or donor
earmarking in favour of emergency interventions.
There are mixed perceptions around the strength of ACO’s practical understanding of
peacebuilding objectives and how to integrate them at programme level, and while respondents
provided examples of the ACP’s contribution to peace, evidence to support this is anecdotal.
Further, there is limited understanding and use among staff of UNICEF guidance on peacebuilding
and conflict sensitivity. In the survey conducted among ACO staff for this evaluation, 51.7% of
respondents agreed that UNICEF in Afghanistan has a good, practical understanding of how to
integrate peacebuilding objectives at programme level.40 There was no significant variation in this
response rate across programme sectors. Among other UN agencies, NGOs and donors, 38% agreed
with the same statement, with no significant variation across these groups.41
At sector level, no evidence could be found that peacebuilding objectives are formally integrated in
programming. In interviews, a range of diverse examples was given of how the ACP supports peace,
and what could be done to increase this contribution further. While plausible, these opinions are not
supported by evidence, and no research has been conducted so far to corroborate them. They do
deserve mention, however, and provide two insights into ACO peacebuilding. First, a diverse range
of possible avenues exists for peacebuilding, and provides a basis for research and analysis on the
subject. Second, there is currently no unified understanding of what peacebuilding means in
programming terms, and how it might be integrated in existing results frameworks.
As detailed further in a finding below, the evaluation team found that ACO staff had a very generic
understanding of the concept and application of conflict sensitivity, which aims to minimise the risk
that aid interventions unwittingly fuel conflict or other adverse events. Most staff interviewed were
unaware that UNICEF guidance prescribes conflict sensitivity as a minimum requirement in peace
programming, as called for by the triple nexus. Likewise, there was limited evidence that staff were
familiar with the core conceptual distinction proposed in UNICEF guidance between conflict
sensitivity (i.e. ‘do no harm’) and peacebuilding (i.e. ‘do more good’).42
The evaluation team also noted a degree of ambiguity around the stated purpose of conflict analysis
work conducted by ACO staff. While some interviewees linked conflict analysis to the goal of making
programmes more conflict-sensitive (‘do no harm’), the majority viewed conflict analysis as being
integral to needs assessments, as required for preparedness purposes and to ensure that
programmes in their design are a good fit with conflict-related needs. These two finalities call for
distinct types of analysis. The lack of distinction between these two approaches is probably
37 The response and mitigation measures rolled-out by ACO during the COVID-19 pandemic spanned all its programme sectors, and relied
heavily on local partner personnel trained or otherwise supported by UNICEF in WASH, Health, Nutrition, Protection and Education.
Source: UNICEF Afghanistan, COVID-19 Response: Brief # 04, October 2020.
38 This perspective is echoed at regional level. See, for example, UNICEF, Direct and Indirect Effects of the COVID-19 Pandemic and
Response in South Asia, March 2021.
39 For examples, UNICEF’s drought response of 2018 was focused primarily on life-saving needs. Similarly, its response to floods in 2010
was confined to emergency assistance. Sources: UNICEF, Western Region Drought Response – Humanitarian Situation Report #2,
September 2018; UNICEF, Western Region Drought Response – Humanitarian Situation Report #3, November 2018; UNICEF press release
on floods in central and eastern Afghanistan, August, 2010.
40 Itad surveys conducted for this evaluation between 15 March and 17 April 2021.
41 Ibid.
42 UNICEF, Conflict Sensitivity and Peacebuilding: Programming Guide, 2016.
Itad 4 August 2021 42
Final Report
reinforced by the fact that, currently, the only available platform for conducting formal conflict
sensitivity analysis by ACO is the online EPP.
While there was strong evidence to show that conflict analysis as part of needs assessments is
conducted across the ACP’s programme sectors, the evaluation team found that only WASH engages
in analysis deliberately aimed at conflict sensitivity in a peacebuilding perspective. This consists of
ongoing assessments of whether limited access to water might exacerbate communal conflict, and
the support of systems of water governance that ensure equitable access to this scarce commodity.
The Procedure on Linking Humanitarian and Development (LHD) Programming has had limited
impact so far on the ACP. There was a sense among ACO staff that the Procedure is too far
removed from Afghanistan’s operational realities to be applicable. Significant efforts have been
made to operationalise the procedure, yet it remains uncertain whether programme strands
stemming from it will lead to the desired outcomes. In interviews, most ACO staff expressed well-
informed views on the nexus, as well as on programme-level opportunities and constraints relating
to its application in Afghanistan. In contrast, the evaluation team found that staff had little specific
knowledge of the 2019 UNICEF Procedure on LHD, which is UNICEF’s main policy document on the
humanitarian-development nexus.43 Among management, there was a sense that the LHD Procedure
had been formulated in isolation of Afghanistan’s operational context, and was therefore of limited
relevance to it.
In part, this perception was borne out by the fact that, in 2019, ROSA commissioned an independent
consultant to help UNICEF in Afghanistan (and other countries) to break down the LHD Procedure
into a set of specific action points applicable at country level. In the view of several sources in Kabul,
this was necessary as the Procedure on its own fell short of providing context-specific guidance.
In Afghanistan, work with the consultant involved both the Field Coordination Unit and the Social
Policy Section, and aimed specifically at advancing the nexus through cash-based interventions
(CBIs) and the development of social protection capacity. CBIs and social protection can have key
enabling roles in the nexus, by allowing for linkages between humanitarian cash programmes and
government-owned social safety nets.44
Before this latest attempt, previous attempts had been made to address humanitarian needs
through CBIs and social protection systems in Afghanistan, with little success (see Box 2.)
43 UNICEF, Procedure on Linking Humanitarian and Development (LHD) Programming, PD/PROCEDURE/2019/001, May 2019.
44 For a discussion on how cash-based programming can support progress towards the humanitarian-development nexus, see DAI Europe,
Grand Bargain Workshop: Linking Humanitarian Cash and Social Protection, June 2019.
Itad 4 August 2021 43
Final Report
Cash-programming and the nexus in Afghanistan
In principle, humanitarian CBIs and government-owned social protection programmes present
strong potential to enable the nexus, as their common use of cash as a modality for assistance
should make it comparatively easy to cross over from one to the other. Nonetheless, attempts at
building these linkages have a history of mixed results in Afghanistan. In 2014, ACO piloted a
child-focused social protection cash programme in Balkh, in view of assessing the feasibility and
viability of interventions in this area. In 2016 and 2017, it provided technical support to the
government to assist it in drafting a national social protection policy. With WFP and UNHCR, it
also co-authored a feasibility study that year, covering multiple options for cash-in-emergencies,
and aimed to inform subsequent programming work. Despite these efforts, CBIs launched by ACO
during the period under review have generally remained limited in size, due to contextual
obstacles to their mainstreaming. In 2017, ACO suspended a child-sensitive cash transfer pilot
project, as no prospects existed for its sustainability and handover to the Ministry of Labor and
Social Affairs (MoLSA). Cash support continues to be provided by ACO on a small scale.
In light of this it can be concluded that, thanks to the facilitation of the consultant commissioned by
ROSA in 2020, ACO has actively engaged in workstreams that stemmed from the LHD procedure, and
aimed specifically to support the operationalisation of the nexus in Afghanistan. However, the effect
of the Procedure on ACO programming to date remains limited and indirect. It consists mainly of
pursuing avenues which ACO has already explored in depth in preceding years. The final impact of
the Procedure on the nexus in Afghanistan remains uncertain, given the very limited prospects for
successful linkages of CBIs with effective social protection systems in the country.45
Contextual Obstacles to Humanitarian-Development Coherence
Despite a high degree of integration between humanitarian and development activities in its
programme planning, significant contextual obstacles limit ACO’s ability to carry this coherence
over to programme implementation. There are indications of a lack of clarity in policy and
positioning around these obstacles. As well as undermining progress towards the nexus, this may
have adversely impacted stakeholder perceptions of ACO performance. The evaluation team
identified a series of significant contextual obstacles faced by ACO in linking up humanitarian and
development programme strands, most of which relate to partnerships and capacity building (see
Box 3 below). Interviews with both ACO staff and external stakeholders made clear that these
obstacles are known and broadly understood by the aid community in Afghanistan. Some of the risks
stemming from them are registered in the risk assessments annexed to the 2019 and 2020 Annual
Management Plans (AMPs).46 However, the evaluation team found limited evidence that these
obstacles have elicited clear policy or strategic-level responses on the part of ACO, or have been
incorporated in the narratives that underpin engagement with stakeholders. Rather, the posture of
ACO staff towards these challenges was generally to accept them as inherent in the operating
context, and to assume that they have no prominent place in outbound messaging.
In part, this apparent passivity may be because some of these obstacles are politically sensitive, and
few can be resolved by ACO alone, or within the lifespan of a country programme. Nonetheless,
there is evidence that a muted policy response to these obstacles has had an adverse impact on the
quality of programmes over time. For example, they include delays in addressing shortcomings in
the NTA system, or weakened programme continuity in some sectors, such as education, that
benefit strongly from multi-year planning and funding.
45 See, for example, International Policy Centre for Inclusive Growth, COVID-19 and Social Protection in South Asia: Afghanistan,
September 2020: ‘Prior to COVID-19 […] non-humanitarian, non-contributory, flagship social assistance programmes targeting the
individual or household level only covered an estimated 0.9 per cent of the population, with local initiatives lacking government support’.
46 ACO Annual Management Plans 2019 and 2020.
Itad 4 August 2021 44
Final Report
There was also some evidence to suggest that ACO’s lack of a clear outbound narrative on these
contextual obstacles may have affected stakeholder perceptions of its work and performance. In
interviews, two donors who suspended their funding of ACP programme strands in 2019 and 2020
indicated that they had done so due in part to programme performance issues. It was not
immediately clear that these donors were aware of the very significant impact which contextual
barriers to implementation were having in the relevant programme sectors.
Contextual obstacles to partnerships
The following contextual obstacles to partnerships in a nexus perspective were consistently
mentioned by a large proportion of interviewees. Some of these obstacles are discussed in further
detail in Section 4.3.1 below:
▪ High turnover of government staff. Rapid and sometimes unpredictable staff rotations in
GIRoA line ministries have an adverse impact on the continuity of joint activities. Multiple
interviewees in the evaluation identified this as the main obstacle to substantive partnerships.
▪ High turnover of ACO staff. High turnover among ACO and other UN international staff was
also noted as an obstacle to resilience in a nexus perspective. As noted by multiple
interviewees, lack of programme hindsight among international staff is compounded by the
fact that limited use is made of ‘programme memory’ held by national staff.
▪ Siloed funding. Multiple interviewees stated that donor grants in their programme sectors are
still often earmarked for emergency or for development activities, and do not provide the
flexibility required to cross over from one to the other. These observations are borne out by
research on the subject (Alcayna, 2019; IPI, 2018; ICVA, 2017).
▪ Short funding cycles. Annual funding cycles remain prevalent for programmes in which desired
nexus outcomes can only be achieved in a multi-year timeframe. According to one
interviewee, lack of predictability in funding streams is particularly problematic in the
execution of rolling workplans (RWPs), which by necessity are reviewed annually. Even within
an annual timeframe, funding shortfalls are frequent.
▪ Lack of public revenue. Several interviewees mentioned a lack of public budget and a dearth
of on-budget donor support as barriers to greater government ownership of joint
programmes. Bilateral pledges at the Geneva Conference in late 2020 were about 20% lower
than in the previous pledging period. In these conditions, a range of activities at the core of the
nexus, most notably shock-responsive social safety nets, are unlikely to become sustainable.
▪ Elite capture and rent-seeking were mentioned in multiple interviews as serious impediments
to partnerships in a nexus perspective. Controls and verification mechanisms required to
mitigate these behaviours add drag to programme implementation and generate significant
transaction costs. In the case of NTAs, the controls in place did not fully succeed in enforcing
accountability standards on contracted personnel.
Risk Management, Risk-Informed Programming and Preparedness
Across sector programmes, there is a high level of compliance to processes relating to risk
management, risk-informed programming and preparedness. However, the extent to which this
contributes to appropriate responses to risk is limited. Despite the little use made of dedicated
programme tools, ACO’s response to major risks has been consistently well-coordinated on an ad
Itad 4 August 2021 45
Final Report
hoc basis. According to UNICEF guidance,47 risk-informed programming (RIP) should be embedded in
programme planning processes relating to both ACO’s own country programme, and system-wide
planning exercises such as UNDAF or One UN. Since the guidance was introduced in 2018, AMPs for
Afghanistan have included risk assessments as Annexes.48 A child-centred, multi-hazard risk analysis
was also conducted across the ACP in 2020,49 identifying a broad range of ‘risk factors that affect the
peaceful and resilient development of children and their communities in Afghanistan’.50 In addition, a
separate study of conflict trends in Afghanistan was commissioned in 2020.51 Among other goals,
these risk assessments aim to inform programme planning and related ToCs, and to provide entry
points for preparedness, capacity building and resilience intervention in a nexus perspective.
As the 2022–25 ACP cycle has not yet begun, it was difficult to evaluate the uptake of these
assessments in planning work. In interviews with ACO staff, however, it became clear that analysis
relating to both humanitarian and conflict risks faces two main challenges in Afghanistan. The first is
to ensure that it stays current and alive to the extreme fluidity of the context. The second is to
integrate elements of analysis that relate to both countrywide and very localised events.
From a system-wide perspective, meeting the need for agility and depth in analysis is extremely
challenging. One interviewee cited the widely held view at ACO that the study of conflict trends
carried out in 2020 was outdated by the time it was approved for internal circulation. Although
extensive and well researched, the study could not examine district-level conflict dynamics in any
detail. In several interviews, likewise, ACO staff stated that risks identified in the risk assessments
annexed to AMPs tended to be too generic to inform preparedness or contingency planning.
Although some were subject to mitigation measures built into administrative processes, such as
those relating to partnerships, none of the interviewees queried on the subject could provide an
example in which any of these risks had informed programming in any significant way.
As shown by the recent outbreak of hostilities in Panjwai district, which caused aid activities there to
be suspended while this evaluation was being conducted, it is mainly at the local level that conflict
impacts on programmes. The implications of this in terms of decentralisation, and of the critical role
of field offices in risk analysis and programme adaptiveness, are discussed in Section 4.2.2.
In terms of programme systems, one of the main tools to support risk-informed programming across
the ACP is the online EPP, which was introduced in 2018 and is hosted by ROSA. The EPP covers six
standard risks,52 against which programme sectors are required to enter contingency plans and to
update them on a twice-yearly basis. According to the EPP’s preparedness and compliance tracker,
completion rates for ACO are good, with 94% of sector-based contingency plans entered into the
system at the time of the evaluation. The tracker also monitors completion of the various fields to be
completed per sector plan and risk category. For ACO, the combined weighted score on these
measures was 70%, due to a few delayed entries.
Contrasting with these favourable scores is the quality of contingency plans entered in the EPP.
When queried about them, ACO interviewees acknowledged that many of these plans lack sufficient
detail to inform specific lines of action. For example, in the ‘Armed Conflict’ risk category, one
sector’s entry totalled less than 20 lines, with many subheadings in the template left blank. There
was a strong sense that the main reason why the EPP was periodically updated was that this is a
process requirement. According to two sources, the task was often delegated to junior staff.
47 UNICEF, Guidance on Risk-Informed Programming, 2018.
48 Risk assessments, annexed to ACO Annual Management Plans, 2019 and 2020.
49 UNICEF Afghanistan, Child-Centred Multi-Hazard Risk Analysis, May 2020.
50 Ibid.
51 UNICEF, Analysis of Current and Projected Conflict Trends to Inform the UNICEF’s Engagement in Afghanistan, internal document, May
2020.
52 The other five risk categories are earthquake, floods/landslides, epidemic/pandemic, armed conflict, and drought.
Itad 4 August 2021 46
Final Report
Despite limited use of dedicated programme tools such as the EPP and the RIP guidance, there is
strong evidence that major risks elicit consistent and well-planned programme responses. To
illustrate this, two timely examples are ACO’s response to risks posed by the COVID-19 pandemic
and by the impending drawdown of NATO troops from Afghanistan. In both instances, programme
responses to these risks were designed and managed in a largely ad hoc manner, on the basis of
‘live’ information drawn directly from programme sources on the ground, rather than from risk
registers completed in advance. According to interviewees, this did not prevent related decision
making and coordination from being timely and results-focused.
At sector level, likewise, a majority of ACO staff interviewed stated that risk was managed
pragmatically and in an ad hoc manner, with minimal reliance on formal ACO tools or guidance. For
example, in response to renewed fighting in Laghman province in May 2021, consultations took
place spontaneously between ACO programme sectors and the Jalalabad Field Office, to identify
risks and determine the feasibility and appropriateness of a response. Subsequent discussions were
informed by reports generated by six inter-agency assessment teams on the ground, and gave full
consideration to impending risks, including risks of internal displacement into Mehtalam City. The
assessments conducted and the subsequent response relied in part on UNICEF in its capacity as
WASH cluster lead. In this specific instance, the inter-agency assessment and response process took
place in a mostly localised manner. Risk and conflict analysis was conducted locally on an inter-
agency basis, with the United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA)
providing coordination and information management support to UNICEF and other humanitarian
actors. While consultations did take place between the ACO programme sectors and the Jalalabad
Field Office (FO), no evidence could be found that these discussions were prompted or facilitated by
dedicated risk management tools, other than those already embedded in the inter-agency process.
ACO managers queried on the EPP said that the limited uptake of this tool by programme sectors is
in part because of their reservations about its usefulness. To a large extent, the EPP requires a
duplication of inputs into other programme tools and processes, such as AMPs. Also, like the multi-
hazard risk assessment and the study of conflict trend commissioned in 2020, the EPP cannot
provide tactical guidance and support in the face of fast-moving or highly localised risks.
Despite these limitations, several interviewees pointed to ways in which they thought the EPP was
useful. One was to prompt programme sectors to think ahead and reflect on risks that might affect
their activities. Another was to help ensure minimal standards of preparedness at sector level. A
third was to serve as a repository of information on measures taken to mitigate risk as they arise.
The EPP does allow actions to be logged while the adverse events they aim to respond to, or to
mitigate, are unfolding. For example, this was done during ACO’s response to the COVID-19
pandemic in 2020.
In the case of COVID-19 programming, events and programme responses on the ground quickly
outpaced the EPP, and essentially confined its use to that of an ex post reporting tool. Responding to
immediate and long-term risk involved tactical emergency measures that only incrementally
provided a basis for longer-term actions. These actions were shaped by contextual factors that were
hard to predict and harder still to plan for. A highly mechanistic approach to risk, such as that
offered by the EPP, was always unlikely to capture these factors in the level of detail required for
appropriate and timely responses at field level. As shown in activity reports on ACO’s COVID-19
response,53 this did not prevent programme sectors from adapting to fast-changing circumstances as
they arose on the ground. Evidence shows that the pace and quality of measures involved in this
53 UNICEF Afghanistan, COVID-19 Response, Briefs #01 to #04, April to October 2020.
Itad 4 August 2021 47
Final Report
adaptation depended more on bottom-up information flows to inform programming than on the use
of dedicated programme tools.54
4.1.2 System-Wide Engagement and Positioning in Support of the Nexus
Summary of Findings
In Afghanistan, UNICEF’s comparative advantage in advancing the nexus derives mainly from its
dual mandate and its sectoral expertise. It has drawn on these attributes to help create
stakeholder alliances that bolster the sustainability of progress made towards the welfare of
children. UNICEF in Afghanistan is widely recognised for its unifying role among stakeholders,
but its approach to advocacy is sometimes viewed as overly cautious.
UNICEF Comparative Advantage in Promoting the Nexus
UNICEF has used its sectoral expertise and the leverage it draws from its dual mandate to rally
stakeholders around common goals, which include or contribute to programme sustainability over
time. Interviews with ACO staff and external stakeholders confirm that UNICEF’s comparative
advantage in advancing the nexus in Afghanistan draws from two main sources: its dual mandate
and its sectoral expertise. UNICEF’s dual mandate enables it, in principle, to hard-wire the
humanitarian-development nexus into its own sector programmes. This can allow it to play a more
prominent role in the relevant sectors and lessens its dependence on inter-agency partnerships in its
pursuit of the nexus. The most illustrative examples of this may be in Nutrition, Health and WASH,
where ACO can address life-saving needs while drawing on pre-existing partnerships with line
ministries to follow through with more development-oriented interventions. As noted above,
however, significant contextual obstacles in Afghanistan stand in the way of implementing
programmes that contain both humanitarian and capacity building or resilience strands. Internally,
and as discussed further in Section 4.2.1 below, slow progress in multi-sectoral programming
compounds barriers to progress in building complementarity across the humanitarian and
development areas of UNICEF’s mandate.
In interviews, there was broad agreement among stakeholders that in several sectors, ACO’s
technical expertise had allowed it to contribute substantively, if not at scale, on both sides of the
humanitarian-development nexus. Consensus on this was most notable in education and
immunisation. In immunisation, UNICEF has played a highly prominent role in a countrywide polio
vaccination campaign conducted jointly with WHO and the Afghan MoPH. The campaign has relied
heavily on capabilities built locally by UNICEF and other actors. In education in 2020, likewise, ACO
has leveraged its sectoral expertise to mobilise multiple stakeholders around a workplan to expand
programme coverage, including in contested areas. This workplan includes measures aimed at
capacity building and the creation of an environment conducive to the improved sustainability of
programme outcomes.
In child protection, ACO is working with implementing partners on the provision of technical
assistance to multiple ministries, aimed at the better implementation of the rights of the child.55 Its
support of the Child Protection Action Network (CPAN) is also at the crux of humanitarian and
54 Programme sector staff queried on the subject stated that programming decisions in the COVID-19 response relied mainly on
information stemming from the ground and conveyed to them by the field offices, partners, the clusters, and other sector-specific
coordination platforms. The same limited use of the EPP was observed in more recent plans to prepare for the drawdown of US troops,
announced on 13 April 2021. This announcement prompted a range of consultations both internal and external to ACO. At the time of
writing, programme sectors were drafting contingency plans, and arrangements were being made to recruit a consultant to assist in the
preparedness effort.
55 This includes the provision of technical support to MoLSA’s Child Protection Secretariat in its development of a national child protection
policy.
Itad 4 August 2021 48
Final Report
development programming and involves capacity and environment building at field level.56 In WASH,
ACO has demonstrably built technical capabilities among its partners, most notably the MRRD and
community development councils (CDCs). Independently of limitations in programme coverage,
discussed in further detail in Section 4.2.1 below, these capabilities contribute meaningfully to the
improved sustainability of programme outcomes.
System-wide Engagement and Advocacy in Support of the Nexus
In spite of the failure of the One UN Framework to provide a basis for structured, multilateral
engagement in Afghanistan, opportunities to engage in collective efforts to advance the nexus and
consolidate gains in system-wide sustainability have been actively pursued. Equally notably, there
is evidence to suggest that avenues that showed less promise were – rightly – deprioritised.
According to a non-ACO source, system-wide engagement with the Afghan government showed
some promise between 2016 and 2018, during the tenure of the country’s sole Senior Advisor to the
President for UN Affairs.57 However, following this official’s resignation in late 2018, structured
consultations between UN agencies and the corresponding line ministries slowed down markedly.
High-level engagement remained minimal during the COVID-19 pandemic. During this period, UN
actors were required to engage with the office of the Vice-President rather than with senior officials
of line ministries, resulting in bottlenecks and delayed responses in consultations.
In these difficult conditions, ACO and other UN actors have struggled to consolidate gains in their
partnerships with the government. At least in part, this accounts for a lack of progress in linking
humanitarian programmes with development interventions that rely on the participation of the
government.
In this context, one example worth mentioning is the lack of ACO follow-up to the concept note on
shock-responsive approaches, prepared by the UN in Afghanistan’s Bridging Humanitarian and
Development Responses Working Group.58 An internal audit conducted in 2019 noted that ACO
failed to engage with both Headquarters and the relevant GIRoA line ministry, to explore UNICEF’s
potential role in strengthening social systems in Afghanistan.59 While some level of engagement was
certainly warranted, the evaluation team found that, on balance, ACO was justified in not
considering this a priority. Indeed, its comparative advantage in contributing to social safety nets in
Afghanistan is lower than that of other stakeholders, notably the World Bank.60 Prospects for
successful outcomes in this area were highly uncertain and remain so to date.61 As illustrated in
Section 4.3, other avenues for partnership with the government drew more heavily on ACO’s
comparative advantage, and were being pursued. Interventions in these areas aimed to address
more urgent needs than those served by systems-building activities in social protection.
Despite the lack of a system-wide framework for cooperation with UN and government
stakeholders, the evaluation team found that ACO was generally seen to exert measured but
substantive leadership in its areas of expertise and comparative advantage. This related mainly to its
leadership of clusters and sub-clusters, as noted in Section 4.3 below, but was also true of its
influence in other fora, such as Spotlight and CPAN. Similarly, in more technical fora, UNICEF was
56 Sayara Research, Evaluation of Afghanistan’s Child Protection Action Network, February 2017. See also Save the Children International,
Child Rights Situation Analysis – An In-Depth Report, 2018.
57 Farkhunda Zhara Naderi was nominated to the role in December 2016 and resigned in November 2018.
58 Cited in Office of Internal Audit and Investigations (OIAI), Internal Audit of the Afghanistan Country Office, December 2019.
59 Ibid. The line ministry involved here was MoLSA.
60 The World Bank’s $7.5 million Afghanistan Pension Administration and Safety Net project, which ran from 2010 to 2017, has been the
largest social protection intervention conducted so far in Afghanistan.
61 In addition to the source referenced in footnote 80 above, see also, for example, specific references to Afghanistan in Rachel Cooper,
Social Safety Nets in Fragile and Conflict-Affected States, Knowledge, Evidence and Learning for Development (K4D) helpdesk report,
November 2018. Notably, this analysis quotes World Bank.
Itad 4 August 2021 49
Final Report
widely viewed as a supportive presence.62 Its prominent involvement in those fora did not expressly
aim to advance the nexus, but did contribute to it through its support of capacity and environment-
building activities.63
UNICEF Leadership in Integrating Humanitarian, Development and Peacebuilding Across the Aid
System in Afghanistan
ACO has opted for a measured and carefully reasoned approach to its advocacy of the nexus in
support of children. This approach is justified, given a sensitive political environment. Even
accounting for contextual risks, however, there is room for ACO to be more assertive and
participatory in its conduct of advocacy work. While, at the technical level, ACO has actively drawn
on its comparative advantage to advance the nexus, several interviewees felt that it could do more
to leverage its close working relationship with the government, to press for more progress in joint
programme implementation and in the enforcement of children’s and women’s rights. For example,
one interviewee cited multi-stakeholder consultations on the resumption of school classes after
COVID-19, in which they felt that ACO should have insisted more on the resumption of classes earlier
than envisaged by the MoE. This example resonates with the findings of a 2017 evaluation of CPAN,
in which there was a sense that ACO was sometimes too willing to compromise on the quality of
collective outcomes, and reluctant to assert the need for mutual accountability in its partnerships
with line ministries.64
The evaluation team also found limited evidence of ACO’s use of public communication to support
efforts aimed at the nexus. While public communication as an advocacy tool is inherently risky in
such as politically sensitive environment as Afghanistan, it can be useful to create or reinforce
accountability among stakeholders. An example of this is provided in Box 4 below.
Example of good practice: Creating accountability through the use of public
communications
In June 2018 ACO, jointly with the Afghan MoE, staged a press conference to present their Afghan
study on out-of-school children. The study is of high strategic value as it underpins the National
Education Strategic Plan III by providing a baseline on out-of-school children.
The panel at the press launch was composed of the UNICEF Representative, the acting Minister of
Education and the Ambassador of Canada, with a presentation by the ROSA Education Specialist.
The event was extremely well attended by national and internal media and received good global
coverage.
The event is notable for two reasons. First, the press launch involved close and successful
teamwork between the education and communication sectors, with follow-up events organised in
the following days to proactively engage foreign embassies in Kabul on the subject. Second, by
providing global media exposure to the project, the event created strong accountability for it
across the range stakeholders involved.
62 Such as, for example, the national and regional Emergency Operations Centres (EOCs) and the Immunisation Communication Network
(ICN).
63 For example, UNICEF support of CPAN has included substantial capacity building assistance to MoLSA and Afghan CSOs since 2006.
Prospects for CPAN’s sustainability remain uncertain, however. Source: Sayara Research, Evaluation of Afghanistan’s Child Protection
Action Network, February 2017.
64 Sayara Research, Evaluation of Afghanistan’s Child Protection Action Network, February 2017.
Itad 4 August 2021 50
Final Report
Focus Area 2: Coverage and Access
This section looks at multi-sectoral programming and equity in programme planning and
implementation, as well as the contextual factors that have affected progress in these two areas, and
how ACO has responded to them. It also looks at the way ACO has managed access in view of
expanding coverage and improving the quality of programme delivery. Its use of extenders and TPMs
is also examined.
Equity and Multi-Sectoral Programming for the Welfare of Children
Summary of findings
ACO has made gains in programme coverage in the past three years. But it continues to face
significant challenges in its assessment of needs and its monitoring of results in hard-to-reach
areas. Different programme sectors have implemented varying operational approaches to
prioritise and respond to needs and to increase coverage. This diversity in approaches can yield
valuable lessons and can serve to develop good practices around which programme sectors can
gradually cohere. Progress has been made in multi-sector programming in the past two years,
although this continues to be challenged by internal and external factors which are only now
starting to be addressed. These include sector siloes, the slow pace of ACO decentralisation, the
complexity of measuring and reporting results across joint sectoral interventions, and donor
preferencing and siloed partnerships with GIRoA ministries.
Equity in Programme Delivery
An increasing appetite for risk, incremental decentralisation of ACO and a ‘lift and shift strategy’
have furthered the advancement of ACO’s reach in the latter years of the ACP. The overall goal of
the current ACP is to address inequity to ensure all children, adolescents and women have access to
essential services. To this end, the country programme initially developed a geographical focus
based on an analysis of the most deprived provinces coupled with a capacity gap analysis that would
underpin area-based prioritisation. The shortcomings of this geographical prioritisation were well
documented in the MTR65 and ACO’s analyses also indicate that UNICEF is not active in some of the
districts with the highest needs.66 As a result, UNICEF has mostly abandoned the focus province
approach, with the exception of polio, where it makes sense given the geographic clustering of polio
in the country.
In contrast to the focus province approach, in the latter years of the ACP, countrywide reach has
grown, partly driven by a greater risk appetite to implement in hard-to-reach areas. While the RAM
data was not consistent enough to provide a solid evidence base to show coverage increases, key
informants and evidence in recent project proposal documents evince a clear strategy to focus on
hard-to-reach areas. Figure 7 below indicates the planned coverage of ACO interventions by sector
and district in 2021. The health programme is operational in all districts. WASH and child protection
have an approximate 50% coverage, owing to a GIRoA implementation modality for the former and
a lack of acceptance of child protection conventions by the Taliban for the latter. Internal and
external perceptions indicate that UNICEF has implemented a successful approach to selecting
locations to achieve the best possible balance to address acute needs and assist the greatest
possible number of people, although a small number of partners and stakeholders do also observe
65 Mid-Term Review of the Country Programme 2015-2019. Summary Report.
66 KIIs.
Itad 4 August 2021 51
Final Report
that UNICEF is still mostly inclined to work in its comfort zone, that is, in more urbanised and secure
areas.67
Figure 7. Planned Coverage per Sector
Health Nutrition WASH Education Child
Protection
Figure 6. Planned Coverage per Sector
Count of District Level Interventions 399 394 143 205 166
Count of Districts without Intervention 0 5 256 194 233
Coverage of ACO Interventions, by Programme Sector & Districts (2021)
400
350
300
Count of Districts
250 without
s n Intervention
o
it 200
n
e
v
r e 150
t
n
I Count of District
100
Level Interventions
50
0
Health Nutrition WASH Education Child Protection
Sector
Source: Final ACO District level interventions
UNICEF has implemented a number of strategies that provide a greater enabling environment to
advance programme coverage and access in the latter part of the ACP period. The efforts at
decentralising ACO (discussed in more detail in Section 4.2.2) will, in time, reap dividends in terms of
institutionalising field offices better empowered to plan and programme according to local needs.
The establishment of new sub-field offices in Helmand and Urozgan, while more a ‘lift and shift’
strategy than a rollout of ACO decentralisation processes, has contributed to accessing hitherto
hard-to-reach areas. The establishment of the sub-field office in Tirinkot has further enabled better
access of other actors to address humanitarian and development needs in Urozgan.
ACO faces a number of challenges in its efforts to prioritise support to high-need areas, including
security issues, political sensitivities, donor preferencing and the availability of implementing
partners. It also faces challenges in assessing needs in hard-to-reach areas. The evaluation team
has found that ACO faces a number of constraints in its capacity to prioritise humanitarian and
development assistance. The first of these constraints is the GIRoA implementing strategies which
67 77% and 62% of respondents, respectively, to the online surveys of UNICEF Staff and External Stakeholders agreed with the statement
that ‘the way the Afghanistan country office (ACO) has prioritised provinces makes sense, and strikes a good balance between addressing
the most acute needs and assisting the greatest possible number of people’.
Itad 4 August 2021 52
Final Report
UNICEF is mandated to align with. The MoE is a particularly strong ministry in terms of dictating its
implementation strategy, and UNICEF walks a tightrope in terms of being able to push back on
ministerial preferences. Geographic preferencing by donors can also inhibit ACO being able to
prioritise those most in need. For example, some donors will earmark easier-to-reach locations, such
as Bamiyan, to enable diplomatic field visits. Aside from the obvious constraints of security and the
complexity of programming in hard-to-reach areas, reaching at equity is also contingent on the
availability and capacity of implementing partners. As discussed in Section 4.3.1 of this report, ACO
has to make trade-offs in localising partnerships for greater reach with compensating for capacity
gaps that exist in some of these local partner organisations.
ACO is also constrained by a lack of detailed understanding of the needs in hard-to-reach areas,68
despite increasing use of REACH Initiatives data to target interventions. While humanitarian and
development coordination platforms (for example, the clusters and OCHA discussed in further detail
in Section 4.3.1 of this report) have helped to improve targeting through shared analyses. However,
in some areas the level of deprivation and the intervention needs remain opaque. 82% of extender
survey respondents in this evaluation believe the highest needs are in hard-to-reach areas.
Therefore, a deeper understanding of these needs is required to be able to address equity.
Different programme sectors have implemented varying operational approaches to respond to
deprivation needs, prioritise support and increase coverage. Health and nutrition have the highest
level of countrywide coverage, largely due to the use of mobile teams and frontline workers. WASH
and Child Protection have the most limited geographic coverage, partially explained by the
challenges associated with operating in a large number of hard-to-reach areas (described in the
section above) and fewer financial resources than other sectors.69 The evaluation team found that in
the Eastern region, female teachers were working in hard-to-reach areas. As discussed further in
Section 4.2.2 below, a significant enabling factor for access in hard-to-reach areas is Taliban demand
for services, with health being most required by the Taliban.
The evaluation team finds that there is a lack of coherence between the sectors in their
programming approach to equity. For some sectors, equity is conceptualised as programming in
hard-to-reach areas. For example, in the ECHO-funded Education in Emergency project, there is a
prioritisation to work in three Southern provinces in 580 hard-to-reach locations.70 In the CLTS in the
WASH sector, there are also efforts to programme in the remotest and hard-to-reach areas of
Afghanistan to reach the goal of making Afghanistan an open defecation-free zone by 2025. The
health sector, on the other hand, takes a more overarching approach to equity, evinced by the fact
that it has interventions in every district in Afghanistan. Although lacking a coherent approach, there
is evidence that all the sectors do consider the principle of equity in their developmental planning.
UNICEF is perceived externally as a very large UN agency with good reach throughout Afghanistan. In
the latter years of the CPD, programming reach has been enabled by a greater risk appetite to
implement in hard-to-reach areas. In the next CPD period this continued appetite for risk is
encouraged, alongside further decentralisation measures to engender a clearer understanding at
field level of the needs in hard-to-reach areas to ensure that ACO programming can reach those
most in need.
68 This was a key finding of Andrew Featherstone and Charlotte Lattimer, Evaluation of UNICEF’s Coverage and Quality in Complex
Humanitarian Situations: Afghanistan Evaluation Report, August 2020.
69 2021 count of districts with interventions is: Health, 399; Nutrition, 394; Education, 205; Child Protection, 166; WASH, 143 (source: ACO
data).
70 Provision of education in emergencies and lifesaving health, nutrition and WASH services to vulnerable children in Afghanistan (ECHO
proposal annex narrative).
Itad 4 August 2021 53
Final Report
Multi-Sectoral Programming
Evidence suggests that convergent multi-sectoral programming (MSP) has increased in the last 18
months in three ways: through new approaches to planning, through creative operational choices
and through emergency response. The 2020 Afghanistan AMP made reference to the need for
‘operationalizing an intersectoral strategy’. The evaluation team has found that since 2020 multi-
sector planning and programming have evolved from theoretical to practical implementation, in
particular through a series of programmes in the WASH, gender and education sectors.71, 72 This shift
has been driven not only by global strategies and AMP goals but also by a will to scale up and
formalise existing ad hoc harmonisation between sectors.
A clear majority of UNICEF staff believe that UNICEF strategy and guidelines for MSP are useful to
guide programming on the ground and are enabling programme sectors to work well together in
support of children, adolescents and women.73 Global UNICEF policies such as the LHD procedures
and the revised CCCs (2020), coupled with an increasing donor agenda to enhance effectiveness,
efficiency and cohesion of intervention in fragile state (OECD-DAC 2019) have been important
catalysts in driving the increase in MSP over the CPD period. Furthermore, a clear majority of
external stakeholders believe that UNICEF’s MSP is yielding good results.74 Increasing efforts to plan
for MSP in project design indicates that this type of programming, which is recognised as key for
achieving the SDGs, is becoming more institutionalised and premeditated in ACO. There is now a
need to properly formalise this convergence approach in the next ACP planning documents. An
important lesson from the evaluation is that while formalising MSP in the next CPD is important,
there is also a need for the CMT to prioritise this agenda in ACO. To ensure MSP planning is
grounded in a sound understanding of needs and context, it is imperative to include field office input
at the start of the project design phase while building a set of lessons learned (including a focus on
inter-ministry coordination) from existing MSP such as Spotlight and the Integrated Services Package
project to convince donors (and other stakeholders) of the relevance and effectiveness of MSP.
In recent years, convergent MSP has also been driven by judicious operational decisions made
during implementation. Quite often this harmonisation is driven by personalities and a will to
maximise programming impacts between the sectors. In Jalalabad, for example, the evaluation team
found that UNICEF has been able to offer a joint package of nutrition, health and WASH services in
medical facilities. According to KIIs in the Eastern region, while there was no formal strategy for
convergence, staff have been opportunistic in identifying synergies on the ground. A further
example of successful harmonisation during programme implementation is the alignment between
the polio, WASH and nutrition sectors in tackling an outbreak of wild polio in the Kandahar slums.
Here, UNICEF decided not to pursue a stand-alone vaccination programme, but looked for
opportunities for programme convergence by promoting enhanced WASH, the establishment of
defecation-free zones and nutrition packages alongside vaccinations. It should be noted that in some
instances multi-sector service packages are not driven by UNICEF staff or community request but by
the Taliban, who have on occasion asked UNICEF to provide health and WASH services (sometimes
as a condition to allow polio vaccinations) in hard-to-reach areas.
71 Programme examples include: (1) The EU-funded ‘Spotlight’ (an inter-agency multi-sectoral response project to provide services for
survivors to increase access and use of SGBV/HP response services in Afghanistan); (2) The ECHO-funded ‘Provision of education in
emergencies and lifesaving health, nutrition and WASH services to vulnerable children in Afghanistan’; and (3) The South Korea-funded
‘Integrated quality service package in hard-to-reach areas of Afghanistan’.
72 Examples of harmonised delivery approaches include improving gender-specific WASH facilities in schools to promote female menstrual
health and encourage higher female enrolment rates.
73 79% of respondents to the online survey of UNICEF staff agreed or strongly agreed with the statement ‘UNICEF‘s approach to multi-
sectoral programming has produced good results, in terms of enabling a combined approach to the diverse needs of children, adolescents
and women. This has allowed my sector and other programme sectors to work well together in support of children, adolescents and
women’.
74 71% of respondents to the online survey of External Stakeholders agreed or strongly agreed with the statement ‘UNICEF‘s approach to
multi-sectoral programming has produced good results, in terms of enabling a combined approach to the diverse needs of children,
adolescents and women’.
Itad 4 August 2021 54
Final Report
A further area which has supported the trend to greater programme convergence and MSP is that of
emergency response. UNICEF’s response to the COVID-19 pandemic and to the severe drought in
2018–19 has provided some serendipitous opportunities for sector convergence. C4D has been
instrumental in identifying and taking up such windows of opportunity. For example, in post-natal
health services opportunities have been identified to include COVID-specific messaging around the
importance of handwashing and good sanitation to help mitigate the spread of the pandemic. It is
understood that monitoring has captured a significant uptake of these messages and changed
hygiene practices. Now the C4D unit is staffed and operational (the section chief position was vacant
for 18 months in 2018–19), it will have an important role to play in articulating multi-sectoral
approaches, based on solid analyses and data.
Multi-sector and geographic convergent programming continue to be challenged by internal and
external factors which are only just starting to be addressed. These include sector siloes, the slow
pace of ACO decentralisation, the complexity of measuring and reporting results across joint
sectoral interventions, and donor preferencing and siloed partnerships with GIRoA ministries.
While there are promising trends towards multi-sector planning and implementation, such
approaches are still in their infancy in ACO. The rollout of this work faces both internal and external
challenges which will need to be addressed in the forthcoming months. In the next ACP period, the
vision and administrative infrastructure required to increase this type of programming will need to
be far more clearly articulated at a country office level and accompanied by a strong will from the
CMT and all staff to work genuinely across the sectors.
With regard to internal constraints, one of the key challenges is continued siloed working among
ACO sectors, driven by institutional culture and resource allocation. The emergency response to the
COVID-19 pandemic has provided opportunities to overcome such constraints: for example, the
increased flexibility of RWPs in 2020 (in response to COVID-19) has been extremely useful in
enabling resource sharing and response fine-tuning in the Eastern region (i.e. polio funds utilised by
other sectors).
In addition, the slow pace of decentralising decision making to the regions has also impacted on
both the planning and implementation of MSP. Sector programming continues to be very Kabul-
centric in both the formulation of project proposals and in implementation. Data and contextual
knowledge about needs primarily rest at field level but are not yet being maximised sufficiently in
multi-sector planning, and few opportunities exist for field-based staff to substantively engage and
input local knowledge at the project development stage.
Example of good practice: Innovative approaches to designing a geographically
convergent multi-sector project in Daikundi, working with extenders in the child protection and
WASH sectors
The Integrated Services Package Programme in Daikundi Province (funded by South Korea) is a
good example of convergent programming on the ground. The programme aims to increase the
availability of and access to basic, quality integrated services for the most vulnerable groups –
particularly children, adolescent girls, pregnant and lactating women – in hard-to-reach areas. The
programme uses an innovative approach which taps into different facility and community-based
initiatives across all sectors, in a targeted geographical area, and draws on a complementary
behaviour change approach. In doing so, it aims to address all gaps in education, health, nutrition
and WASH provision in a coordinated approach and to produce multiplier effects which single
sector programming would not be able to achieve.
Itad 4 August 2021 55
Final Report
MSP is also undermined by weaknesses in approaches to results aggregation and reporting at sector
and project levels. For example, the structure of the RWPs and associated monitoring frameworks
are not conducive to measuring and aggregating results across sectors. While the monitoring
frameworks for the three new multi-sectoral programmes are practical, it is not clear how results at
project level will contribute to overall sectoral goals. The evaluation team further observes that MSP
often depends more on personalities and people’s will to share analyses and to look for joint
opportunities, rather than being embedded in a systematic approach. As such, the financing and
results measurement approaches taken in the RWPs will need to be revisited if ACO is to scale up its
efforts to increase convergent MSP.
In terms of external challenges, donor earmarking and prioritisation (geographically and
thematically) pose barriers to multi-sector working. The evaluation team observes that, in principle,
donors are not averse to convergence, but there is a need for UNICEF to make better use of data and
analyses to build an evidence-based case for the effectiveness of this type of programming.
Generating a strong set of lessons learned from the three multi-sector projects will be an important
part of this evidence case.
A second external challenge is the siloed nature of sectoral relationships with GIRoA partners. It is
common for different sectors in ACO to share common GIRoA ministry partners, particularly with
large ministries such as MoPH and MoLSA. However, these partnerships are siloed between each
sector/project and the respective GIRoA partner. Inter-ministerial coordination and decision making
in Afghanistan is time consuming and often marred by resource turf wars. Therefore, a multi-sector
programme that works across several ministries will face a complex relationship with GIRoA. The
Spotlight project, which engages with a variety of different ministries, will be an important learning
experience for ACO in this regard.
Approaches to Access
Summary of findings
ACO has relied on four (at times, mutually reinforcing) informal strategies to improve access, and
its ability to respond to needs in hard-to-reach areas rests predominantly on implementing
partners, extenders or frontline workers. The most effective strategy is access at a local level
through implementing partners, extenders and frontline workers who have engendered trust
within communities. UNICEF’s capacity and agility to respond to risks in hard-to-reach areas is
largely reliant on the use of extenders. During the current ACP period the use of extenders has
increased rapidly, although only very few of these extenders are women. The remote
management of these actors is challenging and exposes ACO to both programme and
reputational risks, stemming from constraints in ensuring good oversight over extenders in hard-
to-reach areas. At the same time, ACO relies heavily on implementing partners, ACO staff and
extenders for monitoring. The lack of an overarching monitoring framework has led to a disparity
of approaches among these actors. The fragmentation of ACO’s monitoring architecture has
likely been aggravated by the limited use of TPMs to verify and validate monitoring data across
the ACP. ACO has tools at its disposal for conflict sensitivity programming; however, knowledge
of these tools is limited among UNICEF staff.
Programme Strategy and Implementation in Support of Access
ACO does not have a formal strategy on negotiating access into hard-to-reach areas, and
institutionalising such a strategy could be controversial for GIRoA and some donors. To date, ACO
has relied on several informal strategies to improve access, which have contributed to varying
degrees to the goal of leaving no one behind. While formalising a strategy on access is not advised,
formalising the ‘rules of the game’ for UNICEF staff in the field would bring better clarity and
Itad 4 August 2021 56
Final Report
assurance to staff. There is a number of hard-to-reach areas groups operating in Afghanistan but
this evaluation has confined its focus to the largest group, which is the Taliban. During the current
ACP period, the reach and institutionalisation of Taliban shadow governments has increased. It is
superficial to statistically compartmentalise Afghanistan into hard-to-reach areas- and government-
controlled areas, given the extreme fluidity of the situation on the ground. However, for UNICEF to
fulfil its mandate and leave no child behind, it has been an operational imperative to negotiate, or
enter into dialogue for access, with the Taliban. ACO does not have a formal strategy for negotiating
access into hard-to-reach areas. This is due to two pragmatic reasons. First, negotiating access is
achieved through a number of informal, dynamic and overlapping strategies (highlighted below) that
are hard to capture in a formal manner. Second, GIRoA and some (not all) of UNICEF’s donors are
opposed to actualising agreements with the Taliban. UNICEF perpetually walks a tightrope with
GIRoA in terms of making working agreements with the Taliban for programming in hard-to-reach
areas, maintaining neutrality and running the risk of souring its relationship with GIRoA.
This evaluation has identified several informal strategies employed by UNICEF to gain access into
hard-to-reach areas, which have all contributed to varying degrees to the goal of leaving no one
behind. These include:
1. Decentralising ACO: in March 2020, UNICEF opened two additional sub-field offices.75 The
opening of these offices is part of a ‘lift and shift’ strategy that enables the ACO to quickly
respond to the dynamic context in Afghanistan. For example, the ACO identified Ghor province
as a hard-to-reach area with high unmet needs and, in response, quickly moved to establish a
sub-field office. The 2020 coverage evaluation posited that these outposts offer UNICEF a
foothold to increase its proximity to populations living in areas of high need that hitherto have
been difficult to access.76 Key informants in UNICEF and in government and NGO partners have
strongly indicated that a larger field presence for ACO has increased the reach of programming
in hard-to-reach areas and opened up areas for other humanitarian and development actors in
provinces such as Urozgan. However, the physical presence of more UNICEF field offices does
not necessarily equate to improving UNICEF’s agility to gain access in hard-to-reach areas
without the accompanying decision making authority. In addition, the process to devolve
administrative processes and increase field presence has been slow and is still under way.77 This
impacts on the ability of field office staff to make quick, on-the-ground decisions with regard to
access.
2. Responding to Taliban requests for the provision of individual services and/or multi-sector
packages of support: the education, health and WASH sectors have proved to be important
entry points for UNICEF programming in Taliban-controlled areas.78 In the Eastern region, for
example, UNICEF has reached a technical agreement with the Taliban to establish 4,000
Community-Based Schools (CBSs) in hard-to-reach areas, with the COVID-19 pandemic also
providing an important catalyst for programme access.79 Research by the evaluation team and
secondary studies indicates that health and education in Taliban areas are sometimes a hybrid of
NGO and state-provided services, operating according to Taliban rules;80 for example, studies
75 Located in Lashkargah (in Helmand Province) and in Trinkot (in Uruzgan Province. These are in addition to the UNICEF country office in
Kabul and (as of June 2019) eleven field offices (five zone offices in Herat, Jalalabad, Mazar-e-Sharif, Kandahar and Kabul – for the central
region, co-located with the country office – and an additional six outposts).
76 Andrew Featherstone and Charlotte Lattimer, Evaluation of UNICEF’s coverage and quality in complex humanitarian situations:
Afghanistan Evaluation Report, August 2020, p.28.
77 A number of UNICEF staff interviewed by the evaluation team (in Kabul and in the field) point to a failure to fully institutionalise the
2019 Accountability Framework, a lack of fiscal decentralisation to the regions, and a highly centralised Country Office that leads on all
planning and decisions.
78 In theory, the GIRoA does not collaborate with the Taliban on public service delivery, and nor does it permit aid agencies to do so. In
reality there is a ‘pragmatic relationship’ between GIRoA and the Taliban (especially at subnational level).
79 In the Eastern region, the Taliban requested help to address the pandemic with a multi-sector package of WATSAN, health and nutrition
supplies. These interventions can be interpreted as planting seeds of goodwill for further cooperation to take place.
80 Ashley Jackson, Life under the Taliban Shadow Government, Overseas Development Institute, 2018.
Itad 4 August 2021 57
Final Report
point to agreements in hard-to-reach areas whereby the Taliban allow girls to study up to grade
six; the MoE funds the schools but the Taliban monitor the schools under their control.81 UNICEF
is required to navigate these complex and highly contextual arrangements. At times UNICEF can
rely on GIRoA officials at a local level to help facilitate access into hard-to-reach areas, but this is
ad hoc and requires a deep political economy understanding of the implementing areas.
3. Access through implementing partners (NGOs/CSOs), extenders and frontline workers: implicit
within this approach is that IPs, extenders and frontline workers are promoting and respecting
UNICEF’s core principles of neutrality and acceptance. This strategy for access is further explored
in Section 4.3 and results in a significant transfer of risk to these actors. It also hinges heavily on
the level of trust that these partners have gained in communities, which is hard to assess.
4. Negotiating and signing work agreements with the Taliban in Afghanistan:82 this is not a new
strategy in Afghanistan, but UNICEF’s ability to negotiate workplans with the Taliban is
significantly enabled if a donor mandates or actively encourages UNICEF to work in hard-to-
reach areas83 in Afghanistan. However, entering into work agreements with the Taliban is a high-
risk endeavour which can lead to negative results. Ultimately, the Taliban is not a monolithic
organisation and the degree to which Taliban groups are willing to find compromise is highly
localised.
The degree to which UNICEF can gain access through any of the strategies varies between different
sectors. Arguably, access tends to be easier when these are services most in demand by the Taliban,
such as health provision. Despite UNSC 1612, child protection access is the most challenged for
access because its objectives are currently controversial and not well understood by the Taliban.
WASH has predominantly programmed though GIRoA structures and CDCs and is quite constrained
in this current operational arrangement with GIRoA.
While formalising a strategy on access is not advised, there is evidence to suggest that greater clarity
and support could be provided to national staff regarding the UNICEF rules of the game on
negotiating with hard-to-reach areas. The 2019 audit pointed to confusion among field staff about
what to do when confronted with a situation that obliged them to negotiate with hard-to-reach
areas to implement key activities.84 This lack of clarity was also underscored in the 2020 coverage
evaluation that recommended UNICEF should support field staff better in this regard.85 This
evaluation found that the lack of clarity on the rules of the game at field level persists, with field
offices reporting mixed messages emanating from senior staff in Kabul with regard to negotiating
programme access with the Taliban.86 It understood that there are plans to recruit a new security
officer in the ACO for the next CPD period, who will provide support on access issues. This staff
member (with other key ACO staff) could draft an internal basic operating procedure for UNICEF
field staff as regards red lines and parameters of their engagement with hard-to-reach areas.
Programme Agility and Responsiveness in hard-to-reach areas
UNICEF’s ability to respond to needs in hard-to-reach areas predominantly rests on implementing
partners, extenders or frontline workers. The monitoring and management of these actors is
difficult in hard-to-reach areas and this can create vulnerability for UNICEF in terms of
reputational risks and unintentionally doing harm, especially in the absence of a detailed
81 Ali Mohammad Sabawoon, ‘One Land, Two Rules (6): Delivering public services in insurgency-affected Nad Ali district of Helmand
Province’, Afghanistan Analysts Network, June 2019.
82 I.e. not in Doha.
83 An example of this is the new ECHO-funded project for the provision of education in emergencies and lifesaving health, nutrition and
WASH services to vulnerable children.
84 UNICEF, Audit of Afghanistan Country Office. Summary of Draft Observations, OIAI, 7 July 2019.
85 Andrew Featherstone and Charlotte Lattimer, Evaluation of UNICEF’s coverage and quality in complex humanitarian situations:
Afghanistan Evaluation Report, August 2020.
86 KIIs.
Itad 4 August 2021 58
Final Report
understanding of the needs in hard-to-reach areas87 and a lack of a systematic monitoring system
for activities taking place in these areas.
UNICEF predominantly relies on implementing partners, extenders and frontline workers to access
and programme in hard-to-reach areas. Within the operating context of the ACO, the evaluation
team could not find an alternative strategy that would more effectively reach people most in need in
hard-to-reach areas, and as such the evaluation proposes improvements to the current strategy.
ACO is proud of its appetite for risk and ability to expand access within the United Nations
Department for Safety and Security’s (UNDSS’s) prescriptive rules and regulations. However, this
results in the main risks on the ground for negotiation and implementation in hard-to-reach areas
being transferred to these three groups. In this context, it is notable that a significant proportion of
UNICEF staff perceive that current ACO approaches to accessing hard-to-reach areas were not
effective and could be improved. The evaluation team finds that UNICEF could strengthen its model
by improving its stewardship of extender services (discussed in detail below), building stronger trust
with implementing partners, improving programme cycle management and providing adequate
support and training to frontline workers.
UNICEF implementing partners (not GIRoA) are comprised of international and national NGOs/CSOs.
Many of the international NGOs, such as the Danish Committee for Aid to Afghan Refugees
(DACAAR), Save the Children and IRC are well established in Afghanistan and have built up high
levels of acceptance in the communities that they work in. UNICEF has increasingly tried to engage
with more local NGOs/CSOs to further access into hard-to-reach areas and as a broader strategy of
localisation of the Afghanistan ACO. Across both types of partnerships, the evaluation team found
that capacity and attitudes for engaging in hard-to-reach areas are variable, and this results in a
piecemeal approach to gaining access. In some cases, national NGOs/CSOs have better reach and
relations to enhance access into hard-to-reach areas, but their lack of administrative and
professional development capacity demands that UNICEF provides additional resources and
oversight to support their activities.
The challenges of working in hard-to-reach areas create pressures in the relationship between
UNICEF and some its implementing partners, with the risk of undermining transparency and trust.
Firstly, it is well documented that the Taliban charges 10% tax (or ‘ushr’) on development projects
implemented in hard-to-reach areas-controlled areas.88 This puts implementing partners in a very
difficult position vis-à-vis their grant agencies such as UNICEF. On the one hand, implementing
partners (IPs) are mostly forced to pay this tax if they wish to implement their project. On the other
hand, it is very difficult for NGOs and INGOs (International NGOs) to admit this reality to its donor.
This situation can lead to UNICEF lacking a full picture of how funds are being used for programming
in hard-to-reach areas, and this could compromise UNICEF values and pose a reputational risk to
ACO. Secondly, the evaluation team found that some implementing partners felt pressured by
UNICEF to operate in certain hard-to-reach areas and that ACO is putting implementing partners at
risk.
Further pressures in the relationship between UNICEF and its implementing partners are generated
by short project cycles and cases where funding of multi-year programmes is interrupted during
implementation. Developing trust and acceptance in hard-to-reach areas requires time well beyond
the remit of a short humanitarian intervention. Unless there is a well thought-out engagement
strategy to work across the humanitarian and development nexus, there is a danger that IPs will
engender mistrust from communities for isolated, quick-impacting projects. Similarly, the evaluation
team found that in multi-year programmes, when UNICEF was not able to transfer funding to the
87 This was a key finding of Andrew Featherstone and Charlotte Lattimer, Evaluation of UNICEF’s coverage and quality in complex
humanitarian situations: Afghanistan Evaluation Report, August 2020.
88 According to KIIs conducted by the evaluation team; Ali Mohammad Sabawoon, ‘One Land, Two Rules (6): Delivering public services in
insurgency-affected Nad Ali district of Helmand Province’, Afghanistan Analysts Network, June 2019.
Itad 4 August 2021 59
Final Report
implementing partner on the agreed timetable, the partner had to stop implementing, and
consequently encountered a loss of goodwill and acceptance from the community. In these respects,
UNICEF does not quite live up to the expectations/commitments of the Saving Lives Together
framework.
Engaging on gender programming in hard-to-reach areas, as in other sectors, is dependent on
Taliban demand for services, and programmes that do not align with these demands are halted. For
example, following the 2019 scandal (sexual abuse of school children), UNICEF attempted to set up
multi-purpose centres to assist children and adolescents (boys and girls) who were victims of
exploitation; however, the centres were closed by the Taliban.
As highlighted above, a key constraint to programming in hard-to-reach areas is a lack of detailed
understanding of the needs in these areas, despite the use of REACH Initiatives data. This also
applies to gender programming, for which there is a particular dearth of evidence to inform
programme design. The survey of extenders (Figure 8 below) indicates that there are some
weaknesses in terms of extenders being able to address gender concerns in the communities they
work in (which are mostly hard-to-reach areas). Approximately 20% of extenders said they had not
received training/guidance from UNICEF on how to include all members of the community, including
women, in discussions on programmes. This correlates with another survey response in which
approximately 20% of extenders perceived that it was quite difficult or very difficult to take into
account the different needs of boys and girls in their sector or area of work.
Figure 8. Extender perceptions on training and gender
Figure 7. Extender perceptions on training and gender
Extenders' perceptions on training and gender
Have you received training/guidance from UNICEF on how to
include all members of the community, including women, in
discussions on programmes (health, edu, CP, WASH)?
0% 20% 40% 60% 80% 100%
Yes No
How easy or difficult is it to take into account the different
needs of boys and girls in your sector or area of work (edu,
health, CP, WASH)?
0% 20% 40% 60% 80% 100%
Very easy Quite easy
There are also risks to female frontline workers who are implementing UNICEF programmes. The
evaluation team found that female frontline workers in health and education have been able to play
a vital role in providing services in the Eastern region. However, there is less acceptance of female
Itad 4 August 2021 60
Final Report
frontline workers in the Southern region, and they often need to be accompanied by a mahram to
ensure their safety and acceptance. Female frontline workers are at increased risk of harassment
and violence in hard-to-reach areas, particularly when working on issues contentious to the Taliban,
such as polio.89 Accordingly, in the Pashto and Dari survey conducted, 15 out of 32 female frontline
workers considered the security and access conditions of where they worked as ‘bad’ or ‘very bad’.
This was unique to female respondents, highlighting the differing security perceptions of men and
women.90 UNICEF has introduced innovative thinking on reducing risk to and protecting female
frontline workers. Within polio programming, two consultants have been retained to identify the risk
and protective factors behind the targeting of female health and outreach workers.
UNICEF staff and external stakeholders all point to the fact that it is expensive to programme in
hard-to-reach areas. This has led some to question whether this programming represents value for
money and an efficient use of resources. The factors that increase costs are the Taliban tax, an
increased need for extenders and additional resources required to monitor activities and
implementors. By subscribing to ‘leave no child behind’, UNICEF has implicitly accepted the extra
programming costs. However, it has yet to invest in a systematic data and monitoring system to gain
a better understanding of the real needs in hard-to-reach areas and the quality of its activities in
hard-to-reach areas. The ACO is reliant on a patchwork of data collected by implementing partners,
extenders and frontline workers, with very limited oversight of the methods used by these groups or
a baseline to measure results. This underlines a lack of transparency in value for money
programming in hard-to-reach areas and raises reputational risks for UNICEF. The requirements and
challenges of TPMs are discussed in more detail below.
Responsiveness to Conflict and Other Risks
ACO is not well equipped to plan and programme for localised and contextualised risks, including
localised escalations in the conflict, and to manage them in an agile fashion. Risk-informed
analyses, including conflict assessments, are more likely to be effective if they are undertaken
internally by ACO, and with field offices playing a greater role in contextualising the analysis.
UNICEF uses a variety of corporate and UNDSS tools to inform context/operational risk-informed
planning. The UNDSS security risk management (SRM) assessment guides overall security
classifications (i.e., PC1. PC2). At country office operational level, key risks are captured in the AMPs.
However, as the internal audit of 2019 observed, it is hard to institute a systematic risk management
system with the rapid in-country work cycles of the international staff.91 The SRM and AMP manage
macro-risks, which tend to be quite static in nature. This limits the capacity of these tools to assist in
dynamic programme responses to conflict or other risks. As noted in Section 3.1.2 above, the
evaluation team found that current risk management tools available to ACO do not enable localised
or more agile responses to risks.
The dynamic situation across Afghanistan means that risk analyses and conflict assessments are
most useful when they are tightly focused in time and geographical location. However, the progress
achieved so far in decentralisation does not yet allow a strong bottom-up approach to risk and
context analysis. Field offices do not yet have the latitude and support necessary to conduct their
own analysis and to act on it promptly, within well-established guidelines and parameters.92 Key
informants have pointed to a lack of field analysis as a key obstacle to risk-informed decision making.
In one documented instance, this lack of contextual knowledge and understanding on the part of
89 This is sadly evidenced in the shooting of three female polio vaccinators in March 2021. Ruchi Kumar, ‘Killing of Female Polio
Vaccinators Puts Afghan Eradication Campaign at Risk’, 2021, available at: https://www.theguardian.com/global-
development/2021/apr/21/killing-of-female-polio-vaccinators-puts-afghan-eradication-campaign-at-risk
90 Pashto and Dari survey results.
91 OIAI, Internal Audit of the Afghanistan Country Office, December 2019.
Itad 4 August 2021 61
Final Report
ACO led an implementing partner to request progress in this area as a condition for continued
cooperation.
UNICEF has invested in two substantive countrywide conflict analyses.93 As noted in Section 3.1.2
above, the evaluation team did not observe significant ownership of these analyses. Several UNICEF
interviewees stated that conflict analyses are not fit for purpose when they are undertaken by
external consultants, and this work must be ongoing rather than periodic. ACO interviewees
generally recognised that further in-house capacity is required to match the ambition of higher
standards in risk-informed planning and programming.
At sector level, conflict sensitivity principles are not well understood and are very rarely applied to
programming. Staff have little knowledge of available guidance. ACO has not yet generated a clear
common understanding of conflict sensitivity applicable to its programme planning. The evaluation
team could find evidence of only one instance in which conflict sensitivity was applied to ACO
programming. This was in the case of WASH interventions, in which the risk of communal conflict
over scarce water resources was mitigated through consultations with stakeholders and a
participatory approach to programme formulation and design. In other sectors, as noted in Section
4.1.1 above, staff interviewed had little knowledge of UNICEF guidance on conflict sensitivity, and its
relationship with peacebuilding.
Although some UNICEF staff were able to articulate some of the conflict sensitivity principles
implicitly, UNICEF guidance on the subject was largely unknown to them. The analysis of conflict
trends conducted in 2020 provides ACO with advice on how to improve conflict-sensitive
programming. However, the evaluation team could find no evidence that ACO has applied this
guidance. There was a sense among UNICEF staff interviewed that conflict sensitivity was too
theoretical and not grounded enough in the contextual realities which had to reckon with. This puts
UNICEF behind the curve vis-à-vis some of its international non-governmental organisation (INGO)
partners, such as Save the Children and IRC, whose approaches to conflict sensitivity are more
advanced and better embedded in their programming and planning. For example, Save the Children
is guided by a global Conflict Sensitivity Brief94 which provides useful contextualised examples of
conflict sensitivity programming in their country office. This global briefing is accompanied by
various conflict sensitivity initiatives in their country offices, such as conflict sensitivity guidance
notes and case studies.
The evaluation team has identified a lack of transparency in UNICEF’s relationships with some of its
partners. This can undermine conflict sensitivity and have negative consequences. For example,
UNICEF did not consult with some of its major implementing partners when negotiating the work
plan with the Taliban in Doha. This resulted in making an agreement with senior levels of the Taliban
that did not represent the views and principles of other Taliban groups which exercised some control
Afghanistan. In response, these in-country groups in the north of the country halted the project
activities of the implementing partner in this region. Conflict sensitivity in such a complex context as
Afghanistan requires working with others, rather than a ‘go it alone’ attitude.
Hiring and human resource management can be a very divisive issue in Afghanistan. At ACO in Kabul
there is a need to balance transparency, gender and ethnic equity, and merit-based recruitment.
Even if this is taking place, there is a need to highlight this clearly, especially to GIRoA partners. In
the case of extenders, although these are contracted services, there is still a need for clear oversight
in recruitment processes to ensure that UNICEF is seen to be acting in a fair and honest manner. In
93 UNICEF Afghanistan, Analysis of current and projected conflict trends to inform UNICEF’s engagement in Afghanistan, internal
document, 2017, cited in Andrew Featherstone and Charlotte Lattimer, Evaluation of UNICEF’s coverage and quality in complex
humanitarian situations: Afghanistan Evaluation Report, August 2020; Analysis of current and projected conflict trends to inform UNICEF’s
engagement in Afghanistan, May 2020.
94 Save the Children, Conflict Sensitivity Brief, December 2019.
Itad 4 August 2021 62
Final Report
Afghanistan, corruption (perceived or real) is used as a currency to damage organisational
reputations.
There are indications that ACO is implicitly recognising the importance of conflict sensitivity for
planning purposes. For example, one staff member advocated the need for a mindset change in ACO
to recognise that UNICEF does not need to be the first responder to all humanitarian emergencies.
Instead, UNICEF should allow other capable organisations (e.g. MSF, ICRC) to respond first while
UNICEF takes time to plan a more considered response that addresses issues of sustainability and do
no harm.
Utilisation of Extenders
Of the extenders recruited, only a small proportion are women. ACO has made efforts to address
this imbalance because female extenders are critical for service delivery in sectors such as health
and education. Extenders are paid by UNICEF and contracted through an LTA which has traditionally
been with a private company. The contractor provides the administrative supervision for the
extenders while UNICEF is responsible for the technical supervision. The LTAs are issued at Kabul
level, but the extenders are normally from the regions where they work, in order to allow for better
access and understanding of the context. The use of extenders has been important for access and
information gathering for ACO. UNICEF currently employs 3,531 extenders in health, nutrition, polio,
education, child protection, WASH, cash and C4D, with an annual total cost of USD 9,339,293.
Although ACO records do not provide for a temporal analysis of extender usage over time, UNICEF
key informants pointed to ACO’s increased use of extenders as a way of improving access
throughout the country. Although extenders do operate in areas to which international UNICEF staff
have access, this appears to be the exception rather than the norm. In the survey of extenders
conducted for this evaluation, all respondents stated that they worked in areas which other UNICEF
staff could not reach.95
It is understood that many more extenders are male than women. Although the extender data
provided by ACO is not gender disaggregated, it is commendable that ACO has recruited 471 female
mobile vaccinators and 25 female mobilisers in C4D. It is understandable that the majority of
extenders are male, given cultural norms and the insecurity in most places in Afghanistan. ACO has
made efforts to address this imbalance, because female extenders are critical for service delivery in
sectors such as health and education. ACO has been able to increase the number of female
extenders in the health section, and the evaluation team found that females were being employed
in both the health and education sectors in the Southern and Eastern regions, including in some
hard-to-reach areas. In the Southern region, which is socially very conservative, the use of mahram,
or male chaperones, has been valuable to enable female extenders to go about their work. However,
staff have pointed out the high costs of engaging a mahram in project activities.
The increase in the use of extenders during the last ACP has enabled ACO to access hard-to-reach
areas, but heavy reliance on them has risked undermining UNICEF staff responsibilities and the
quality of programme delivery. New SOPs have led to improvements in their use and there are
good examples of their use in particular sectors. There is still room for improvement, however,
especially in terms of systems to capture and verify information reported by extenders and in
training provided to extenders. Extenders are the ‘jack of all trades’ in ACO. Their use has expanded
rapidly during the current ACP for monitoring purposes, gaining access in hard-to-reach areas,
capacity building, provision of technical assistance to the GIRoA and taking on UNICEF staff tasks in
areas that ACO staff cannot access. In this sense, they have significantly contributed to UNICEF’s
commitment ‘to stay and deliver’.
95 Extender survey question #2: ‘Do you work in areas which only extenders can access and are not accessible to other UNICEF staff?’
100% of extenders replied to this question with either (1) ‘Yes, those are the only areas in which I work’ or (2) ‘Yes, but I also work in areas
accessible to UNICEF staff’.
Itad 4 August 2021 63
Final Report
At the same time, the rapid increase in the use of extenders led to the perception earlier in the ACP
that their use was ‘out of control’. ACO itself began to recognise that extenders had been misused
by some ACO staff who had given them responsibilities normally reserved to UNICEF personnel. ACO
has responded to this situation by increasing guesthouse capacity in the regions and redoubling
efforts to ensure a stronger field presence of UNICEF in the field. This is a useful but intermediate
step. Attention could also be focused on decentralisation to ensure that field staff are adequately
resourced and empowered to both fulfil their responsibilities, where access is possible, and carefully
manage the work of extenders in the field.
The evaluation team has understood from both internal and external stakeholders that one
particular weakness of the rapidly expanding extender approach is that it is hard to test and verify
the veracity of extender information. Another related issue highlighted by UNICEF staff is that ACO
does not have a systematic process of capturing the information that extenders bring in. This
information tends to stay with their direct report rather than feed into a wider evidence and
learning system. Other informants have pointed to some cases where the extenders know much
more than the programme officer who is responsible for the project to which they are assigned.
Other ACO sectors have highlighted that large amounts of information are collected from extenders
by ACO staff but this data is neither gathered nor used in an effective way.
In response to some of these challenges, in February 2020 ACO sought to address current practices
for engagement with extenders.96 It has since developed new SOPs and guidelines which aim to
rationalise the use of extenders. The online survey of UNICEF staff conducted by the evaluation team
suggests that perceptions of the use of extenders are changing, with 87% of respondents agreeing or
strongly agreeing that extenders and TPMs are useful in contributing to quality programme delivery
and monitoring.
Example of good practice: the use of extenders and technical advisors by the Child
Protection and WASH sectors
In the Child Protection sector, extenders are placed into high-level technical positions (including
reviewing and reporting on legislative and CRC reporting) and are viewed like consultants.
Working relationships with UNICEF are based on an assumption of professionalism and high
standards, which is accompanied by close and supportive relations with UNICEF counterparts.
The Child Protection sector has been able to develop a strong, well-managed and well-supported
operational core of extenders, due largely to its comparatively small size. An enabling factor may
be that the Child Protection sector does not have broad reach into hard-to-reach areas, as the
Health or Education sectors.
In the Eastern region, the WASH sector relies on Technical Assistants (TAs) who have similar roles
to those of extenders but are recruited directly by the ACO WASH sector and are jointly
supervised by it and the CDCs. This approach places a higher administrative burden on ACO and
may not be feasible for large-scale recruitment, but it does allow for more rigorous recruitment
and oversight.
As highlighted in Box 6 above, the evaluation team identified a number of innovative and effective
models of working with extenders currently being deployed in the WASH and child protection
sectors. These examples point to particular ways in which the use of extenders may be improved in
future. A further area in which ACO can improve its use of extender services is in the training offered
96 UNICEF Afghanistan Programme Retreat, 17–19 February 2020, Kabul, Session 5: Extenders & NTAs: Approaches and opportunities to
maximise potential.
Itad 4 August 2021 64
Final Report
to extenders. While the long-term arrangement with third-party contractors stipulated that, upon
recruitment, all extenders would attend an induction session organised by UNICEF programme
sections/field offices,97 the 2020 audit found that some extenders were not aware of ACO’s ethical
requirements and of the mechanisms to address misconduct or PSEA cases and that ACO lacked a
specific induction programme for extenders.98 As highlighted in the section on Programme Agility
and Responsiveness in hard-to-reach areas above, slightly over 20% of respondents report not
having received training/guidance from UNICEF on how to include all members of the community
(including women) in programme discussions. This is probably linked to the second survey finding
whereby approximately 20% of respondents report finding it difficult, or very difficult, to take into
account the different needs of boys and girls in their programme sector.99 The evaluation team
underlines the importance of ensuring that all extenders received this basic training and have a clear
understanding of PSEA and associated reporting mechanisms.
Utilisation of TPMs
While ACO fully understands the importance of independent verification of its programme
activities, it has encountered significant problems with previous TPM providers, and has been
disinclined to resource further TPMs (after 2020). Currently, ACO largely relies more on
implementing partners, ACO staff and extenders for monitoring purposes. This has led to a
piecemeal approach to monitoring that falls below accountability and learning requirements.
Further human and resource investments are required to institute a comprehensive TPM system
that is fit for purpose. During the ACP programme period, ACO has contracted TPM services in LTA
arrangements with private firms. The contracting of TPMs stopped in 2020 after completion of a six-
month TPM pilot in the Southern and Eastern regions. The use of TPMs (prior to the pilot in 2020)
has been problematic for ACO. The 2019 audit pointed to various failings of the system: ‘staff
indicated the inefficiency of the third-party monitors […] and delays in terminating them’. For
example, the main limitation was that the contractors were not able to provide sufficient quality
training and continuous coaching to field monitors. Further, the contractors were not proactively
conducting QA, despite a structure of supervision that was reported to be in place, which was
expected to check and verify if these field monitors were actually conducting field visits. The
contractors were reluctant and did not provide verification of field visits with GPS evidence (e.g. GPS
embedded in photos or ODK reports). The contracted field monitors were often paid very low wages
and given limited means for travel/transportation, which subsequently discouraged them to conduct
actual field visits.100 Monitoring is now mostly conducted by UNICEF staff, IPs and extenders.
The evaluation team found that some ACO staff in Kabul and at field level have a poor perception of
the work and usefulness of TPMs. For example, health officers in the Eastern zonal office used TPMs
twice in the region, in 2017 and 2019. They perceived that TPMs were useful for some data and
information collection but believed the TPMs had no technical capacity to analyse the data.101 In this
case, extenders were viewed as more efficient and effective for TPM purposes. Similarly, the
nutrition sector observed that TPMs had higher costs, with little quality assurance of their
services.102
The poor impression of the value of TPMs in some ACO sectors has provided little impetus to raise
funds to extend the 2020 pilot or factor in the use of TPMs into project budgets in the current ACP
period. The exception to this trend is education and nutrition which, the evaluation team
97 This induction was to include, among other topics, the code of conduct and ethical behaviour, and the related reporting tools and
systems.
98 OIAI, Internal Audit of the Afghanistan Country Office, December 2019.
99 The remaining 80% found it easy or quite easy to take this into account.
100 OIAI, Internal Audit of the Afghanistan Country Office, December 2019.
101 KII.
102 KII.
Itad 4 August 2021 65
Final Report
understands, is already looking at ways to increase resource allocation for TPM.103 At senior levels of
ACO, it is well recognised that UNICEF requires a systematic way to monitor its work so that it is fit
for purpose and lives up to donor requirements. In this regard, it is considered important to
sufficiently budget for TPM in the next programme cycle and integrate costs into sector
workplans/RWPs. Given past difficulties in raising funds for TPM, costs could be considered as core
budget (RR, or Regular Resources in UNICEF terminology) and not need to be identified every year
(OR, or Other Resources). Based on provisions made by other aid agencies in Afghanistan, it is
estimated that approximately 1% of the total ACO budget should be earmarked for TPM.104
While independent TPM is a requirement for compliance, monitoring for learning and accountability
purposes should be considered carefully in the ACO monitoring architecture. To enhance ACO’s
monitoring toolkit, other avenues could be considered, such as testing and reinforcing community-
based grievance mechanisms already in place, expanding their coverage where possible, and piloting
a system of peer-to-peer monitoring across programme sectors and among implementing partners.
Focus Area 3: Partnerships and Capacity Building
This section looks at the effectiveness of UNICEF’s partnerships with the Afghan government, NGOs,
and other UN actors, and the alignment of these partnerships with key cooperation frameworks. It also
considers how UNICEF in Afghanistan has drawn on its comparative advantage to strengthen the
capacity of the government.
Partnerships with Governmental and Non-Governmental Actors
Summary of findings:
ACO has generally developed good and effective technical partnerships with line ministries, but
government buy-in of joint programmes remains limited. ACO is viewed as a reliable partner by
NGOs, although some NGOs expressed a desire for a more inclusive approach to partnerships.
ACO programmes are clearly aligned with government priorities at ministerial level, but alignment
is less clear with the NPPs. There are widespread reservations about the One-UN Framework,
which has little discernible influence on inter-agency processes. UNICEF’s Cluster leaderships are
generally well perceived, and there is a sense that clusters present opportunities to be used more
proactively as platforms for advocacy. Despite the lack of a formal capacity building strategy,
UNICEF has had some notable successes in this area in terms of output-level results. However, it
has also faced serious challenges; lessons learned on best approaches are starting to be
considered by some sectors. The NTA system has become increasingly controversial, with some
well-founded claims that it is unaccountable and has unwanted consequences. ACO is planning to
review and rationalise its use of the system, but these measures come late.
Cooperation with the Government
Despite challenging conditions, evidence from interviews and documentation reviewed indicates
that ACO has generally developed good technical partnerships with line ministries, although
government buy-in and ownership of joint programmes remains limited. The government and the
local administrations are the main partners for UNICEF in Afghanistan. They allow the organisation
to cover large parts of the country with its programmes and interventions, as well as to respond to
humanitarian crises and emergencies. Interactions with line ministries have had some success in
103 KII.
104 KII.
Itad 4 August 2021 66
Final Report
delivering against output-level objectives set out in RWPs, which form programme roadmaps for
ACO’s cooperation with GIRoA. However, multiple sources noted in interviews that bottlenecks in
working relations with the President’s Office and the volatile political context have impacted
adversely on the working environment for UNICEF and other UN agencies.105 Although a partnership
strategy is mentioned in the 2015–19 ACP,106 ACO was unable to establish a formal strategy with the
government, and each sector independently navigates its collaborations with key counterparts in the
framework of the relevant RWPs. The recently developed Afghanistan Partnership Framework107
offers some broad guidance for international organisations; while its intended scope appears to be
increased government ownership, the impression among agencies and donors is that it just
underscores the government’s desire for more direct control over aid resources.
Technical cooperation at ministerial level has been largely successful in terms of output-level RWP
indicators, with some variations between sectors. One of the strongest partnerships is between the
WASH sector and the MRRD, which has evolved over a long period. According to multiple sources,108
this collaboration has grown so close that it has made it difficult at times to expand the programme
in Taliban-controlled areas. However, the WASH sector was able to join in the more recent ACO
expansion drive, including in the context of the COVID-19 response in 2020.
Work with the MoPH revolves around the large polio programme, which, due to its high priority,
provides partners with common incentives to harmonise their operations. UNICEF’s other
interventions in the health sector are dwarfed by the presence of larger programmes, notably the
$300 million Basic Package of Health Services (BPHS) programme funded mainly by the World Bank,
with some EU and United States Agency for International Development (USAID) support. There was
a widespread perception among interviewees that the BPHS and other programmes in which the
MoPH is a partner are undermined in its equity, efficiency and effectiveness by a lack of
accountability and poor monitoring.109 One problem mentioned by multiple interviewees is the lack
of a rigorous and transparent process for the selection of local implementing partners for these
programmes. A related problem, according to the same sources, was that the size of these
programmes and relatively low conditions of entry were attracting a large number of local NGOs,
with few remaining available for partnerships with UNICEF.
UNICEF has a long-term partnership with the MoE, with some successful large-scale interventions,
such as the CBE programme and the Girls’ Access to Teacher’s Education (GATE) initiative. Lack of
resources and the limited ability of the MoE to fulfil handover commitments have adversely affected
the quality and scale of these interventions. The Child Protection section needs to interface with
multiple ministerial counterparts, and must also navigate sensitive human rights and protection
issues, making its partnership complex and challenging. During the last 18 months, meaningful
progress was made in terms of policy adoption and systems building in joint programmes. Due to its
high degree of sensitivity, Child Protection faces the hardest challenges to expanding its
interventions in Taliban-controlled areas.110
105 KII.
106 UNICEF, Afghanistan Country Programme Document 2015-2019, 2014.
107 ‘Afghanistan Partnership Framework’: Afghanistan Conference, Geneva, 23–24 November 2020.
108 KII.
109 KIIs.
110 KII.
Itad 4 August 2021 67
Final Report
In addition to the contextual obstacles identified in Section 3.1.1 above, more specific challenges to
partnerships with governmental counterparts were noted in Kabul and regional levels; they can be
summarised as follows:
▪ Limited local capacities, both technical and financial, to sustain agreed partnership commitments
and responsibilities; these can affect all levels of planning and implementation and are especially
critical for the ownership and sustainability of the interventions after the handover.
▪ Security constraints limit the access to large sections of the country and oblige ACO to work
through extenders; this increases the complexity of the interventions and inevitably reduces their
efficiency and effectiveness.
▪ Sensitivities to work in Taliban-controlled areas create specific challenges. At provincial level,
UNICEF Field Offices need to find a right balance to ensure local administrations understand and
accept the work done in areas beyond their control. At central level, these sensitivities are more
complex to navigate due to the contextual political dynamics and have led in the past to adverse
outcomes (Persona non grata of the Chief of Polio).
▪ The magnitude of the problems UNICEF aims to address in Afghanistan is so large that, even with
a large budget, ACO programmes require continuous prioritisation, and their upscaling is
challenging.
In addition to these challenges, the government occasionally pressures UNICEF for greater
transparency and better reporting on its activities, according to multiple UN, NGO and donor
sources.111 While room for improvement exists in these areas, there was a sense that government
commitment to some interventions was adversely affected by the fact that funding for them is off-
budget (i.e. not delivered by donors directly to government). The resulting tensions remain
unresolved and impact the quality of partnerships. Some NGOs feel that in some instances UNICEF
should stand up more firmly to government demands.
In surveys conducted by phone and email, NTAS were equally divided on whether it was difficult to
ensure that GIRoA has a good understanding of the different needs of boys and girls. All but one
stated that addressing gender issues was considered by their government counterparts as an
important part of their responsibilities. While this indicates that gender integration is a high priority
for a proportion of Afghan civil servants, other sources expressed the view that systemic gender
inequality remained widespread in the Afghan civil service.112
Partnerships with NGOs
ACO is perceived as a reliable partner, although relationships are often viewed as asymmetrical, with
a desire for greater openness and inclusion often expressed by NGOs. Given ACO’s focus on
cooperation with GIRoA, its partnerships with national and international NGOs are relatively limited.
As of January 2021, ACO has 32 active PCAs with 31 partners. Field-level interventions are to a large
extent implemented and/or complemented by small local community-based organisations, which
contributes to ownership and sustainability. In parallel with the progressive expansion of
interventions in Taliban-controlled areas, ACO has been looking to increase the number and scope of
partnerships with both national and international NGOs.
There was a sense among sources approached for this evaluation that long-term collaborations with
international NGOs have been mostly successful in achieving the desired objectives.113 Examples of
the effectiveness of these partnerships, corroborated in interviews with multiple sources including
donors, are the collaborations with the Danish NGO DACAAR in the WASH sector, the joint work with
111 KII.
112 Key Informant Interviews.
113 This includes partnerships with DACAAR, War Child, Save the Children, Christian Relief Services and Care International.
Itad 4 August 2021 68
Final Report
War Child in the framework of the ‘Children on the Move’ programme, and the extensive
partnership with Save the Children in the education sector. However, the administrative burden and
lack of predictability that often comes with UNICEF funding have limited the continuity of
partnerships, with multiple project cooperation agreements required, involving occasional gaps and
high transaction costs. In some cases, partnerships have aimed to span both development and
humanitarian interventions, but donor earmarking of budgets for one or the other of these
programme areas have hampered bridging between the two. Like other organisations, these INGOs
were also affected by the complexities of working with the government, and the demands placed by
it on programmes. Some NGO sources noted that in some cases, their in-country capacity, coverage
and access to Taliban-controlled areas had been adversely impacted.
When ACO signed an education workplan with the Taliban in Doha (2020), this happened without
prior consultations with key partners and created difficulties for those partners whose programmes
were in hard-to-reach areas controlled by factions not party to the workplan. There was a sense
among multiple UNICEF and external interviewees that information-sharing by UNICEF with its NGO
partners was more limited than required. These sources pointed to the need to develop
partnerships based on trust, beyond the transactional dimension of PCAs.
ACO’s long-term objective of achieving better programme sustainability through local partnerships is
in line with Grand Bargain commitments, as well as UNICEF’s commitment to localisation, as set out
in the CCCs. However, localisation presents multiple challenges. Aside from capacity constraints,
multiple interviewees reported opaque partner selection processes dominated by line ministries.
Since the ACO Audit Report conducted in 2019,114 which pointed out that rules and guidelines for the
selection of national NGOs were poorly applied, new SOPs have been put in place for stricter
adherence to the rules. Occasionally, however, Field Office staff interviewed for this evaluation felt
that their recommendations and suggestions about the selection and management of local NGOs
were not taken into account by government counterparts.
With the assumption of a continued expansion of ACO interventions in Taliban-controlled areas,
more and broader partnerships with national NGOs will be indispensable. This would be in line with
the general localisation efforts aimed at stronger ownership and sustainability UNICEF supports
around the world. However, it would also raise the issue of increased risk for these NGOs asked to
work in a dangerous environment, and the consequent reputational risk for UNICEF. With this in
mind, there is a consensus that ACO should commit to long-term collaborations with key local
partners, with a comprehensive capacity- building component and a ‘hand in hand’ approach
through all programmatic phases.
Alignment of Partnerships with Cooperation Frameworks and Use of Coordination Platforms
ACO programmes are clearly aligned with government priorities at ministerial level, but alignment
is less obvious with the NPP. In large part, this is because NPPs lack government leadership and
direction. The alignment of UNICEF and government priorities is evident at ministerial and technical
level, with some good examples in the Education, WASH and Child Protection sectors, as well as in
the large polio programme. In some cases, for example the new Child Protection policies and the
CBE programme, ACO has been able to influence key government counterparts for better alignment.
The broader exercise of formally aligning UNICEF Country Programmes with the ANPDF and NPP has
proved more challenging, despite the 2018 establishment of the One UN Framework115and the
114 OIAI, Audit of Afghanistan Country Office, Summary of Draft Observations, 7 July 2019.
115 GIRoA and UN, One UN for Afghanistan: 1 January 2018 – 31 December 2021, March 2018.
Itad 4 August 2021 69
Final Report
framework matrix.116 Multiple interviewees said that alignment with the NPPs is made difficult by
the fact that they lack leadership and strategic direction.
There is widespread scepticism towards the One UN Framework, and no evidence of its
application outside Kabul. Overall the Framework has little influence on the way aid stakeholders
engage with each other, and no discernible impact on how programmes are implemented. The
One UN Framework was established in January 2018 to support the ANPDF in replacement of
UNDAF. It is the main system-wide platform for ACO’s engagement and coordination with the
Afghan government and other aid actors in Afghanistan.
However, the One UN Framework in Afghanistan has never taken hold as a platform for structured,
multilateral engagement. Nominally, ACO co-chairs the One UN Education working group and
Programme Management Team. In fact, these bodies have rarely convened since 2018, according to
a source external to ACO. The effectiveness of technical working groups was widely questioned by
interviewees for this evaluation. The evaluation team found that among the UN agencies in Kabul, a
good understanding of the One UN Framework was mostly confined to senior management.
At Kabul level, among UN agencies and donors, there is a general recognition of the benefit for the
UN to speak with one voice in its dialogue with the government, particularly in joint advocacy and
engagement in support of the SDGs. However, this is accompanied by strong scepticism about the
capacity of the relevant actors to harmonise their mandates and administrative systems. Several
interviewees also noted that competition over increasingly scarce funding was not conducive to
cooperation among UN agencies, or meaningful steps towards programme convergence around the
SDGs.
Despite these limitations, there were examples of good cooperation between UN actors at sector
level. For example, the Spotlight Initiative for Central Asia and Afghanistan,117 which aims at breaking
gender barriers, is jointly driven by UNICEF, UNFPA and UN Women. Similarly, the collaboration
within the gender-based violence (GBV) Area of Responsibility (AoR) between UN agencies and
NGOs to strengthen referral pathways and safe spaces, and ultimately strengthen integration of
gender in protection. Finally, the Children on the Move initiative involves UNICEF, IOM, UNHCR and
the War Child NGO. Work on polio has led UNICEF and WHO to work very closely, despite occasional
divergences of view and distinct programme processes.
The presence of UNAMA, with a clear political mandate, complicates the position of UNICEF and
other actors whose mandates straddle the humanitarian-development divide. In interviews, ACO
staff were divided on how to approach the political pillar of the UN mission in Afghanistan. There
was evidence of some room for improvement in the knowledge among staff of IASC and other policy
guidance on the subject.
UNICEF’s Cluster leaderships are generally well perceived. There is some consensus that the
Clusters can and should be used as platforms for advocacy on broader issues, such as the nexus
and funding flexibility. In Kabul UNICEF leads the WASH and Nutrition Clusters, co-leads the
Education in Emergency Working Group, leads the Child Protection AoR under the Protection Cluster
and is an active member of the WHO-led Health Cluster. ACO was perceived by cluster members and
OCHA to be performing well in its leadership function, and this was made easier by the decision to
eliminate the so called ‘double-hatting’ of sector programme staff, and hire independent cluster
coordinators under the supervision of the Chief of Emergency and Field Coordination. Child
Protection is the only sector which is yet to take this step, largely for lack of resources. Several
interviewees stressed the need for UNICEF to use clusters to support more comprehensive advocacy
116 UN Afghanistan, One UN for Afghanistan Results Framework 2018-2021, 2018.
117 ‘EU-UN Flagship Spotlight Initiative Launched in Central Asia and Afghanistan’, available at:
https://www.spotlightinitiative.org/press/eu-un-flagship-spotlight-initiative-launched-central-asia-and-afghanistan
Itad 4 August 2021 70
Final Report
goals beyond emergency response, such as the nexus and better modalities for programme funding
by donors.
The main challenges faced at Kabul level are linked to the role which UNICEF and other large
agencies are perceived to play within the clusters, with a perceived tendency to marginalise small
organisations, especially if they are not implementing partners. Additionally, in line with the
localisation approach pursued by UNICEF and other UN agencies, ministerial counterparts co-lead
the clusters. The objective of handing over cluster leadership to government counterparts is still
remote, given their lack of capacity and high staff turnover.
In the regional capitals, UNICEF plays a prominent role in cluster coordination. Double-hatting is the
norm in the coordination cluster led by UNICEF, with NGOs typically playing a co-lead role. While
OCHA and cluster members generally agreed that UNICEF performs well in its regional coordination
role, there was also a sense that regional sub-clusters are significantly weaker than their national
equivalents.
Institutional Strengthening and Comparative Strengths in Capacity Building
Despite the absence of a formal CB strategy, UNICEF has had some notable successes in this area
at the technical and output levels; however, there have also been serious challenges. There is
some initial evidence of the increased impact and sustainability of approaching capacity building
as an integral part of partnerships, rather than an add-on. Very different understandings and
interpretations exist among internal and external interviewees of what CB and institutional
strengthening are, and many found it difficult to define UNICEF’s comparative advantage in CB.
However, there is a recognition that UNICEF’s expansive mandate spanning multiple sectors puts it
in a favourable position to intervene in this area, with its expertise in several key sectors.
No ACO-specific strategy for CB exists, and each sector has developed its own approach. To a
significant extent, these approaches have been shaped by contextual opportunities or constraints, as
well as fluctuating levels of funding and the vagaries of relationships with counterparts. Against this
challenging backdrop, the main focus of UNICEF’s CB interventions has consistently been at the
technical level, with substantive engagement with mid-level ministerial and administration staff and
field personnel (teachers, health workers, social workers).118 Among the CB initiatives which multiple
interviewees viewed as meaningfully contributing to the strengthening of systems in Afghanistan,
the most notable were the Faculty for Social Workers, the GATE female teacher training programme,
the above-mentioned CPAN, and some of the more comprehensive and long-term CB efforts driven
by the WASH sector. The ambitious CBE programme, while impacted by sustainability and
government ownership issues, was also considered a successful CB initiative by most interviewees.
While at the technical level, sources interviewed for the evaluation agreed that there had generally
been a good uptake of know-how and capacity, there was also broad agreement that the
sustainability of these gains had been undermined by factors mostly outside the remit of ACO
programming. In this sense, and in light of the contextual challenges and obstacles listed above,
there is an increasing acknowledgement within ACO that its efforts at capacity building may not
have yielded commensurate results in the long term. This view is consistent with research on
development assistance to Afghanistan.119
Several interviewees noted that a long-term approach to CB, geared to the integration of training
activities in broader and more long-term development efforts, was more likely to yield results than
‘add-on’ interventions designed and implemented in response to the short-term availability of
118 Institutional support at higher level to establish sustainable political momentum for child-related issues has been more sporadic; an
example brought to the attention of the evaluation team was the work done in close collaboration with key ministerial counterparts for
the adoption of the CPAN, which entailed consistent on-the-job formation.
119 For a succinct and solidly evidenced review of obstacles to development cooperation with the Afghan government, see Christoph
Zürcher, Meta-Review of Evaluations of Development Assistance to Afghanistan, 2008-2018: Chapeau Paper, BMZ, March 2020.
Itad 4 August 2021 71
Final Report
budget lines. Long-term CB carefully integrated in broader institutional development was especially
likely to show good results where the focus was on strengthening existing training systems and
curricula. Besides the already mentioned GATE programme or the Social Workers Faculty, the
inclusion of Child Protection and Human Rights sessions in the training curriculum for the Afghan
Police, done in collaboration with the Ministry of the Interior, offers a good example of this
approach.
Use of National Technical Assistants
The NTA system has become increasingly controversial, with some well-founded claims that it is
unaccountable and has unwanted consequences. ACO is planning to review and rationalise its use
of the system, but these measures come late. The NTA system was introduced by the President’s
Office in 2016 to replace what was then viewed as a dysfunctional Technical Advisor system. The
role of NTAs has since increased in size and scope, and there are currently about 22,000 NTAs
embedded in government offices, shared among UN agencies.120 They are normally funded by the
UN and hired by the respective ministries or government offices.
There is a widespread perception among the UN agencies, NGOs and donors interviewed for this
evaluation that the NTA system is dysfunctional. Some interviewees stated that it is one of the key
problems affecting the way in which the international community provides assistance to
Afghanistan.
The list of problems affecting the NTA system is long, and concerns about it are not new.121 These
problems have revolved mainly around the higher salaries paid to NTAs, and a lack of clarity and
consistency in their recruitment. Despite efforts to align salaries and reform recruitment processes,
the prevailing view continues to be that the NTA system is unaccountable and prone to elite capture.
There have also been issues of blurred accountability and unintended consequences, with NTAs
supplanting ministerial staff instead of remaining within the remit of their advisory roles.
Interviewees stated that UN agencies often engage with NTAs directly, rather than with their
ministerial counterparts. This has reinforced the notion that NTAs form an entrenched elite isolated
from the system which it is intended to support. The evaluation team could not find evidence of
measures to promote gender balance among NTAs.
ACO has been using a high number of NTAs in the past years, with variable results. For the WASH
section, which has relied on approximately 200 NTAs annually between 2018 and 2020, they
represent an important component of the programme, allowing it to strengthen cooperation with
the MRRD, expand the outreach of its interventions, and enhance capacity building. In some cases,
female NTAs have been appointed to focus on gender issues, and their role has generally been
viewed as successful.
There is a general recognition among UN agencies, shared by ACO interviewees, that a review of the
NTA system is needed, and that this should be accompanied by a sharp reduction of their numbers.
However, there are also concerns that rapid downsizing might create a capacity vacuum and
adversely impact the sustainability of some programmes.
UNICEF has already started shifting its approach to utilise more extenders (see FA2 for details), and
to increasingly place NTA-type of advisory positions under more direct ACO oversight. This, for
example, has been the case in WASH and Child Protection. In parallel, ACO is planning to review and
consolidate its NTA network.
120 ACO KII.
121 See, for example, observations on the NTA system in Afghanistan in OECD DAC Capacity Development Unit, Monitoring the Fragile
States Principles: Reflections on Issues of Capacity and Capacity Development, 2009.
Itad 4 August 2021 72
Final Report
Focus Area 4: Gender Integration
This section examines measures taken by ACO to integrate gender in its programmes, as well as to
promote gender integration among partners and to support their progress towards this goal.
Gender Integration in Programme Planning and Practice
Summary of findings:
UNICEF Afghanistan has made substantive progress in recent years, learning from the 2018
Gender Programmatic Review (GPR) and operationalising a gender strategy. Its operationalising
of GAP guidance at an institutional level has been very effective, with the ACO considered a ‘role
model’ in the application of the guidance. However, these institutional changes are yet to
percolate to programme level. While there is clear coherence between programming and GAP
priorities, approaches to operationalising these priorities vary in gender sensitivity across the
Gender Equality Marker (GEM) scale and in evidence generation and analysis. At country and
sector levels, reporting processes are weak on systematic gender analyses or gender
mainstreaming progress (as per gender strategy ambitions), and this hampers knowledge
management and learning aimed at the better integration of gender.
Investment in Gender Analysis and Knowledge Management
There is evidence that programmes have adopted recommendations from the GPR and sought to
integrate gender more effectively in programme design and monitoring. Yet there are still many
opportunities for ACO to strengthen its approach to gender through better analysis, use of sex-
disaggregated and qualitative data, and consolidation of learning across sectors.
In 2018 ACO requested a GPR, which highlighted that gender had been integrated well into the
country programme. The GPR also identified areas for further improvement. This led to the
development of ACO’s Gender Strategy (2019–21), which spans five key strategies to approach
gender equality (see Box 7). These are discussed throughout this section.
Over the past three years, important steps have been taken to operationalise the gender strategy,
notably as it relates to systematic evidence generation, analysis and Knowledge Management (KM).
This is reflected in the survey findings: a majority of UNICEF staff respondents (30 out of 37) agree
that ACO does a lot to enable a better understanding of gender issues through evidence, analysis
and knowledge management (see Figure 9 below).
ACO gender strategy 2019–21: key strategies to approach gender equality
1. Ensure gender-responsive design and implementation of key programmes
2. Targeted gender priorities on empowering adolescent girls and women (see findings in the
‘gender-responsive programming’ section)
3. Reinforce Institutional results on gender equality (see strengthening of gender at
organisational level)
4. Build institutional capacity on gender within UNICEF and of partners (see 4.4.2)
5. Position UNICEF as a strong gender-responsive organisation within the national
development and Humanitarian context (see 4.4.2)
Itad 4 August 2021 73
Final Report
Figure 9. ACO staff survey response on gender
‘In my programme sector or area of work, UNICEF does a lot to enable a
better understanding of gender issues through evidence, analysis and
Figure 8. ACO staff survey response on gender
knowledge management’
Strongly disagree
Disagree
e
s
n
oNo opinion / Don’t know
p
s
e
R Agree
Strongly agree
0 5 10 15 20 25 30
No. of respondents
While strengthening programmatic evidence and analysis processes on gender are generally moving
in the right direction, some of the gender strategy’s ambitions have not been met.
Situation analysis and context analysis
An important initial step in integrating gender into programming starts with a gender-sensitive
context analysis. At country level, situation analysis surrounding children and women was not
updated as planned, despite the lack of an update since 2014 and the fact that the country
programme was extended by two years until December 2021.122 A situation analysis was, however,
conducted on child marriage, which has increased understanding of the impact of early marriage on
health outcomes.123
At sector level, there are also no consistent plans to conduct a context-specific gender analysis to
help identify gender-related challenges and barriers. The Education sector does go some way
towards integrating a gender lens into the ‘risks, bottlenecks and barrier analysis’, e.g. differing
barriers for girls in access to education. There is also anecdotal evidence from the health sector that
the polio section undertook a gender-sensitive political economy analysis which identified the
influence of grandmothers in family acceptance of the vaccination.124 However, gender-sensitive
analysis is not integrated in a systematic way.
Gender-sensitive indicators and monitoring
There have been important developments in integrating gender monitoring. According to the GAP
gender overview for Afghanistan 2018–20, by 2020 100% of UNICEF programmes were integrating
gender into their programme documents (country programme documents and programme strategy
notes) as opposed to 0% of programmes in 2018. Also, by 2020 all eight country programmes had at
least one integrated gender priority result, as opposed to only five programmes in 2018.125 Within
the sectors, there is a clear concerted effort to introduce gender-sensitive indicators from the
standard indicators bank (RAM) that are tagged at gender level 3 (meaning the indicator directly
122 Internal Audit of the Afghanistan Country Office, December 2019.
123 UNICEF staff member.
124 UNICEF key informant.
125 GAP gender overview for Afghanistan 2018–20.
Itad 4 August 2021 74
Final Report
addresses a gender barrier).126 Education, WASH and CP have at least two indicators that directly
address a gender barrier; Health is an outlier with less well developed gender-sensitive indicators
despite the focus on maternal health. That said, there are several missed opportunities to generate
valuable gender-sensitive data for learning and decision making through more routinely
disaggregating by sex. For example, in health indicators, it is not clear who is getting vaccinated127 or,
in WASH indicators, who among IDPs/host communities are accessing sanitation and handwashing
facilities; this information could provide valuable insights.
Data monitored through the results frameworks at country and sector levels are mostly quantitative,
and there is no systematic collection within the RF or through other means to collate qualitative
evidence with a gender lens. There are some incidences of qualitative data being collected: for
example, the CP EYR notes that the C4D programme monitored parishioner attitudes on harmful
practices and GBV.128 However, it is unclear how this data feeds into cross-sector gender learning.
Knowledge Management and Learning
ACO’s ambitions to uphold UNICEF’s role as a ‘knowledge hub’129 requires further strengthening in
relation to gender. As per the ACO gender strategy, the ACO should annually produce a review and
progress report on the gender mainstreaming strategy. This is yet to be created. In terms of
knowledge products, there are several examples of good practice in applying a gender lens to
assessments, such as the ‘Rapid Welfare Monitoring Assessment of COVID-19 Impact’ (Nov 2020)
and the ‘Herat WASH drought response KAP survey report’ (Oct 2019). However, the next step of
consolidating the learning and sharing cross-sector is missing.
Strengthening of Gender at Organisational Level
UNICEF Afghanistan has made significant efforts and substantive progress in recent years in terms
of investment and real commitment to GAP priorities at an institutional level, and has done so in a
challenging context. Due to these advances, ACO is currently considered a ‘role model’ in the
application of the global GAP staffing and programmatic guidance.
The gender strategy states three primary objectives: (a) to strengthen integration of gender equality
issues across UNICEF ACO programme areas (including in emergency contexts); (b) to enable and
empower all staff and implementing partners to take on the responsibility to mainstream gender
concerns in their work; and (c) to create an enabling environment for promoting gender equality.
Activities designed to contribute to the achievement of these objectives include both investment
and systems to track progress. With regard to investment, UNICEF Afghanistan recruited in 2019 a
P4 Gender Specialist to coordinate the gender strategy implementation, reporting directly to the
Deputy Representative. ACO has also met the 15% organisational benchmark for gender
expenditures in 2020.130
Gender parity in staffing is a further GAP priority. This is difficult to achieve within the context of
Afghanistan, especially for national staffing positions, as depicted in Figure 10 below, where national
staff categories ‘NO’ and ‘G’ show less male/female diversity than the international staff category
‘P’. Nevertheless, ACO is concertedly tracking gender parity and is taking steps to consider the
challenge holistically and identify innovative solutions.
126 Indicators are ranked from 0 to 3, with the following connotations; GT 0 - the indicator is not a gender indicator; GT 1 - the indicator
implies a sex-disaggregation of data collected; GT 2 - the indicator measures a significant contribution to gender equality; GT 3 - the
indicator directly addresses a gender barrier.
127 Raised by UNICEF Key informant.
128 CP EYR 2019.
129 UNICEF, Afghanistan Country Programme Document 2015-2019, 2014.
130 UNICEF dashboard.
Itad 4 August 2021 75
Final Report
Figure 10. Gender parity across ACO staffing positions
Figure 9. Gender parity across ACO staffing positions
‘P’ 1–5 represent international professionals, with P1 being most junior.
‘NO’ (National Officers) and ‘G’ (General Staff) represent locally recruited staff again with 1 being most junior.
‘D’ is most senior and can be either international or national.
ACO’s holistic thinking on the subject includes
Box 8. Example of good practice: innovative
an understanding that creating an enabling
approaches to promote female recruitment
environment for gender parity within the
workplace is a long-term commitment rather ACO has adopted a number of working practices to
promote female recruitment, including:
than just a matter of drafting a policy.
Innovative solutions introduced by ACO are i) Recruitment among Afghan diaspora
and female graduates;
outlined in Box 8 and include proactive and
considered strategies to recruit more women. ii) Providing written tests for new recruits
Examples include: recruitment among the in central Kabul rather than at the
UNICEF compound (reducing the
Afghan diaspora and attracting female
requirement for travel);
graduates from university into more junior
iii) Providing staff transportation;
roles with support to quickly move upwards;
and all staff with hiring capacities being iv) Targeted strategies to recruit, mentor
strongly encouraged to positively consider and promote female national staff;
female applications. v) Establishing creche facilities for both
female and male staff.
Written tests for new recruits are provided
within central Kabul rather than within the UNICEF compound (requiring travel) and UNICEF also
provides staff transportation, which removes another barrier to female employment. In addition,
ACO has established creche facilities for both female and male staff, which acknowledges the gender
dimensions of promoting equality within households and encourages an active role for fathers.131 All
of these adjustments and considerations constitute positive progress towards a more gender equal
workforce and also reflect an institutional innovative attitude: ‘It is an office not worried about
trying new things’.132
In terms of building gender into policies, planning and programming, ACO has mandated a gender
review of all documentation (policies and strategies) and ACO has established a Gender Task Force
to ensure that progress against the gender strategy is monitored and measured.133 All of these things
131 UNICEF, Trip Report: Review of UNICEF Afghanistan's Gender Equality Strategy, 2020.
132 UNICEF key informant.
133 UNICEF, Trip Report: Review of UNICEF Afghanistan's Gender Equality Strategy, 2020.
Itad 4 August 2021 76
Final Report
together have led to ACO being considered, with regard to implementation of GAP staffing and
programmatic guidance, a ‘role model’ for UNICEF globally.134
Gender-Responsive and Transformative Programming
While UNICEF Afghanistan has seen significant progress at institutional level on integrating
gender, progress at programme level comparatively lags behind. Notwithstanding, there are clear
efforts to link programme goals to GAP programming priorities.
Targeted priorities within GAP are centred around adolescent girls’ well-being and empowerment,
and focus on five areas: i) promoting adolescent girls’ nutrition, pregnancy care, and prevention of
HIV, AIDs and HP; ii) advancing adolescent girls’ secondary education; iii) preventing and responding
to child marriage and early unions; iv) preventing and responding to GBV in emergencies; and v)
facilitating accessible and dignified menstrual health management (MHM). ACO programming
speaks to these priorities for example through the focus on child marriage & GBV (Child protection
sector), MHM (WASH sector) or girls’ secondary education (Education sector) and pregnancy care
(Health).
In line with GAP priorities, ACO has a flagship135 programme on adolescent girls’ education. Building
on recommendations from the GPR to use education as a platform to be more holistic in addressing
gender, the programme takes a cross-cutting approach linking education programming to child
marriage, WASH and MHM in schools. As part of this programme, UNICEF advocacy successfully
resulted in the development and launch of the first-ever Girls’ Education Policy helping to put girls’
education as a top priority on the government’s agenda. UNICEF responds to barriers to girls
education in a practical, holistic and coherent manner, including:
▪ Linking educational results with reducing child marriage with CP programming;
▪ Addressing insecurity and conflict barriers through demilitarisation of schools and CBE: a specific
strategy within the broader CBE strategy of Afghanistan to recruit and retain female teachers,
which has long been recognised in Programme documentation and globally as a crucial
component for successful girls’ education;
▪ The use of cash transfers to vulnerable families – with no specific educational condition, but
where families are encouraged to use the funds for supporting adolescent girls’ education;136
▪ Working through WASH programmes to increase WASH facilities in schools;
▪ Investment in girls’ dormitories and sanitation facilities in conjunction with WASH programming;
▪ Working with the MoE to improve gender disaggregated government educational data; and
▪ Working with the health programme to provide weekly iron and folic acid supplements to
adolescent girls in schools.
In addition to the above, since 2017 the programme has been empowering adolescents by
enhancing their knowledge, improving their access to information and supporting their rights to
healthier and safer lifestyles in the provinces of Badghis and Bamyan.
Other programmes which directly address GAP priorities include the Afghan Women’s Leadership
Initiative (AWLI), which has been developed within a context of high rates of both child marriage and
out-of-school girls, coupled with a growing realisation of the combined detrimental effects of these
134 This is a more informal accolade highlighting the progress made by ACO to date: a more formalised version of this would be
categorising ACO as a ‘GAP Champion country’, which, global and regional UNICEF respondents confirm, will become the case if ACO
continues on the same trajectory with regard to gender integration.
135 ACO has moved on from the specific terminology of ‘flagship’ programming as articulated within the CPD, but the adolescent girls
education programme remains a priority programme for ACO.
136 Monique Awad and Salwa Nezami, ‘Cash Transfer Supports Girls’ Education in Afghanistan’, 2020, available at:
https://www.unicef.org/afghanistan/stories/cash-transfer-supports-girls-education-afghanistan
Itad 4 August 2021 77
Final Report
phenomena for the girls involved and for society at large.137 This also links in a coherent and holistic
manner to the GAP priority of increasing adolescent girls’ well-being and empowerment.
Although UNICEF Afghanistan programming targets women and girls in line with GAP priorities,
the level of gender integration and gender sensitivity in programming remains inconsistent across
sectors, with a lack of systematic gender analysis being a key barrier.
UNICEF programmes work to a gender scale and associated GEM categories that classify
programming approaches and activities in relation to their impact on gender equality and equity
(see Figure 10). When programming is reviewed against the GEM categories, the evaluation team
finds significant variation in approaches adopted by different sectors. It is important to note that,
while an intervention might overall fall into one GEM category, there may be approaches or
activities within the intervention that span across the GEM continuum.
Figure 10 - UNICEF gender scale and GEM categories138
Gender-transformative programming
For a programme to be considered gender-transformative, it needs to go some way to shifting
embedded gender norms and power relations. The Child protection and Education sectors lead on
tackling these root cause issues through promoting attitudinal and behaviour change. For example,
C4D’s innovative participatory community mobilisation dialogues on child marriage and GBV and
Education’s policy work contribute towards an enabling environment.139
Gender-responsive programming
Within the WASH sector in particular, there are many good examples of gender-responsive
programming – for example the provision of MHM facilities in schools, which allows girls to access
education (linked to the GAP targeted priority programme); and the establishment of water points
by household, which reduce women’s insecurity in using public water sources. While positive, this
cannot be considered gender-transformative, as it continues to reinforce the sexual division of
137 The AWLI project consists of three objectives:
• Change perceptions on the acceptability of child marriage and mobilise communities to delay marriage by raising awareness of
adolescent girls’ rights, the laws in place to protect them, the negative consequences of child marriage, and the importance of
educating girls;
• Empower adolescent girls to make life choices through education, vocational and life skills training, and peer support. This also
includes unconditional cash grants in selected districts in two provinces;
• Map and document the changing status of adolescent girls in the programme’s participating districts and provinces.
138 UNICEF, ‘Gender Expenditure Markers and Gender Expenditure’, PowerPoint, 2020.
139 Child Protection and Education sector, End of Year reports 2019.
Itad 4 August 2021 78
Final Report
labour – which posits that collecting water is the work for women and girls – and has no strategies to
shift this perception.
Gender-sensitive programming
Other elements of programming are more accurately described as gender-neutral or gender-
sensitive. For example, in the polio sector, analysis undertaken to identify whether the vaccination
programme might have different impacts for boys and girls is gender-sensitive to the extent that it is
considered that there might be a differential impact on girls.140
Gender-blind or exploitative programming
Some aspects of ACO programming may be considered gender-blind or gender-exploitative (and
therefore potentially harmful). For example, in the health sector, the use of (unpaid) female
community health workers (CHWs) recruited through programme partners could have unintended
harmful effects for women141 given that they are usually accompanied by a male relative, with
associated stipends being paid to the male relative.
Programming elements that fall into gender-responsive and transformative GEM categories look
beyond simply targeting women and girls with services, and integrate gender. They do this by
conducting gender analysis to consider how people might experience the problem differently
because of their gender, and also to identify the gender gaps in access to and agency over resources,
and gendered power relations that may affect the solution to a problem. An example of gender
targeting in WASH programming includes initiatives that target girls and build latrines to help during
menstruation. While these are ‘gender-sensitive’ in providing the correct resources for girls, they
does not consider intersections between latrines and GBV whereby washrooms are sites of sexual
violence.142 Therefore, while this intervention is gender-responsive in addressing differences, it is
gender-blind on GBV.
Figure 11. Frontline Worker survey response on gender
Frontline Worker responses: How easy or difficult is it to take into
account the different needs of boys and girls in your sector?
Figure 11. Frontline Worker survey response on gender
Very difficult
5%
Very easy
31%
Quite
difficult
34%
Quite easy
30%
No opinion /
Don’t know
0%
140 The analysis showed that there was, in fact, no difference.
141 Implementing partner key informant.
142 Marni Sommer, Suzanne Ferron, Sue Cavill and Sarah House, Violence, gender and WASH: Spurring action on a complex, under-
documented and sensitive topic, Environment & Urbanization 27(1):105–116, 2015.
Itad 4 August 2021 79
Final Report
Considering cross-sector programming, there are two key enablers towards moving from ‘gender-
responsive’ to ‘gender-transformative’ programming, including;
▪ a robust gender analysis (including the voices of beneficiaries where possible) that feeds into
programme design and decision making; and
▪ community engagement and empowerment around attitudes and behaviour change.
As such, a core barrier to gender-transformative programming is the lack of systematic gender
analysis, which, at worst, reinforces harmful norms and/or puts women and girls in harmful
situations. There is also a risk that the emphasis on education as a platform for cross-sector gender
integration could silo gender mainstreaming to programming within school sites. Geographies also
play a part in constraining gender integration. The Eastern region, for example, is extremely
conservative. Integrating gender and addressing gender issues gets increasingly difficult, moving
away from urban to rural areas.
Another barrier is the capacities and abilities of frontline workers. The survey results show that an
overwhelming majority believe gender to be very important within their work, although interestingly
those who report that it is not, or do not have an opinion, are female. It is of note that in the survey,
over a third (39%) of frontline workers felt that it was difficult or very difficult to take into account
the different needs of boys and girls in their sector (see Figure 11 above). This response cut across
CP, education, health, WASH and multi-sector/‘other’ sectors.
UNICEF Partnerships and System-Wide Positioning to Promote Gender
Summary of findings:
ACO has promoted better gender integration through its partnerships, and has taken an
innovative approach in working with some women-led CSOs. Further work is needed to
practically support partners to implement quality gender programming. UNICEF in Afghanistan is
well recognised for its robust gender-responsive programming. There was a perception among
some interviewees that ACO should be bolder in its approach to advocacy and gender-
transformative goals. Rather than a more assertive posture in related activities, this suggest a
need for better ACO messaging to its partners to explain and justify its current approaches.
The evaluation team found that ACO has taken an innovative approach to supporting gender
integration by working with a series of women-led CSOs. However, there is limited evidence of
practical support to partners in integrating gender considerations across organisational and
programmatic areas.
The evaluation team found some evidence that ACO is promoting gender considerations with its
implementing partners. In interviews, both UNICEF staff and external stakeholders agreed that
UNICEF has provided support to partners in better understanding gender issues and how to reflect
them in programming. This is illustrated in survey results in Figure 12.
Itad 4 August 2021 80
Final Report
Figure 12. UNICEF staff survey response on gender
UNICEF staff: ‘In my programme sector work, UNICEF has been
Figure 12. UNICEF staff survey response on gender
effective in helping its partners to improve their understanding of
gender, and to reflect this in their programme design’
Strongly disagree 0
e Disagree 4
s
n
o No opinion / Don’t know 13
p
s
e
R Agree 37
Strongly agree 4
0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40
No. of respondents
Other evidence includes the fact that gender is now reported as one of the mandatory criteria
included in any programme cooperation agreement (PCA). However, there is limited evidence from
IPs or government partners of increased capacity or commitment on their part for applying gender
considerations in programming, undertaking gender analysis, and working with disaggregated data.
A particularly positive and innovative approach undertaken by UNICEF has been through deepening
partnerships with a number of women-led CSOs, including Voice of Women Organization (VWO),
Women Activities & Social Service Association (WASSA), and ActionAid Afghanistan (AAA) on their
women and girls-focused interventions. This recognises that these CSOs already have the
commitment to gender and, with UNICEF’s support, can themselves work to change the equality
situation within the country.
Recognising the challenges inherent in the Afghan context, the steps taken in ACO’s promotion of
gender are positive and provide a basis on which to build further. One area of continued work is
support to partners in replicating some of the gender equity-focused initiatives that UNICEF has
introduced in recent years at an institutional level.
ACO is well recognised within the UN system and among NGOs and partners as an authoritative, if
measured, voice on gender, specifically with a comparative advantage on girls’ education.
Although its programming is widely acknowledged for its gender-responsiveness, some
interviewees felt that it could do more to achieve gains in gender transformation. A majority of key
informants viewed UNICEF as a champion of gender equality, with some reporting that UNICEF is
more advanced in this area than other UN agencies.143 The comprehensive and coherent girls’
education programme, and all associated aspects such as the linkages with child marriage and the
MHM in schools aspects, are well known, well acknowledged and well respected within Afghanistan.
This is solid and sustainable programming with many potential longer-term gender-transformative
results.
ACO has also shown a capacity to adapt and innovate on gender programming in the face of the
COVID-19 pandemic, which has impacted livelihoods and increased rates of GBV.144 UNICEF
conducted a rapid COVID-19 assessment in Herat which reviewed the differing experiences of men
143 External key informants.
144 ATR consulting, Rapid Welfare Monitoring Assessment of Covid-19 Impact, 2020.
Itad 4 August 2021 81
Final Report
and women in the pandemic. This assessment was ground-breaking in its application of a gender
lens to COVID-19 programming.145
However, ACO was not viewed as a dynamic gender actor, pushing boundaries on gender
transformation and social norm change. Insofar as respondents perceived UNICEF to draw on its
comparative advantage, it was seen to do so through its application of technical expertise to
programme design and implementation (education specifically), rather than through vocal advocacy.
Some interviewees faulted it for this, saying that its posture on gender was overly prudent.
Evidence collected by the evaluation team suggests strongly that a high-profile stance in advocacy
and gender transformation, aimed at more rapid progress towards desired outcomes, would likely
be counterproductive in the context of Afghanistan. In this sense, perceptions that ACO’s posture is
overly cautious call for better messaging aimed at partners and stakeholders, to raise their
awareness of the significant challenges involved in achieving progress towards gender goals in
Afghanistan, and of the risks implied in attempting to achieve too much too soon.
One area where ACO has increased UNICEF’s visibility and leadership potential within gender, and
on GBV specifically, is through the Spotlight Initiative, a multi-year global EU/UN partnership to
eliminate violence against women and girls by 2030. As a joint programme between UNICEF, UNDP,
UNFPA, and UN Women, the Initiative highlights a notable move towards greater UN inter-agency
cooperation. For UNICEF, the gender advisor leads on this initiative which, together with UNICEF’s
strong field presence, has helped to solidify its role as a lead actor in this initiative.
145 UNICEF key informant.
Itad 4 August 2021 82
Final Report
Conclusions, Lessons Learned andRecommendations
The context for the next ACP planning period will be marked by increased uncertainty as the US
initiates its drawdown from Afghanistan. This event is likely to exacerbate operational challenges,
with a possibility of heightened conflict, more acute needs, increased barriers to access, and more
difficult engagement with government and other key stakeholders. In this new context, donor
funding may also decline, and prospects for the sustainability of programme delivery may become
more remote. These new conditions will require ACO to become more agile in its decisions and
programme responses, and particularly astute in the formulation and implementation of its
strategies.
The conclusions and recommendations below incorporate key lessons on the operating context, and
on how improvements may be made to programme delivery. Across the programme sectors
examined, the evaluation team found that three core areas warrant particular attention:
Focusing on results
Programme management practice at ACO is heavily process-led and is yet to become genuinely
results-oriented. The focus on process compliance rather than substantive results imposes a
mechanistic approach to programming that lacks agility and is ill-suited to the extreme fluidity of the
Afghan context. This is especially notable in the areas of risk management and risk-informed
programming. In these areas, a strict adherence to process inhibits a more pragmatic and ultimately
more reliable approach to gauging the context surrounding needs, and ways to navigate these.
Non-programme areas of intervention
The evaluation team found that ACO activities are heavily programmatised, with non-programme
activities such as advocacy and stakeholder engagement often given lower priority.
In complex emergencies generally, and more particularly in Afghanistan today as it enters a highly
challenging period, the importance of clear outward-facing messaging, underpinned by a forward
leaning posture in stakeholder engagement, cannot be overstated. Critically, this needs to be
informed by granular, bottom-up context analysis (see below). Being outside the framework
designed for the evaluation, outward-facing engagement has only been summarily touched on in
this report. We address it in the context of the nexus which, as in the case of other strategic goals
set out in the 2017 MTR, cannot progress unless it is accompanied by ongoing efforts aimed at
consensus and environment building. This view is consistent with nexus best practice.146
Decentralisation
The third area in need of progress is decentralisation. Despite some positive steps, ACO operations
remain overly centralised, both in terms of operational architecture and decision making processes.
The evaluation team found that there is room for field offices to play a significantly more active role
in key programme functions, most notably risk and context analysis, and decision making on access
and stakeholder engagement. Beyond these two areas, the evaluation team found that progress in
decentralisation would yield benefits in terms of operational agility, MSP, and programme
congruence with needs on the ground.
In this section we set out our conclusions against each of the four FAs, followed by
recommendations.
146 The OECD DAC Recommendation on the Humanitarian-Development-Peace Nexus (2020) calls for forward-leaning political-level
engagement in support of the triple nexus.
Itad 4 August 2021 83
Final Report
Focus Area 1: The Nexus
A significant gap exists between nexus policy and planning, which are in an advanced state of
development, and nexus implementation, which is heavily constrained by an adverse operating
environment. ACO has developed strong programming capability in the former; however,
significant contextual obstacles prevent this from translating into progress towards the nexus at
programme level.
Nexus Planning, Implementation and Positioning
Although several interviewees attributed slow progress on the nexus to sector siloes in the ACP, the
evaluation team found no evidence that siloes were undermining humanitarian-development
linkages in ACO operations. This is because the dual mandate that characterises UNICEF activities in
Afghanistan enables each programme sector to establish humanitarian-development linkages within
its own programmes. For example, the WASH section addresses urgent humanitarian needs by
trucking water to remote communities, while addressing the root causes of vulnerabilities through
development activities such as the drilling of wells and the training of communities in their
maintenance.
The evaluation team found that the same complementarity between humanitarian and
development activities is actively – but individually – pursued by all sectors across the ACP. In the
four sectors examined, humanitarian delivery aims to draw on local capabilities which ACO is actively
helping to develop. Overall, about the same amount of resources are budgeted per sector outcome
to development interventions (capacity building, resilience) and to humanitarian ones. This denotes
that humanitarian and development outputs are deliberately designed to work in concert, and to
contribute jointly to sector results.
In implementation, the evaluation team found that humanitarian-development linkages are heavily
undermined by contextual factors that are largely outside the remit of sector-level programming.
These obstacles relate mainly to the considerable challenges involved in ensuring the sustainability
over time of partner capacity built in joint programmes. This lack of sustainability owes to structural
factors deeply rooted in the aid environment in Afghanistan.
Rather than a programmatic focus, the mitigation of these obstacles calls for interventions in non-
programme areas, including steadfast advocacy, clearer outward-facing positioning and more
articulate policy responses on the part of ACO. A key finding in this evaluation is that ACO’s
involvement in a leadership and coordination capacity in these areas has been limited, due in part to
the shortcomings of the One UN framework and the absence of a viable platform for system-wide
engagement. ACO needs to compensate for the lack of such a platform by redoubling efforts to
engage bilaterally with like-minded stakeholders. This means allocating more senior management
time to ensuring that its messaging on the nexus and other key policy goals is better heard and
understood. Critically, it also means formulating stronger evidence-based narratives on the
contextual obstacles that stand in the way of the nexus, so that stakeholders –including donors—can
become better aware of the root causes of the slow pace of progress in this area, and collectively
formulate the needed policy responses.
In engaging on the nexus, ACO should make more deliberate use of its comparative advantage,
which stems primarily from its dual mandate and its sectoral expertise. Evidence collected during
the evaluation shows clearly that linkages between humanitarian and development programme
strands of activity are hard-wired in the very design of the ACP. While progress at rolling out the
nexus have come against considerable obstacles inherent in the context, ACO staff interviewed on
the subject showed a significant conceptual and programme-level understanding of where and how
these linkages could be achieved if circumstances allowed. In the Afghan context, this know-how
should be viewed as a public good and more should be done to share it pragmatically. Natural entry
Itad 4 August 2021 84
Final Report
points for this are provided by multi-partner initiatives in which ACO has proven sectoral expertise,
such as Spotlight and CPAN.
Peacebuilding
Although peacebuilding as an aspirational goal is widely adhered to in principle by ACO staff, the
evaluation team found no evidence of formal steps taken to incorporate peacebuilding objectives in
sector programming. Peacebuilding and related UNICEF guidance are not well known or understood
by ACO staff. The same is true of conflict sensitivity, which UNICEF guidance prescribes as a
minimum programme requirement in peacebuilding.
There is a need for dedicated research on the ACP’s potential peacebuilding effects, to inform a
decision on whether peacebuilding should be pursued as a formal objective in the next ACP. This
decision requires careful consideration, as UNICEF’s pursuit of peacebuilding outcomes is
constrained by its adherence to humanitarian principles.147 In addition, there is a need to determine
whether UNICEF in Afghanistan can take on the additional burden involved in the formal pursuit of
peacebuilding objectives.
Risk Management and Preparedness
At sector level, risk management is mainly carried out on an ad hoc basis. Dedicated tools aimed at
managing risk and improving preparedness, such as such as RIP guidance or the EPP, are not widely
used to inform programme decisions. As noted in Section 4.1.1, the use of the EPP in particular is
problematic. Compliance to related requirements is demanding, yet a majority of staff interviewed
considered that the EPP has limited benefits and is remote from operational realities on the ground.
RIP guidance appears more likely to achieve buy-in at sector level. A reason for this is that RIP
approaches risk in terms of its effects on needs and vulnerabilities; in this sense, it is consistent with
both needs-based and results-based programming, and speaks directly to sector priorities.
Although field offices feed into risk and context analysis processes, the extent to which their inputs
is taken up appears limited. Their more active participation in these processes would improve the
overall quality of analysis used to inform ACO-wide programming. While further progress is made on
decentralisation, better programmatic use of contextual knowledge held by field offices, and by
implementing partners and extenders, would also enable modest but more rapid gains in
programme agility.
Focus Area 2: Coverage and Access
ACO has expanded its programme coverage in the past three years, thanks to an increasing appetite
for risk, as well as incremental decentralisation and the increased use of IPs, extenders and frontline
workers. But it continues to face significant challenges in its assessment of needs and its monitoring
of results in hard-to-reach areas.
Equity
Given the imprecise picture of needs in large swathes of the country, it is challenging to determine if
equity is being attained and whether value for money and effectiveness are maximised in hard-to-
reach. Programme delivery to high-risk areas continues to face serious obstacles, including security
and access constraints, political sensitivities surrounding engagement with non-state armed groups,
supply-side approaches to prioritisation, and the limited availability of implementing partners.
Different programme sectors have implemented varying operational approaches to respond to
needs, prioritise support and increase coverage. As illustrated in the findings, this diversity of
approaches is dictated by the particular traits of each sector and a well-founded desire for
147 Neutrality as a humanitarian principle limits the extent to which UNICEF can associate with UNAMA and advocate against actions or
behaviours that are obstacles to peace.
Itad 4 August 2021 85
Final Report
pragmatism in implementation. The resulting lack of consistency in approaches is not a concern per
se. However, it does call for clarity on red lines and best practice in expanding coverage.
Multi-Sector Programming
MSP has evolved from theory and design to implementation in the last 18 months, in particular
through a series of interventions in the WASH, gender and education sectors.148, 149 This shift has
been driven not only by global strategies and AMP goals but also by a will to scale up and formalise
existing ad hoc harmonisation between sectors. Continued progress is likely to be constrained by
sector siloes, compartmentalised partnerships with GIRoA ministries, donor earmarking, the slow
pace of ACO decentralisation, and the complexity of multi-sectoral results measurement and
reporting.
Access
The lack of formal strategy on negotiating access into hard-to-reach areas-controlled areas is not, in
itself, an impediment to access. On the contrary, it provides latitude for exploring and adjusting
approaches to access on a pragmatic basis. ACO has relied on four – at times, mutually reenforcing –
informal strategies to improve access. Its ability to respond to needs in hard-to-reach areas
predominantly rests on implementing partners, extenders or frontline workers. The most effective
strategy is to engage at a local level through implementing partners, extenders and frontline workers
who have engendered trust within communities. Rather than developing a formalised strategy on
access, a basic operating procedure setting out red lines and good practice may be more
appropriate.
Programme Agility
Across the ACP, improvements in programme agility and adaptiveness are closely tied to progress in
decentralisation and to the provision of increased support and latitude needed by field offices to
respond more autonomously to changes in their immediate environment (‘Freedom in a
Framework’). A key lesson in this regard is that improvements in operational agility and
responsiveness require an in-depth reform of ACO’s operational processes and architecture,
enabling field offices to play a significantly greater role in programming. Innovative programme tools
and programming guidance, such as the EPP and RIP, are no substitute for this. While reforms at
scale are conducted to enable further decentralisation, improvements in programme agility should
be pursued by improving the quality of information that feeds into programming, including in hard-
to-reach areas.
Conflict Sensitivity
With one exception in WASH, conflict sensitivity is currently not applied to ACO programming. In the
Afghan context, effective conflict-sensitive programming requires not only a good understanding of
conflict sensitivity principles, but also a capacity to produce conflict analysis that is commensurate in
scope to the programme space to which it applies. For example, the analysis feeding into conflict
sensitivity programming in a countrywide perspective will be very distinct from that used at local
level by the field offices. Conflict sensitivity training should be provided preferentially to field office
staff, as they are the main points of operational interface between ACO and its environment.
Training should allow staff to understand how to apply conflict sensitivity not only to programming
but also to their engagement with local stakeholders, and to the use of programme features such as
extenders, frontline workers and IPs.
148 Programme examples include: (1) The EU-funded “Spotlight” (an inter-agency multi-sectoral response project to provide services for
survivors to increase access and use of SGBV/HP response services in Afghanistan); (2) The ECHO – funded “Provision of education in
emergencies and lifesaving health, nutrition and WASH services to vulnerable children in Afghanistan,”; and (3) The South Korea funded
“Integrated quality service package in hard-to-reach areas of Afghanistan.”
149 Examples of harmonised delivery approaches include improving gender-specific WASH facilities in schools to promote female
menstrual health and encourage higher female enrolment rates.
Itad 4 August 2021 86
Final Report
Use of Extenders and TPMs
The increase in ACO’s programme coverage is due in large part to the use of extenders, and the
evaluation team could not identify an alternative modality that would be equally effective in
reaching vulnerable groups in hard-to-reach areas. Despite its advantages, a lack of oversight has
weakened lines of accountability, with an adverse impact on the quality of extender performance in
‘last-mile’ programme delivery. Given that extenders mostly work in areas not accessible to UNICEF
staff, the monitoring of extender outputs and the verification of extender reporting remains a
challenge. Although new SOPs have led to improvements in the use of extenders, there is still room
for improvement.
ACO’s limited use of TPMs is causing an over-reliance on ACO staff, implementing partners and
extenders for monitoring purposes. This has led to a fragmentation and disparity in monitoring
practice, with results that fall below accountability and learning requirements. Further human and
resource investments are required to institute a comprehensive TPM system that is fit for purpose.
Focus Area 3: Partnerships and Capacity Building
At the technical level, ACO has built strong partnerships with its government counterparts. Whether
this can translate into sustainable outcomes depends on contextual factors that can only be
addressed indirectly, through environment-building measures including advocacy, stakeholder
engagement, and concerted action across the range of aid actors in Afghanistan. Progress towards
this has been heavily constrained by the lack of a well-functioning platform for system-wide
cooperation.
Gains made to date will remain precarious as Afghanistan enters a period of high uncertainty.
Renewed engagement efforts will be needed to consolidate these gains, and to make up for the
limitations of the One UN process by forging ad hoc alliances with like-minded stakeholders,
including UN actors and donors.
In the course of interviews with NGOs there was a sense that, while partnerships do generally yield
the intended programme results, ACO may have missed opportunities to fully leverage the potential
offered by NGOs in terms of their knowledge of the local context, their often better access to
community-based leaders and hard-to-reach area proxies, and their capacity to relay and amplify
some advocacy messages. As Afghanistan enters a period in which programme delivery will become
more complex, a broader and more strategic approach to partnerships with NGOs should be
considered, to encompass joint objectives in non-programme areas.
In its partnerships with NGOs and Civil Society Partners, results have been affected by a lack of
sustainability in capacities built. As noted in Sections 4.1.1 and 4.3.1, obstacles to sustainability are
structural and rooted in the environment. Some of these obstacles might be mitigated through more
flexible funding set in a multi-year perspective, and efforts to engage with donors on this objective
should be maintained at both country and headquarters levels.
Another important finding in the evaluation is that the lack of long-term strategy for capacity-
building and institutional strengthening may have undermined the continuity and coherence over
time of related activities, with possible adverse effects on their sustainability. Without such a
strategic framework, the impact- and outcome-level results of capacity-building interventions are
necessarily harder to measure; course corrections, when needed, cannot be informed by strong
evidence.
While ACO’s comparative advantage in capacity-building could not be conclusively identified, there
was good anecdotal evidence that its strong sectoral expertise did contribute to the quality of
capacity-building interventions. In each of the four sectors examined, not only did much the
technical know-how held by ACO cross over to partners, but sectoral and contextual insights specific
to each sector served to inform the design and roll-out of capacity-building activities. This was most
Itad 4 August 2021 87
Final Report
visible in WASH, where programmes aimed at building the capacity of both the MRRD and the CDCs
were relatively complex and particularly well honed. As discussed earlier, however, the extent to
which these sectoral proficiencies can translate into lasting results at outcome and impact levels is
unclear; the prevailing view was that capacities built to date were generally not self-sustainable and
would be unlikely to endure a withdrawal of ACO support.
Across the range of interviews conducted, the clear sense emerged that the use of NTAs carries
significant risk, both in programme and in reputational terms. Collective efforts to mitigate these
risks have been under way for several years, yet it appears that ACO’s involvement in these efforts
have been relatively modest. Given the changing context in Afghanistan, active measures to mitigate
the risks posed by NTAs have gained new urgency.
Focus Area 4: Gender
ACO has made significant progress with gender integration over the last few years. There has been
notable progress in operationalising GAP guidance and priorities at country level, as well as
institutional strengthening. This progress has been enabled by investments in staff and innovative
strategies to initiate a shift away from the unequal gender balance within ACO. This is worthy of
note as the context of Afghanistan means starting this from a particularly challenging place. Within
UNICEF, the institutional gender work has earned it the recognition of ‘role model’. Externally,
UNICEF in Afghanistan is recognised as a strong and solid gender-responsive actor.
There have also been a number of sectoral achievements and innovations. Targeted priority
programming is strong, particularly in relation to girls’ education. There is evidence of
transformational approaches in the Education and CP sectors creating change at policy level through
advocacy on girls’ education, and at community level by empowering communities in attitude and
behaviour change, for example around attitudes to child marriage and GBV. Transformational
approaches have been enabled by programme commitment to gender analysis and community
engagement. There are also examples of positive gender-responsive programming, for example in
relation to WASH and MHM in schools.
However, there is still further work to do on systematising analysis, monitoring, reporting and
learning at programme level. The absence of country-level situation analysis on women is a
particularly important gap. At sector level, the integration of gender is challenged by a lack of
analysis and still-limited partner capacity.
Going forwards, ACO can draw on pockets of excellence from programming to develop and
implement a more aspirational gender strategy that is more systematic across all sectors in
strengthening gender analysis, monitoring and learning, and enables sector programmes to shift
further towards being gender-transformational, where feasible.
ACO’s comparative advantage in the promotion of gender integration lies in its technical and
programme expertise. To a considerable extent, its role as an authoritative leader in gender
advocacy must be adapted to the cultural context of Afghanistan, where a high-profile stance on this
topic may alienate or antagonise some of its target audiences. While an incremental approach is
more likely to yield the desired results, some interviewees for this evaluation –including donors--
faulted ACO for what they perceived to be an overly prudent approach to gender advocacy and
gender transformation. This provides further ground for one of the key recommendations in this
evaluation, which is to renew bilateral engagement and messaging efforts aimed at ensuring that
ACO stakeholders –some of whom are strategically key—can gain a better appreciation of the
significant challenges involved in the accomplishment of its mandate in Afghanistan.
Itad 4 August 2021 88
Final Report
Recommendations
FOCUS AREA 1: THE NEXUS Action to be Led Relevant
by Report
Section
1 Until the actual and potential peacebuilding outcomes of ACO Dep. Rep. 4.1.1.
operations are better understood, refrain from prioritising
peacebuilding in the next CPD. Specific actions:
• Engage in ACO-wide consultations on peacebuilding and conflict
sensitivity to improve staff understanding of these concepts and
generate knowledge on their application in the context of the ACP.
• Until the feasibility and likely outcomes of peacebuilding activities are
better understood, refrain from allocating resources and setting
formal objectives in this area, and prioritise conflict sensitivity instead
(see recommendation 6 below).
2 As Afghanistan enters a period of significant uncertainty, recognise Dep. Rep, 4.1.1.
advocacy and stakeholder engagement as central to ACO positioning Sector Chiefs,
and to the promotion of an enabling environment for both its strategic Comm. Chief
objectives and its country programme. Specific actions:
• Allocate appropriate resources and senior management time to the
formulation of clear and legible messaging.
• To ensure consistency and effectiveness in advocacy and engagement
work, draft formal narratives to convey tightly prioritised messages
on selected themes (e.g. the nexus, gender, access) and ensure the
good knowledge and use of these narratives by all relevant staff.
• In these narratives, make explicit the contextual obstacles that bar
further progress towards the nexus and other strategic goals, and
clearly articulate the limits and boundaries of ACO work in
Afghanistan.
3 Increase the participation of Field Offices and Implementing Partners Dep. Rep, 4.1.1.
in ongoing risk assessments; mainstream the practice of analysing risk Sector Chiefs,
in terms of vulnerabilities and affected groups. Specific actions: FO Chiefs
• To enable risk-informed programme responses and ensure that they
are consistent with a needs-based approach, analyse risk in terms of
its end-line effects on selected vulnerable groups, as prescribed in
UNICEF guidance,150 rather than in terms of set typologies of risks, as
done in the EPP.
• Rather than approach risk assessment and risk management as stand-
alone activities, further embed them in ACO’s ongoing planning and
programming processes.
• To mitigate sector-siloed approaches and to foster a multi-sectoral
perspective on risk-informed programming, allow Field Offices and
Implementing Partners to play a greater role in risk analysis and the
formulation of programme responses.
150 UNICEF’s 2018 Guidance on Risk-informed Programming prescribes a ‘people-centric’ approach to analysing contextual risk. This
approach is consistent with needs-based programming and a multi-sectoral outlook.
Itad 4 August 2021 89
Final Report
FOCUS AREA 2: COVERAGE areas AND ACCESS
4 To enable further progress towards multi-sectoral programming and Dep. Rep, 4.2.1.
results-based management, continue to support a shift from a Sector Chiefs,
‘planning per sector’ to a ‘planning per need’ approach. Specific FO Chiefs
actions:
• Enforce the recently introduced requirement to design Theories of
Change (ToCs) at sector level. In selected areas of intervention, such
as that covered by the Integrated Services Package, pilot multi-
sectoral ToCs for use as roadmaps in multi-sectoral programme
design.
• Support a multi-sectoral outlook by introducing multi-sector
monitoring, and provide the required training to a selected cadre of
extenders.
5 While reforms at scale are conducted to enable further Dep. Rep, 4.2.2.
decentralisation, foster ACO’s operational agility and adaptiveness by Sector Chiefs,
enabling the better capture of programme-critical information. FO Chiefs
Specific actions:
• Build up ACO’s internal capacity to draw on and analyse anecdotal
information held by extenders. Use this knowledge more
systematically to help compensate for the limitations of formal needs
assessments, notably in hard-to-reach areas where needs are
reportedly the greatest.
• Develop contextual knowledge iteratively from professionalised and
more systematic extender reporting. Where appropriate, develop
templates and set debriefing processes for extender reporting.
6 Invest in developing in-house CS capacity, starting with simplifying and Dep. Rep, 4.2.2.
contextualising the existing UNICEF Conflict Sensitivity and Sector Chiefs,
FO Chiefs
Peacebuilding Programme guidelines. Specific actions:
• Provide training to staff on these principles through webinars and
training exercises. Introduce the use of CS checklists as a routine tool
in project design and monitoring.
• In ensuring the application of CS, focus particularly on Field Office
staff and provide them with them with the necessary support and
oversight.
7 In the next programme cycle, expand the use of TPMs for independent Dep. Rep, Chief 4.2.2.
results verification; complement and better harmonise the use of Planning and
TPMs with monitoring activities conducted internally. Specific actions: Monitoring,
Sector Chiefs,
• To ensure adequate resourcing of TPMs, consider them as core FO Chiefs
budget (RR) and earmark approx. 1% of the total ACO budget to this
programme-wide facility. Carefully consider the deployment of TPM
capacity in light of alternatives for both accountability and learning.
• Enhance ACO’s monitoring toolkit by reinforcing community-based
grievance mechanisms already in place, expanding their coverage
where possible, and piloting peer-to-peer monitoring across
programme sectors and among implementing partners. Peer-to-peer
monitoring should also be envisaged with other UN agencies.
Itad 4 August 2021 90
Final Report
FOCUS AREA 3: PARTNERSHIPS AND CAPACITY BUILDING
8 In preparation for a degraded operating environment in the next Dep. Rep., 4.3.1.
planning period, build more inclusive and consultative working Sector Chiefs
relationships with NGO and civil society partners. Specific actions:
• Operate a shift away from transactional relationships with
implementing partners, towards more symmetrical partnerships
underpinned by mutual accountability. With selected partners, set
cooperation in the long term and commit to consistent capacity
building support over a multi-year timespan.
• Proactively draw on the significant contextual knowledge of NGO and
CSO partners. As well as tapping into this knowledge for risk analysis,
as recommended above, use it to inform joint advocacy activities in
which the comparative strengths of NGO and CSO partners are better
understood and more deliberately leveraged.
9 In consultation with other UN actors, accelerate efforts to review the Dep. Rep., 4.3.1.
use of NTAs in programmes. Specific actions: Sector Chiefs
• Drawing on the experience gained in diverse sectors such as WASH
and Child Protection, arrive at a clear and informed position on
whether, and to what extent, the benefits of using NTAs as proxies in
programme delivery outweigh the reputational and programme risks
that this carries.
• Consult internally and with stakeholders on possible measures to
further mitigate the risk of using NTAs, including by modifying their
briefs, scope of work and reporting lines. On the back of UNICEF’s
dual mandate and the scope of its institutional development portfolio
in Afghanistan, exercise leadership in shaping UN-wide consensus on
the use of NTAs in the aid effort and related best practice.
FOCUS AREA 4: GENDER INTEGRATION
10 Use the opportunity of the next ACP planning cycle to introduce a Dep. Rep., 4.4.1.
strengthened and consistent approach to analysis, monitoring, Gender
progress reporting and learning. Advisors,
Gender
• Review the current gender strategy action plan and consider how
Specialists,
ambitions around ‘gender-responsive design and implementation’
Sector Chiefs
can be revitalised by instilling gender analysis and gender progress
reporting and learning at all levels. At country level, ensure key
situation analyses have been conducted and systematise learning. At
sector level, systematise gender analysis, monitoring and reporting
approaches.
11 While recognising the significant barriers to gender-transformative Dep. Rep., 4.4.2.
goals in Afghanistan, continue to pragmatically seek out opportunities Gender
for progress towards these goals wherever possible. Specific actions: Advisors,
Gender
• Map ACO sectoral plans against the gender scale to identify which
Specialists
sector interventions are strong in gender integration and which are
not.
• Review gender-transformational programming and draw out learning
which can be applied to other interventions that are lower on the
GEM scale, with particular attention to the use of gender analysis,
community engagement and attitudinal and behaviour change work.
Itad 4 August 2021 91
Final Report
Itad 4 August 2021 92
Final Report
Annexes
Terms of Reference
Itad 4 August 2021 93
Final Report
Itad 4 August 2021 94
Final Report
Itad 4 August 2021 95
Final Report
Itad 4 August 2021 96
Final Report
Itad 4 August 2021 97
Final Report
Itad 4 August 2021 98
Final Report
Itad 4 August 2021 99
Final Report
Itad 4 August 2021 100
Final Report
Itad 4 August 2021 101
Final Report
Itad 4 August 2021 102
Final Report
Itad 4 August 2021 103
Final Report
Itad 4 August 2021 104
Final Report
Itad 4 August 2021 105
Final Report
Itad 4 August 2021 106
Final Report
Itad 4 August 2021 107
Final Report
Itad 4 August 2021 108
Final Report
Itad 4 August 2021 109
Final Report
Itad 4 August 2021 110
Final Report
Itad 4 August 2021 111
Final Report
Itad 4 August 2021 112
Final Report
Itad 4 August 2021 113
Final Report
Itad 4 August 2021 114
Final Report
Itad 4 August 2021 115
Final Report
Itad 4 August 2021 116
Final Report
Itad 4 August 2021 117
Final Report
Itad 4 August 2021 118
Final Report
Itad 4 August 2021 119
Final Report
Itad 4 August 2021 120
Final Report
Itad 4 August 2021 121
Final Report
Evaluation Matrix
Presented below is the evaluation matrix, consisting of evaluation questions, sub-questions, indicators, data sources and benchmarks.
Focus area151 EQ Sub-EQ Indicators Evidence and data Benchmarks
collection sources
1. Integration KEQ 1. To what 1. To what extent are UNICEF’s • Extent to which strategies are • Evidence: ACP, CDP CCC 2.4.1 at
and extent has UNICEF humanitarian, development based on joint assessment or extension document, Strategic Result
positioning re-positioned itself and peace strategies analysis including context- relevant programme Level: Children,
for a to contribute mutually reinforcing and/or specific gender analysis strategy notes (PSNs) adolescents, and
strengthened coherently to joint coherent and can synergies • Extent to which sectors are (health, education, their
humanitarian, humanitarian- be improved? aligned and results are cross- WASH and CP), project communities
peace nexus development and sectoral/office-wide proposals, strategy and benefit from
peacebuilding • Extent to which proposals planning meeting gender-
Related DAC objectives? have been based on cross- minutes responsive
Criteria: sectoral strategy assessment • Data collection: Desk programmes and
Relevance and planning, including sex- review, KII, survey services.
(KE1 and KE2) and age-disaggregated data
and strategic gender indicators UNICEF Conflict
Coherence
in accordance with the UNICEF sensitivity and
(KE2)
GAP Peacebuilding
Effectiveness
guide (2016).
(KE1 and 2)
2. To what extent have the • Evidence of cross-sector • Evidence: ACP, PSN, CCCs 2.2.2 Multi-
Equity
sectors demonstrated implementation and workplans, sitreps, the sectoral and
through their monitoring approaches donor proposals, RAM, Integrated
implementation and • Evidence that preparedness notes of planning Programming.
monitoring that UNICEF is measures are planned, sessions, and team
well positioned to coherently integrated into workplans and meetings, case studies, CCC 2.2.4 Linking
address joint humanitarian, monitored records of management Humanitarian
development and decisions and
peacebuilding objectives? • Data collection: Development.
evidence in KIIS, spot Benchmark.
survey (if appropriate), UNICEF
partner and donor KIIs Procedures on
151 DAC Criteria are being applied at Focus Area level and still being tested as the EQs are being finalised. Definitions will be provided as part of the draft Inception Report.
Itad 4 August 2021 122
Final Report
validation, field visits of Linking
cross-sectoral and nexus Humanitarian
analytical approaches, and
internal cross-sectoral Development
joint analysis, evidence Programming
of convergence in the (2019).
field
UNICEF Conflict
sensitivity and
Peacebuilding
guide (2016).
KEQ 2 To what 1. To what extent is UNICEF • Evidence that UNICEF is • ACP, PSN, workplans, DAC 2019
extent is UNICEF operating in its areas of making the best possible use sitreps, the donor Coordination
strategically well comparative strength and of its demonstrated capacity proposals, RAM, notes pillar: Evidence
positioned to advantage to further the and expertise (not limited of joint planning of joined up,
enhance the triple nexus considering the solely to its mandate), to sessions with GIRoA and multi-sectoral
humanitarian- array of other actors? support the aim of the triple One UN, planning programme
development-peace nexus (OECD) sessions, and team design spanning
nexus within the • How effectively does UNICEF meetings, case studies, humanitarian
national advance collaboration records of management and
development between other UN agencies decisions development
system to the with overlapping mandates • KIIS and external KIIs, spheres;
advancement of e.g. UNFPA, UN Women, survey (external), desk Evidence of joint
children’s rights in WHO, WFP review, meeting minute assessment and
the country? • Extent to which UNICEF has and agendas analysis of root
clarified their role on peace causes.
One UN Results
Framework
2018–21.
DAC 2019
Programme
Pillar.
2. How well has risk-informed • Extent to which ACO has • Risk registers DAC 2019.
programming—including risk designed and implemented • Conflict analysis
Itad 4 August 2021 123
Final Report
analysis, design, response and risk-informed and conflict- • Previous evaluations on Guidance on
monitoring—evolved, sensitive humanitarian risk Risk-Informed
strengthened and been programmes (CCC) • Monitoring reports Programming
systematically operationalised • Extent to which social • Perception of risk (GRIP) of 2016.
across programme sections and cohesion actively considered management at field
field offices? How can it be where relevant and feasible level
improved? (CCC) • KIIs
• Social cohesion
documentation
3. How well has UNICEF been 3. Evidence of UNICEF • Minutes of coordination OECD-DAC 2019
able to engage, coordinate and coordination with UN and non- meetings with CSO Programme
partner with other UN and non- UN partners in both Govt.- and partners and UN Pillar component
UN cooperating actors to support hard-to-reach areas agencies 6.
the nexus within the National (coordination, joint initiatives • Minutes from cluster
Development System? etc) meetings (education in One Un Results
emergency, health, Child Framework
Protection sub-cluster (2018–21).
and WASH)
• KIIs, Access unit reports
4.To what extent has UNICEF • Evidence of UNICEF co-lead • KIIs with participants, GAP.
been able to take leadership in co-chair to joined-up meetings agendas,
integrating humanitarian, humanitarian, development meeting minutes UNICEF
development and peace to the and peace planning and Procedures on
benefit of vulnerable boys and programming on the basis of a Linking
girls and women (particularly in joined up or joint multi- Humanitarian
respect of recognising the impact stakeholder analysis of risks, and
of agency of women on their needs, vulnerabilities, and root Development
children)? causes of conflict for the Programming
context as well as indigenous (2019).
capacities utilising data and/or
qualitative analysis DAC 2019 6.a. iii.
2. Coverage and KEQ 3 To what 1. How well has UNICEF been • Evidence that ACO is • PSNs CCCs 2.2.2 Multi-
Access: extent have able to balance the dual progressing towards CCC • Workplans sectoral and
geographical UNICEF’s goals of reducing inequity (2020) commitment 2.2.3 • Results frameworks Integrated
coverage and programme strategy and increasing programme Target and reach the most • Monitoring data Programming.
access to and implementation efficiency and effectiveness? disadvantaged children and • Management reports
Itad 4 August 2021 124
Final Report
achieve coherently and How can UNICEF’s approach their communities with • KIIs CCCs 2.2.3
equitable consistently be improved to achieve the humanitarian assistance, • Field visit reports Equity.
results for fostered multi- dual goals? protection and services. • Possible spot survey
children at sectoral Evidence of the use of
scale programming to disaggregated data, analysis of
respond holistically vulnerability and hard-to-
Related DAC to children’s needs reach data in discussion of
Criteria: at scale and protect trade-offs is taking place
Relevance the rights of (coverage evaluation)
(incorporating children everywhere 2. To what extent has there • Evidence programme PSNs, ToC, results CCC 2.2.2 Multi-
dynamic been consistency between implementation matches framework proposals, sectoral and
UNICEF ACO’s strategic strategic intent reports, monitoring data, Integrated
efficiency
vision on multi-sectoral • Vision on multi-sectoral KIIs Programming.
KE3),
convergence, geographical convergence, geographical
Coherence
coverage and scale, and the coverage is reflected in PSNs,
(KEQ 3 and
actual programming choices workplans and results
KEQ 4)
made on the ground? What frameworks. Evidence of
Effectiveness
were the driving factors, implementation
(KE4, KE6) including gender, in
Equity (KE3) adjusting any programming
approaches?
EQ 4 How well have 1. How effective are current • Evidence of TPM and • Workplans with Taliban, Note: we
UNICEF’s approaches used to extenders operating in hard- monitoring reports, KIIS considered using
programme strategy accessing and programming to-reach areas used the CCC 2.1.4;
and implementation in areas controlled by anti- • Evidence that the five • Access unit reports, however, this
effectively and government elements? How identified access strategies are UNICEF reporting on related to
coherently well are they adjusted and adapted as activities in hard-to- humanitarian
enhanced access to institutionalised in ACO’s required and that learning is reach areas access only.
areas controlled by programming and institutionalised
hard-to-reach organisation? How can they • Evidence of
areas? be improved? operationalisation—and
applicability—of humanitarian
principles, and their effects on
programming in hard-to-reach
areas-controlled areas
Itad 4 August 2021 125
Final Report
2. To what extent does UNICEF • Evidence of UNICEF capacity in • KIIs, spot survey, case UNICEF GAP.
have the capacity and hard-to-reach areas studies
programmatic agility to • Effectiveness and utility of the • Staff and partner
respond to needs and risks in risk management system in presence in hard-to-
hard-to-reach areas- place in ACO reach areas
controlled areas, including • Needs and risks identified in • Results data from hard-
understanding gender hard-to-reach areas to-reach areas
protection concerns? How • Conflict analysis process • Risk registers and
can it be improved? conducted and utilised analysis
• Ability of UNICEF to address • Conflict analysis
gender protection concerns in
hard-to-reach areas
3. To what extent have • Evidence of adaptive • KIIs Conflict
UNICEF’s programmes and programming • Evaluations, trip reports, Sensitivity and
operations adapted to the • Systems to facilitate adaptive reviews Peacebuilding
changing conflict situation programming in place and • PSN revisions Guidelines 2016.
and become more conflict- being used
sensitive, based on adequate
and useful conflict analysis
and informed in general by
evidence on contextual risks,
including gendered risks?
How can the programme’s
adaptive capacity to conflict
be improved?
KEQ 6 How well has 1. How has the use of • Evidence of structural changes • Management response No benchmark
UNICEF utilised extenders and TPM evolved and coherence of to audits and internal applicable.
extendersand TPM during the programme management of contractors in reviews, contractual
to enhance period and has it become ACO including their particular adjustments,
programme better adapted to changing purpose, geographic management
delivery? context and needs – differentiation and utility by • Evaluation reports of
including addressing gender grouping (i.e. TPM and contractors, agreed
concerns? Is there clarity of extenders) and including scope of work for
purpose and rationale of specifically the gender extenders
their use? considerations
Itad 4 August 2021 126
Final Report
2. How effective are extenders • Evidence that extenders and • Contracts, terms of No benchmark
and TPM to respectively TPMs are delivering on their references audits, trip applicable.
contribute to quality programme objectives reports, evidence of QA
programme delivery and • To what extent have quality processes in place and
quality monitoring? How can gains been made through being monitored
their capacity to deliver be extenders and TPM in the
further improved? perceptions of UNICEF staff in
value of TPMs
• To what extent there is
evidence on increasing
gender-balanced recruitment
• Evidence of quality and
accountability trade-offs, as
well as any adverse or
unintended effects, in the use
of extenders and TPMs
3. How well have extender and • Evidence on management • As 6.2 No benchmark
TPM delivery processes, processes relating to the applicable.
oversight and monitoring contracting, briefing and
been designed and deployment of extenders and
implemented to improve TPMs, with special focus on
their effectiveness and the rapidity, appropriateness
flexible use? and ease of use of these
processes
3. Partnerships KEQ 5 How well is 1. How effective are UNICEF’s • Extent to which government • Rolling workplans, ram UNICEF
and UNICEF positioned partnerships with partners are delivering against statements and Documents on
institutional to ensure effective government for programme agreed results progress reports, KIIs, Partnerships,
strengthening programme delivery delivery, understanding the • Evidence and lessons learned meeting minutes from strategy,
and CB through different needs of boys and in partnerships, and their use Education Coordination including the
government and girls? How can effectiveness in driving iterations in Committee 2019 Procedure
Related DAC NGO partnerships be improved? partnership strategies and UNICEF
Criteria: and coordination • To what extent rolling strategic
Relevance with other UN workplans are gender- framework for
(KE5, KE7) agencies? equitable partnerships and
collaborative
Itad 4 August 2021 127
Final Report
Coherence • (Subject to availability) Degree relationships
(KE5) to which information is (2009).
Effectiveness available demonstrating
(KE5, KE7) resource allocation to National
government partnerships Education
disaggregated by geography Strategic Plan 3.
and sector over time
Citizens Charter.
National Health
and Nutrition
Policy 2012–20.
2. How effective are UNICEF’s • Extent to which NGO partners • Partnership agreements, UNICEF
partnerships with NGOs for are delivering against agreed and same as 5.1 Documents on
programme delivery, results Partnerships
understanding the different • Evidence and lessons learned strategy,
needs of boys and girls? How in partnerships, and their use including the
can effectiveness be in driving iterations in 2019 Procedure.
improved? partnership strategies
• (Subject to availability) Degree UNICEF Guiding
to which information is Principles for
available demonstrating Partnership with
resource allocation to NGO Civil Society.
partnerships is disaggregated
by geography and sector over
time
3 How well has UNICEF aligned • Evidence that ACO leadership • Meeting minutes of One UN Results
its delivery partnerships with key and staff are well positioned annual reviews with the Framework.
strategic documents and to act in accordance and Government re NPP
processes such as Afghanistan support the ANPDF contribution and NPP strategies:
National Peace and development • Evidence of UNICEF alignment The Citizen’s
Plan (ANPDF) and One UN? NPP, programme alignment with • KIIs Charter,
SDG alignment NPP Women’s
• Evidence of alignment with Economic
One UN Strategy Empowerment
(WEE), National
Itad 4 August 2021 128
Final Report
Justice and
Judicial Reform,
Effective
Governance and
Human Capital.
KEQ 7 To what 1. To what extent is there a • Evidence of UNICEF clear • PSN, Annual Work Plans No appropriate
extent has UNICEF clear strategy on institutional strategy and common (AWPs), strategic benchmark
contributed to strengthening and understanding for capacity documents, identified.
institutional government CB? In which development capacity accountability
strengthening and programming areas has development support aimed at documents with the
government CB in UNICEF demonstrated a Government of the Islamic government and annual
accordance to its strong capacity for Republic of Afghanistan workplans cf. objectives
comparative institutional strengthening (GIRoA) counterparts in the for government CB
strengths? and building sustainable health, WASH, education and (outputs and outcomes)
government capacities? Child Protection sectors
• Evidence of GIRoA capacity
uptake, and ownership of joint
programmes and interventions
2. Is UNICEF operating in its • Perception of other key actors • KIIs, survey, meeting No benchmark
areas of comparative of UNICEF’s added value minutes, consistent applicable.
strength in terms of regarding institutional coherent appropriate
institutional strengthening strengthening in functional level of presence when
considering the array of sectors and approaches leading
other actors? Is ACO an • Evidence of ACO leading or co-
authoritative voice on leading in coordination
capacity strengthening in meetings
public sector services?
3. To what extent has the use • Trend of number of NTAs • KIIs, audit reports, No benchmark
of NTAs contributed to disaggregated across government feedback applicable.
government capacity government ministries and and government
strengthening? agencies documentation on
• Trend of gender of NTA re NTAs. Donor documents
gender equality
Itad 4 August 2021 129
Final Report
• Evidence that NTAs are
performing CB rather than
government functions
4. Gender KEQ 8 Is gender • How systematically is UNICEF • Context-specific gender • KIIs, workplans strategy CCC 2.1.4
integration being integrated in investing in gender evidence, analysis informs the design notes, GPR report Gender equality
into programme analysis, and knowledge and delivery of programmes in Programme proposals and
programme planning and management? all sectors potentially survey, M&E empowerment
and advocacy practice based on • Evidence of investment and reporting of girls and
work evidence generated mainstreaming in gender women.
and lessons analysis via gender tags of
Related DAC learned? ACOs evidence related Context-specific
Criteria: activities, evolution over time, gender analysis
Equity (KEQ 8, and across sectors informs the
KEQ9) • Evidence via monitoring data design and
Coherence that gender commitments are delivery of
being observed programmes in
all sectors.
Planning,
monitoring and
evaluation of
programmes, as
well as
reporting,
include sex- and
age-
disaggregated
data and
strategic gender
indicators, in
accordance with
the UNICEF GAP.
Itad 4 August 2021 130
Final Report
• How has the strategic • Programmes intentionally • Programme indicators CCC 2.1.4
strengthening of gender at promote positive behaviour and monitoring notes Gender equality
organisation level been and social change toward • KIIs, evidence that and
translated into more gender- gender equality, especially by resources have been empowerment
responsive and gender- empowering adolescent girls reallocated and of girls and
transformative • Evidence and specific mobilised to support women.
programming? What are examples by sector of how more effective gender- Programmes
early lessons learned? How ACO’s comprehensive gender responsive and intentionally
can it be improved? strategy is being translated transformative promote
into programme actions and programming positive
management decisions • PSN annual workplans, behaviour and
• Evidence that programmes are donor proposals, social change
gender-sensitive and address monitoring and field trip toward gender
the different needs of girls, reports. Case study on equality,
boys, men and women learning and especially by
improvement empowering
adolescent girls.
Programmes and
enabling
environment
services
provided and/or
supported are
gender-
responsive and
address the
different needs
of girls, boys,
men and
women.
KEQ 9 How well is 1. To what extent has UNICEF • Planning, monitoring, • Proposals, reports, GAP 2018–21:
UNICEF leveraging been effective in promoting, reporting and evaluation of programme documents, Benchmarks:
its position in supporting, leading, and partner programmes, include monitoring, KIIs investment of
strategic building capacity in partners sex- and age-disaggregated institutional
partnerships to to produce disaggregated data and strategic gender resources in
promote gender in data, undertake gender indicators, in accordance with gender
Itad 4 August 2021 131
Final Report
evidence analysis, and apply gender the UNICEF GAP programming,
generation, policies considerations for impactful • Evidence of partner capacity capacity, and
and programming? programming? to produce gender data and to systems-
undertake gender analysis building.
Essential role in
the United
Nations
Development
Assistance
Framework to
set system-wide
country-level
gender
priorities.
2. Is UNICEF operating in its • Evidence of UNICEF advocacy • Communications, GAP 2018–21:
areas of comparative efforts to change the strategic workplans, Benchmarks:
strength and advantages to institutional environment annual report. Donor 15% UNICEF
increase its visibility as an related to women’s rights and partner KIIs benchmark on
organisation that is • Evidence of active UNICEF • KIIS with partners and programming
committed to gender positioning across the range of UN peers, meeting expenditures
equality and collaboratively ACO partnerships to support minutes, including allocated to
influencing policies and and promote gender equality perceptions of UNICEF advancing
programming related to in the context of the One UN demonstrating capacity gender equality
gender inequality in Framework and expertise relative to results;
Afghanistan? • Expenditure data at output other actors where investment of
level available institutional
• Selected sample of M&E resources in
and other evidence gender
products programming,
• Expenditure data capacity, and
systems-building
One UN strategy
(country-level
gender
priorities).
Itad 4 August 2021 132
Final Report
Sampling Principles and Guidelines for the Evaluation
Sampling is purposive and is set out below based on three broad sets of analysis: sectoral analysis of
existing evidence and relevance; geographical analysis and stakeholder analysis.
Sectoral sampling
All sectors of the ACO will be included as and when they are considered particularly relevant to
answer the Evaluation questions both in a results-based approach but also generating evidenced-
based recommendations for the 2021 CPD planning process. For sectors that have recently
undertaken evaluations and reviews, where relevant, data will be used from these documents rather
than replicating with data collection for this SPE.152
The sampling criteria were drawn from the sector interventions as articulated in the CPD and the
RWPs (Health, WASH, Nutrition, Education, Child Protection, Social Inclusion, Gender and
Communications). The criteria used were:
1. Outcome and output foci relevant to the FAs, especially relating to outcomes and outputs
focused on human rights approaches (working with rights holders and duty bearers) and
gender empowerment
2. Budget ceilings – including weighting of RR, OR and % funding status
3. Geographic coverage (as it is currently understood at a macro level)
4. Programme activities that indicate work on the nexus and multi-sectoral implementation,
especially in regard to gender
5. Stakeholder profile (indicated on the stakeholder mapping), cluster activity and contribution
to One-UN strategy
6. Use of extenders and TPMs
7. Programmes that are pioneering to address access issues and negotiating space in AGE areas
Based on this criteria, four sectoral FA have been identified to explore in greater depth at national
and sub-nation levels:
1. Health – (1) Strong focus on Government of Afghanistan (GoA) CB and institutional
strengthening (national and sub-national levels) at outcome and outputs levels; (2) largest
2015 -2021 ceiling budget153; (3) programme interventions at national and sub-national level
with strong links to gender with maternal health (women’s agency agenda); (4) evidence of
multi-sectoral programming at planning and implementation; (5) Working relationship with
sister UN organisations (especially WHO) which is relevant to One-UN; (6) use of TPMs and
extenders154. (7) polio as a pioneer for access/reach and negotiation in AGE-controlled areas.
It is of note that a keen focus will be paid to polio programming during the sampling due to
its significance as an entry point for negotiating for access in AGE areas and as an entry point
for other sectors to follow.
2. Education – (1) Strong focus on GoA CB (outcome and output level) with high use of TA for
this purpose155; (1) explicit output on linking duty bearers and rights holders at community
152 Examples of recent evaluations and reviews include, inter alia, UNICEF Afghanistan, The Use of Field Extenders in Afghanistan: Lessons learned, internal document,
(2017); Evaluation of UNICEF’s Coverage and Quality in Complex Humanitarian Situations – Afghanistan (2020); CNBC Process Evaluation in Afghanistan 2018 – 2019 (2020),
Evaluation of Afghanistan’s Child Protection Action Network; Mid-Term Evaluation of increasing access to basic education and gender equal programme – Afghanistan
(2019).
153 USD 444,424,000 - OR+RR - ceiling 2015 – 2021 (CPD funding status Feb 2020).
154 The RSI Third Party Monitoring was piloted in the Southern Region in 2020.
155 Due to new leadership in the MoE, all UNICEF NTAs at national level have been removed from office in 2020.
Itad 4 August 2021 133
Final Report
level – also linked to criteria 1; (2) second highest 2015 – 2021 ceiling budget 156 with a large
percentage of OR which may indicate a strong donor engagement, (3) Very wide geographic
interventions across Afghanistan; (4) planned and anecdotal evidence of multi-sectoral
programming, evidence of working on the nexus (5) diverse range of implementing
partnerships with the GoA, UN agencies and World Bank; (6) use of TPMs and extenders157;
(7) Evidence of access negotiation in AGE-controlled areas.
3. Child Protection will be explored with a light touch approach in two areas (1) UNICEF’s role
in working with the GoA on legal and policy frameworks aligned with child rights
conventions, especially UNICEF’s contribution to the promulgation of the Law on Protection
of Child Rights (2019), (2) Children and Armed Conflict as an enquiry into how UNICEF is able
to programme across all three parts of the nexus.
4. WASH: Feedback from the Evaluation Managers is that the ET should specifically include
WASH as one of the sector FA. WASH is considered as a sector of high importance to the
ACO. (1) Elements of GIRoA CB outputs; (2) third highest 2015 – 2021 ceiling budget158 (3)
WASH is an important entry point for the nexus and; (4) WAH has the largest use of
extenders of all the sectors in the ACO.
Defining a realistic sampling for the scope and timeline of this SPE has meant that not all sectors and
interventions can be covered at the same depth, and there will be trade-offs between depth and
breadth in the SPE scope (as described in the preceding sections).
Geographic sampling
Gaining insight into how programmes are being practically implemented at a sub-national level and
how they are contributing to the four FAs will be critical during data collection. Furthermore, the
vertical and horizontal linkages between the zonal/field offices and the national office will help
illuminate the efficiency and coherence of the overall ACO. The unit of sampling at sub-national is at
the zonal level. The criteria used to define a geographic scope were:
1. Conflict intensity and humanitarian needs
2. Social/cultural context
3. Progress on UNICEF decentralization agenda e.g., opening of new sub-field offices
4. Access and AGE negotiation profile through the region
5. Implementation profile of the three identified sectoral FA
6. Risk-informed analysis and planning at the zonal level
7. Logistics – travel, access and, research conditions in winter
Based on these criteria, and as a result of orientation meeting consultations, the two regions
selected are considered to provide a useful contrast in terms of context, operations and
programming:
▪ The Southern Region – High intensity conflict with substantial humanitarian needs; although
variation exists across the region – it is considered socially and culturally conservative – especially
in regards to women’s rights; recent opening of two new sub-field posts in Tirinkot (Urazgon) and
Lashkagar (Helmand); operation of polio interventions in the Southern Region are important
entry points for health and other sectoral programming; involvement in negotiation for access for
156 USD 444,424,000 - OR+RR - ceiling 2015 – 2021 (CPD funding status Feb 2020)
157 The RSI Third Party Monitoring was piloted in the Southern Region in 2020
158 USD 78,976,776 - OR+RR - ceiling 2015 – 2021 (CPD funding status Feb 2020)
Itad 4 August 2021 134
Final Report
space with the Taliban (especially in regards to polio interventions) and; wide coverage of both
health, WASH and education sectors throughout the region.
▪ The Eastern Region – High variance of conflict intensity throughout the region; Nuristan almost
inaccessible (hence the importance of extenders and TPMs); large numbers of displaced owing to
intermittent expulsion of Afghan nationals from Pakistan; due to urbanization and proximity to
the border with Pakistan and proximity to Kabul, the social and cultural context is less
conservative than other parts of Afghanistan (especially in Nangahar - Jalalabad); documented
and anecdotal evidence of multi-sector programming and implementation of the nexus; on-going
access negotiations for greater access into Taliban areas; varied use of extenders on both health
and education sectors and; health identified as an important cluster to look at in the region.159
The Southern Region is comprised of the provinces of Nimroz, Helmand, Urazgon, Zabul and
Kandahar. The Eastern Region is comprised of Nuristan, Nangahar, Kunar and Laghman. Each of
these regions are exceptionally diverse in terms of AGE activity, access, conflict intensity,
humanitarian needs, culture, ethnicity, climate and geography. It is understood that travel will be
possible for the ET to Nangahar, Kunar and Laughman in the Eastern Region. There will be a
greater reliance on remote Evaluation in the Southern Region.
159 Orientation meeting 10/01/21
Itad 4 August 2021 135
Final Report
Stakeholder sampling
Inside each of the nine stakeholder groups covered, respondent and informant recruitment took place on the basis of the guidelines below.
Stakeholder Groups Respondent/Informant Recruitment Guidelines
Surveys KIIs
UNICEF staff • Recruit across four sectors and all regions, as per sample sizes set in approach • As for surveys, and in addition:
note. • Weight further for sector and thematic expertise,
• Consider relevance of respondent, as reflected in role title and duty station (and as reflected in role title and time in position.161
time in position where possible).
• Ensure representative proportion of women and Afghan nationals.160
Other UN • Select min. 5 and max. 10 agencies, weighted for relevance and expertise in the • As for surveys, and in addition:
four FAs and four Prog. Sectors. • Weight further for sector and thematic expertise,
• For individual respondent recruitment, weight for relevance and expertise in the as reflected in role title and time in position.
four FAs and four Prog. Sectors, as reflected in role title and duty station (and
time in position where possible).
• Recruit across four sectors and two regions.
• Limit individual respondent recruitment to total sample size set in approach
note.
• Ensure representative proportion of women and Afghan nationals.162
Donors • Select min. 4 max. 8 donors/dip reps, weighted for country aid budget size or • As for surveys, and in addition:
niche sectoral expertise.163 (See Annex 2) • Weight further for sector and thematic expertise,
• For individual respondent recruitment, weight for relevance and expertise in as reflected in role title and time in position.
the four FAs and four Prog. Sectors, as reflected in role title (and time in position
where possible).
• Recruit across four sectors.
• Limit individual respondent recruitment to total sample size set in approach
note.
GIRoA • n/a • Select min. 5 and max. 8 line ministries/govt.
agency, weighted for specific knowledge of
160 Gender and nationality disaggregated data needs to be obtained from ACO and other UN Agencies from which respondents will be recruited.
161 The assumption is that ranking and seniority generally correlate with sectoral and thematic expertise; however, this is not used as a hard criteria here, as contextualised knowledge will be
actively sought, and may in some cases be more readily obtained from junior staff.
162 Gender and nationality disaggregated data needs to be obtained from ACO and other UN Agencies from which respondents will be recruited.
163 The assumption is made that donors/diplomatic representations will be contributors to the UNICEF country programme; however, this is not a hard criterion.
Itad 4 August 2021 136
Final Report
UNICEF programme/strategy in the four FAs and
four Prog. Sectors.164 (See Annex 2)
• For individual informant recruitment, weight for
relevance and knowledge of UNICEF activities.
• Recruit across four sectors and two regions.
• Limit individual informant recruitment to total
sample size set in approach note.
• Weight for gender.165
NGOs/CSOs • Select min. 6 max. 12 line NGOs/CSOs, weighted for specific knowledge of • As for surveys, and in addition:
UNICEF programme/strategy in the four FAs and four Prog. Sectors.166 • Weight further for sector and thematic expertise,
• For individual respondent selection, recruit across four sectors and two regions. as reflected in role title and time in position.
Weight for relevance and expertise in the four FAs and four Prog. Sectors, as
reflected in role title and duty station (and time in position where possible).
• Weight for gender and nationality.167
• Limit individual respondent recruitment to total sample size set in approach
note.
Community • Select min. 4. max. 8 communities receiving UNICEF support. • As for surveys, and in addition:
influencers/women • Access and communication allowing, communities selected to be spread as • Weight further for sector and thematic expertise,
groups/Shura leaders evenly as possible between Eastern and Southern regions. as reflected in role title and time in position.
• Access and communication allowing, aim to select 2/3 rural 1/3 urban
communities.
• For women groups, prefer groups actively engaged in working relationship with
UNICEF (IPs, Country Plan recipients, Advocacy or C4D relays).
• For individual respondent recruitment, weight for relevance and knowledge of
UNICEF activities.
• Weight to achieve 1/3 women in total sample group.
• Limit individual respondent recruitment to total sample size set in approach
note.
Local service • Subject to further consultation with ACO, select a balanced representation of • As for surveys, and in addition:
providers/frontline health (incl. immunisation and nutrition), education and social workers actively • Weight further for sector and thematic expertise,
workers as reflected in role title and time in position.
164 The assumption is made that GiRoA ministries/agencies selected will be directly engaged in operational partnerships with UNICEF; however, this is not a hard criteria.
165 Degree of weighting to be agreed with ACO.
166 The assumption is made that NGOs/CSOs selected will be UNICEF partners; however, this is not a hard criterion.
167 Degree of weighting to be agreed with ACO
Itad 4 August 2021 137
Final Report
engaged in working relationships with UNICEF: IPs, CP recipients, Advocacy or
C4D relays.
• Where possible and appropriate, weight for specific knowledge of UNICEF
programme and activities.
• Access and communication allowing, respondents to be spread as evenly as
possible between Eastern and Southern regions.
• Access and communication allowing, aim to select 2/3 rural and 1/3 urban
respondents.
• Weight to achieve 1/3 women in total sample group.
• Weight for time in position where possible.
• Limit individual respondent recruitment to total sample size set in approach
note.
NTAs, extenders • Subject to further consultation with ACO, select a balanced representation NTAs • As for surveys, and in addition:
and Extenders in health (incl. immunisation and nutrition), education, WASH • Weight further for sector and thematic expertise,
and Child Protection programmes. where possible.
• Access and communication allowing, respondents to be spread as evenly as
possible between Eastern and Southern regions.
• Aim to select total 8 NTAs and 12 Extenders across the 4 sectors.
• Weigh to achieve 15%–20% women in total sample group (i.e. NTAs and
Extenders combined).168
• Weight for time in position where possible.
• Limit individual respondent recruitment to total sample size set in approach
note.
TPMs • Subject to further consultation with ACO, select a balanced representation of • As for surveys, and in addition:
TPMs in health (incl. immunisation and nutrition), education, WASH and Child • Weight further for sector and thematic expertise,
Protection programmes. where possible.
• Access and communication allowing, respondents to be spread as evenly as
possible between Eastern and Southern regions.
• Weight to achieve 15-20% women in sample group.169
• Weight for time in position where possible.
• Limit individual respondent recruitment to total sample size set in approach
note.
168 For discussion with ACO: Ideal ratio would be closer to 30%, but very low number of women among extenders and NTAs, as well as access/communication constraints, may not make this possible.
169 As above.
Itad 4 August 2021 138
Final Report
Key Informant Question Guide
Focus Area Related EQ Related Sub-EQ Stakeholder Question
Group
1. Integration KEQ 1. To what SEQ 1.1 To what extent UNICEF (Senior Can you provide examples of cross-sectoral, integrated planning
and extent has UNICEF are UNICEF’s management, across the humanitarian, development and peacebuilding spheres?
positioning re-positioned itself humanitarian, Sector leads, In what programme areas is this type of integrated planning the
for a to contribute development and peace M&E) most visible? Why?
strengthened coherently to joint strategies mutually
humanitarian- humanitarian- reinforcing and/or
UNICEF (Senior In your opinion, do the following documents, and the implied ACP
peace nexus development and coherent and can
management, programme architecture, adequately reflect and enable desired
peacebuilding synergies be improved?
Sector leads, integration across the humanitarian, development and
objectives?
M&E) peacebuilding spheres? Cite as appropriate: CPAP Summary results
matrix (2015–19), ACO Revised Results Framework (March 2020), CP
Results Matrix with responsibilities, CPAP/PIDB Integrated Results
and Resources Framework mapping matrix (2015–19).
UNICEF (Senior Do you feel that UNICEF guidance on the nexus (specifically the
management, 2019 Procedure on Linking Humanitarian and Development
Sector leads, Programmes, and the 2020 Update) has been useful at operational
M&E) level? Can you provide examples of how this guidance has
influenced programming?
UNICEF (Senior Can you give an example of an ACO programme strand that has
management, measurably contributed to peacebuilding? Where/how has this been
Sector leads, documented?
M&E)
UNICEF (Senior In a nexus perspective, do you feel that ACO has been able to
management, contribute to peacebuilding without this being expressly stated as
Sector leads, an objective in the CPAP? Would it help if peacebuilding was
M&E) formally included in ACO strategic planning? Are you aware of any
peacebuilding tools to enable this programming?
Itad 4 August 2021 139
Final Report
SEQ 1.2 To what extent UNICEF (Senior Do you feel that the current programme structure (i.e. with 11
have the sectors management, thematic sectors) is generally conducive to the achievement of
demonstrated through Field programme integration across the humanitarian, development and
their implementation, management, peacebuilding spheres?
and monitoring that Sector leads,
UNICEF is well positioned M&E)
to coherently address UNICEF (Senior In terms of operational set-up and countrywide organisational or
joint humanitarian, management, decision making structures, which changes or reforms have been
development and Field conducted in recent years with the aim of improving the feasibility
peacebuilding objectives? management, of the nexus at programme level? What were these changes
Sector leads, specifically? (e.g. planning or planning processes, assessment
M&E) processes, decision making mechanisms, budget delegation, M&E,
information management, training and development, etc.)
UNICEF (Senior Do cross-sectoral results frameworks exist to monitor and evaluate
management, progress towards integration and synergies across the humanitarian,
Field development and peacebuilding spheres? If yes, when were they put
management, in place? Are they consistent across all geographies and all sectors?
Sector leads, (If not covered in 1.1) Do cross-sectoral results frameworks collect
M&E) and analyse age, sex, disability disaggregated data?
Itad 4 August 2021 140
Final Report
UNICEF (Senior Do you feel that the UNICEF Procedure on Preparedness for
management, Emergency Response (2020) adequately allows for programme
Field crossover between emergency/humanitarian response and
management, recovery/development programming? If so, how?
Sector leads,
M&E)
Itad 4 August 2021 141
Final Report
UNICEF (Senior How is preparedness activity monitored (apart from the Annual
management, Audit or as part of programme evaluations)? How is the monitoring
Field data used to inform management decisions and budget decisions, in
management, order to ensure that emergency and recovery are not siloed? Please
Sector leads, provide examples.
M&E)
KEQ 2 To what SEQ 2.1 To what extent is UNICEF (Senior Does One UN (or UNDAF as appropriate) provide a good basis for
extent is UNICEF UNICEF operating in its management, UNICEF’s system-wide engagement on the nexus? What other
strategically well areas of comparative Sector leads, platform(s), if any, are available for UNICEF system-wide
positioned to strength and advantage Advisors,) UN, engagement on the nexus? On these platforms, has UNICEF played a
enhance the to further the triple nexus NGOs, GIRoA, discernible role in peacebuilding, or positioned itself as an actor in
humanitarian- considering the array of Donors this area? Do you consider that this role is appropriate and in line
development- other actors? with UNICEF's mandate?
peace nexus
within the national
development
GIRoA, NGOs, UN, In your view, can lessons be drawn from UNICEF’s dual mandate that
system to the
Donors can be applied in its system-wide engagement on the triple nexus?
advancement of
What are these lessons? Can you provide examples of where/how
children’s rights in
they have been applied?
the country?
UNICEF (Senior How do you assess UNICEF’s contribution to the nexus across the UN
management, system? Can you provide examples? Across the range of actors
Sector leads, involved in the ON-UN process, would you say that UNICEF plays one
Advisors,) UN of the more prominent roles or not? Why?
UNICEF (Senior What actions, if any, has ACO undertaken to support bilateral
management, engagement and programme coherence with other dual mandate
Sector leads, actors (prompt UNFPA, UN Women, WHO, WFP)? Can you give
Advisors,) UN examples? Which mechanisms have worked well/not so well and
why? Have they been effective at capital and field level?
Itad 4 August 2021 142
Final Report
SEQ 2.2 How well has UNICEF (Field Do you feel that UNICEF guidance on risk-informed and conflict-
risk-informed management, sensitive programming has been useful at operational level? Are you
programming—including Sector leads) familiar with this guidance, and have you used it yourself in the
risk analysis, design, course of your work?
response and
monitoring—evolved,
strengthened and been
systematically
operationalised across
programme sections and
field offices? How can it
be improved?
IPs How have ACO/IP staff been introduced to risk-informed and
conflict-sensitive programming? Have learning & development
events been organised to mainstream these practices? Is advisory
support available in-country?
UNICEF (Field Are you able to explain how the notion of risk is understood in
management, reference to social cohesion, and what mitigation measures would
Field staff, Sector normally be called for in this specific case/example? In the context
leads) of ACO programmes, how are risk management measures
documented and where? Can you give an example of where social
cohesion analysis or monitoring has influenced the design of a
programme?
IPs What does UNICEF expect from partners with regard to risk
assessment, analysis and monitoring and conflict sensitivity
monitoring? How and where is this documented? How often is this
updated during a year?
Itad 4 August 2021 143
Final Report
SEQ 2.3 How well has UNICEF (Senior What platforms are in place for development, humanitarian and
UNICEF been able to management, government actors to engage and coordinate over increasing access
engage, coordinate and Sector leads, Field to hard-to-reach areas? In your estimation, how useful is the Saving
partner with other UN management), Lives Together Framework in enabling ACO to engage in a multi-
and non-UN cooperating IPs, NGOs, UN agency approach to security and access? What platform(s) and
actors to enhance access mechanisms are in place to operationalise SLT in Afghanistan, and
to hard-to-reach areas? how engaged is ACO in them?
SEQ 2.4 To what extent UNICEF (Senior Can you give an example of how UNICEF has used One UN or other
has UNICEF been able to management), system-wide platforms to successfully and measurably support
take leadership in GIRoA, UN, NGOs, nexus progress for the benefit of women, girls and boys? What were
integrating humanitarian, Donors the challenges and opportunities involved? What data sources were
development and peace used to support and document related actions?
to the benefit of
vulnerable boys and girls
and women (particularly
in respect of recognising
the impact of agency of
women on their
children)?
2. Coverage KEQ 3 To what SEQ 3.1 How well has UNICEF (Senior In your view, has geographic prioritisation enabled ACO to achieve
and Access extent have UNICEF been able to management, the best possible balance between programme effectiveness and
Geographical UNICEF’s balance the dual goals of Sector leads, Field equity? Were the criteria that led to the selection of the 10
coverage and programme reducing inequity and management), prioritised provinces sound and justified?
access to strategy and increasing programme IPs, Donors
achieve implementation efficiency and
equitable coherently and effectiveness? How can
results for consistently UNICEF’s approach be
children at fostered multi- improved to achieve the
scale sectoral dual goals?
programming to
respond
holistically to
children’s needs at
Itad 4 August 2021 144
Final Report
scale and protect UNICEF (Senior What, if any, are the limitations in achieving UNICEF’s commitment
the rights of management, to equity in development and humanitarian programming in your
children Sector leads, Field area/sector? Please provide examples. To what extent does the
everywhere? management), current Integrated Programming approach contribute to a balance
IPs, Extenders, between programme effectiveness and equity?
Community
UNICEF (Senior In your view, was the Focus Province Strategy that underpinned the
management, ACP successful overall? If not, why was it not adhered to more
Sector leads, Field broadly, and what could have been done for its better application?
management), IPs Are there any examples of where monitoring for equity and use of
disaggregated data, especially gendered data, has influenced
management decisions and programme changes?
SEQ 3.2 To what extent UNICEF (Sector Is UNICEF implementing multi-sectoral programme activities in your
has there been leads, Field arear/sector? If yes, please provide examples. What are the
consistency between management), implications in terms of programme coverage (equity) and quality?
UNICEF ACO’s strategic IPs, Extenders,
vision on multi-sectoral Community
convergence, UNICEF (Sector What are the main challenges to planning multi-sectoral convergent
geographical coverage leads, Field approaches? Please provide examples.
and scale, and the actual management,
programming choices Advisors), IPs,
made on the ground? Donors, UN,
What were the driving Community
factors, including gender, UNICEF (Sector What are the main challenges to implementing multi-sectoral
in adjusting any leads, Field convergent approaches? Please give examples.
programming management,
approaches? Advisors), IPs,
Donors, UN,
Community
UNICEF (Senior Has ACO's decentralisation process improved the implementation of
management, its strategic vision on sectoral convergence and geographical
Field coverage?
Itad 4 August 2021 145
Final Report
management,
Advisors, Sector
leads)
UNICEF (Sector Is the monitoring of multi-sector programme convergence unified
leads, M&E), (i.e. conducted on a multi-sectoral basis)? Are the tools and
TPMs, IPs approaches used for this (e.g. multi-sectoral results frameworks)
appropriate? In your view, has monitoring allowed lessons to be
learned and improvements to be made in convergent programming?
EQ 4 How well SEQ 4.1 How effective are UNICEF (Senior What strategies/approaches are used to gain programme access in
have UNICEF’s current approaches used Management, hard-to-reach areas? Are these informal or institutionalised
programme to accessing and Sector Leads, strategies? Please give examples. What is the most effective
strategy and programming in areas Advisors, Field strategy/approach?
implementation controlled by hard-to- Management),
effectively and reach areas? How well IPs, Extenders,
coherently are they institutionalised Community
Itad 4 August 2021 146
Final Report
enhanced access in ACO’s programming UNICEF (Sector Are Extenders able to increase access into hard-to-reach areas?
to areas controlled and organisation? How leads, Field Please give examples.
by hard-to-reach can they be improved? Management),
areas? IPs, Extenders,
Community
SEQ 4.2 To what extent UNICEF (Sector Does UNICEF have a risk management system in place for
does UNICEF have the leads, Field programming in hard-to-reach areas-controlled areas? Is this an
capacity and Management), informal or formalised system? How decentralised is it?
programmatic agility to IPs, Extenders
respond to needs and
risks in hard-to-reach
areas-controlled areas
Itad 4 August 2021 147
Final Report
including understanding UNICEF (Sector Has ACO decentralisation and establishment of new sub-offices
gender protection leads, Field enhanced UNICEF ability to respond to needs and risks in hard-to-
concerns? How can it be Management) reach areas?
improved? UNICEF (Field In the past 12 months, how many incidents or adverse events have
Management), occurred which have or could have adversely affected UNICEF
Extenders, IPs programming in hard-to-reach areas? Of these, how many were
identified as risks before they occurred? In your view, was the
impact of these events on programmes successfully managed and
mitigated? What were the challenges and areas for improvement?
UNICEF (Sector Are gender protection concerns factored into risk planning,
leads, Advisors, monitoring and management? If so, how is this done? Please
Field provide examples.
Management),
Extenders, IPs
SEQ 4.3 To what extent UNICEF (Sector What do you understand by conflict-sensitive programming? Have
have UNICEF’s leads, Field you received any training on conflict sensitivity? How is conflict
programmes and Management, sensitivity being planned and implemented in your
operations adapted to Field staff), sector/project/activities? Please provide examples.
the changing conflict Extenders, TPMs,
situation and become IPs, Community
more conflict-sensitive, UNICEF (Sector Are you using conflict analyses to inform your work? Do you think
based on adequate and leads, Field conflict analyses are useful? Please provide an example.
useful conflict analysis Management),
and informed in general IPs, Extenders
by evidence on UNICEF (Sector Can you provide an example of when you have had to adapt your
contextual risks, including leads, Field activities in response to changing risks? How much
gendered risks? How can Management), support/guidance did you receive from senior management, and
the programme’s IPs, Extenders, was it appropriate?
adaptive capacity to TPMs
conflict be improved?
Itad 4 August 2021 148
Final Report
KEQ 6 How well SEQ 6.1 How has the use UNICEF (Senior Are UNICEF procurement and management procedures for
has UNICEF of extenders and TPM management, Extenders and TPMs optimal in terms of recruiting well-qualified
utilised extenders evolved during the Sector leads, personnel, and ensuring their performance as desired?
and TPMs to programme period and Advisors),
enhance has it become better Contractors, IPs
programme adapted to changing UNICEF (Sector Is UNICEF able to address quality issues with Extenders and TPMs in
delivery? context and needs – leads, Advisors), a timely manner? What is the process?
including addressing Contractors, IPs
gender concerns? Is there
clarity of purpose and
rationale of their use?
UNICEF (Sector Are gender and inclusion issues factored into contractual
leads, Advisors), agreements? If yes, how? If not, why?
Contractors, IPs
Extenders, TPMs What was the procurement/ recruitment process for your
employment under UNICEF? What worked well/not so well?
Itad 4 August 2021 149
Final Report
Extenders, TPMs Does UNICEF have a quality assurance process? If so, what criteria
are you required to follow?
Extenders, TPMs Were gender and inclusion issues factored into your contractual
agreement?
SEQ 6.2 How effective are UNICEF (Sector What are the benefits/challenges for using Extenders in your
extenders and TPM to leads, Advisors), project/sector/area?
respectively contribute to Extenders, TPMs
quality programme
delivery and quality
monitoring? How can
their capacity to deliver
be further improved?
UNICEF (Sector What are the benefits/challenges for using TPMs in your
leads, Advisors), project/sector/area?
Extenders, TPMs
SEQ 6.3 How well have UNICEF (Sector Are systems in place to ensure a gender balance in the
extender and TPM leads, Advisors), recruitment/use of TPMs and Extenders? What, if any,
delivery processes, Extenders, TPMs improvements in terms of gender and inclusion could be made in
oversight and monitoring the recruitment/use of Extenders and TPMs?
been designed and
implemented to improve
UNICEF (Sector Do Extenders and TPMs have a clear line management (external
their effectiveness and
leads, Advisors), Contractors to UNICEF management)?
flexible use?
Extenders, TPMs
UNICEF (Sector Do Extenders and TPMs have clear ToR outlining their roles and
leads, Advisors), responsibilities?
Extenders, TPMs
Itad 4 August 2021 150
Final Report
UNICEF(Sector Is the work of Extenders and TPMs monitored? If so, how is this
leads, Advisors), done? What is working well/not so well?
Extenders, TPMs
3. KEQ 5 How well is SEQ 5.1 How effective are UNICEF (Senior In your opinion, how suitable is the UNICEF Strategic Framework for
Partnerships, UNICEF positioned UNICEF’s partnerships management, Partnerships and Collaborative Relationships (2009) in providing a
institutional to ensure effective with government for Sector leads, framework for partnerships with GIRoA? In the Afghan context,
strengthening programme programme delivery, Advisors, Field what are the specific shortcomings and limitations of this strategy?
and capacity delivery through understanding the Management) Why?
building government and different needs of boys UNICEF (Senior To what extent is UNICEF’s approach to partnerships with GIRoA
NGO partnerships and girls? How can management, aligned with those of other UN actors? How much inter-agency
and coordination effectiveness be Sector leads), consultation occurs to ensure alignment and common approaches?
with other UN improved? GIRoA, UN
agencies?
UNICEF (Senior Does ACO have a standard approach to assessing GIRoA ownership
management, of, and commitment to, joint programmes? Are there differences in
Sector leads), ownership and engagement between ministries? In your view, do
GIRoA NTAs help to foster GIRoA ownership or not? Please give examples.
UNICEF (Senior Is there a general understanding among GIRoA partners of the
management, different needs of boys and girls? How are gender issues
Sector leads), approached in the context of partnerships with GIRoA? Please give
Field examples.
management, IPs,
GIRoA, NGOs
UNICEF (Senior What are the areas of improvement and/or fine-tuning for
management, partnerships with government? Are these being considered? How
Sector leads, are these addressed in the context of partnerships with GIRoA?
Advisors), GIRoA Please give examples.
Itad 4 August 2021 151
Final Report
SEQ 5.2 How effective are UNICEF (Senior In your opinion, how suitable is the UNICEF Procedure for Country
UNICEF’s partnerships management, and Regional Office CSO Implementing Partnerships (2019) in
with NGOs for Sector leads, providing guidance for partnerships with CSOs? In the Afghan
programme delivery, Advisors) context, what are the specific shortcomings and limitations of this
understanding the guidance? Why?
different needs of boys UNICEF (Sector What are the main strengths and weaknesses of UNICEF – and your
and girls? How can leads, Advisors), programmatic sector’s – partnerships with implementing partners?
effectiveness be IPs, Community
improved? UNICEF (Senior What benefits, if any, have these partnerships attained? Do you
management, have any examples? Are there differences between local and
Sector leads, international NGOs?
Advisors), IPs,
Community
UNICEF (Sector What are the main benefits/challenges in the processes for selecting
leads, Advisors), implementing partners? Is it effective?
NGOs
UNICEF (Sector Is there a general understanding of the different needs of boys and
leads, Field girls among NGO partners? If yes, what are they? Are there
management, differences between local and international NGOs?
Advisors), IPs,
NGOs,
Community
UNICEF (Sector What, if any, are the areas of improvement and/or fine-tuning for
leads, Field partnerships with local and international NGOs? How are these
management, addressed in the context of partnerships with INGOs/CSOs?
Advisors), IPs
SEQ 5.3 How well has UNICEF (Senior What roles do UNICEF ACO and its sectors play in inter-agency
UNICEF aligned its management, coordination, and how are these roles perceived? What is working
delivery partnerships Sector leads), IPs, well/not so well in these roles?
with key strategic UN, Donors
Itad 4 August 2021 152
Final Report
documents and UNICEF (Senior How well are programmes aligned to GIRoA’s strategies and plans
frameworks such as management, (ANPDF and NPPs)? Do you have any examples? What are the main
ANPDF, One UN, NPP and Sector leads), challenges? For example, how are humanitarian principles (including
SDG? GIRoA, UN, independence) balanced with support of and alignment with GIRoA
Donors programmes?
UNICEF (Senior How well is UNICEF ACO and its sectors effectively contributing to
management), the ‘One UN’ approach? What are the challenges? Please give
GIRoA, UN, examples.
Donors
KEQ 7 To what SEQ 7.1 To what extent is UNICEF (Sector Is there a strategy – for ACO and/or your programmatic sector –
extent has UNICEF there a clear strategy on leads, Advisors) guiding UNICEF's approach to strengthening institutional capacity,
contributed to institutional including coordination capacity? If not, why, and how are the
institutional strengthening and sectors harmonising their approaches? If yes, are there examples
strengthening and government capacity that it is working?
government building? In which
capacity building programming areas has
in accordance with UNICEF demonstrated a
its comparative strong capacity for
strengths? institutional
strengthening and
building sustainable
government capacities? UNICEF (Sector In your sector, what is the average duration of capacity building
leads, Advisors), programmes, and to what degree do they contribute to the
GIRoA sustainability of GIRoA services or activities over time? How is
capacity building performance measured? How are programme
trajectories corrected for improved outcomes? Please give
examples.
UNICEF (Sector In your sector, what are the main challenges and areas of
leads, Advisors), improvement for UNICEF’s contribution to institutional
GIRoA strengthening and government capacity building?
UNICEF (Senior How distinct are capacity building approaches across the range of
management, sectors covered by the ACP? Are lessons learned and exchanged
Itad 4 August 2021 153
Final Report
Sector leads, across sectors? How formal is this process, and how effective is it at
Advisors), GIRoA allowing lessons learned to inform programme design?
SEQ 7.2 Is UNICEF UNICEF (Senior In the specific Afghan context, does UNICEF have an added value
operating in its areas of management, and a comparative strength to other actors for institutional
comparative strength in Sector leads, strengthening in specific sectors? In which sector and why? Please
terms of institutional Advisors), GIRoA, provide examples.
strengthening considering UN, NGOs,
the array of other actors? Donors
Is ACO an authoritative GIRoA, NGOs, UN, What is the perception of other actors regarding UNICEF’s role in
voice on capacity Donors institutional strengthening in specific sectors?
strengthening in public
sector services? UNICEF (Senior What evidence is there that UNICEF ACO’s leading and co-leading
management, role in specific sectors contributes to institutional strengthening in a
Sector leads), sustsainable way?
GIRoA, UN, NGOs,
Donors
SEQ 7.3 To what extent UNICEF (Sector What has been the role of the NTAs embedded within government
has the use of National leads), GIRoA, offices? How has it evolved over time? What, if any, are the
Technical Assistants NTAs patterns? Are there differences between sectors?
contributed to UNICEF, GIRoA, Has UNICEF ACO been able to adapt NTAs utilisation to the evolving
government capacity NTAs context and GIRoA’s needs? Please provide examples.
strengthening?
UNICEF (Sector Do you have any examples of UNICEF measurably contributing to
leads), GIRoA, institutional strengthening strategies and processes without
NTAs performing government functions?
UNICEF, GIRoA Has UNICEF ACO been pursuing a target for gender balance between
NTAs? If yes, what is it? If not, why? What are gender trends among
NTAs, generally and by sector?
Itad 4 August 2021 154
Final Report
4. Gender KEQ 8 Is gender SEQ 8.1 How UNICEF (Senior How useful and widely consulted is UNICEF programme guidance on
integration being integrated in systematically is UNICEF management, gender integration? To what extent is this guidance reflected in
into programme investing in gender Sector leads) programme design and implementation, and integrated in ACO
programme planning and evidence, analysis and programme planning? Do UNICEF staff receive training on gender?
and advocacy practice based on knowledge management? What advisory support is available to them?
work evidence UNICEF (Senior How does UNICEF ensure that gender analysis properly informs
generated and management, quality gendered programming? What are the main
lessons learned? Sector leads, challenges/areas for improvement?
Advisors)
UNICEF (Senior How well/not so well is gender integrated into UNICEF programme
management, planning and implementation? Please give examples.
Sector leads,
Advisors, Field
management),
GIRoA, UN, NGOs,
Donors,
Community
SEQ 8.2 How has the UNICEF (Senior Over the last two years, has UNICEF improved how gender is
strategic strengthening of management, integrated in programming? If so, how? If not, why?
gender at organisation Sector leads,
level been translated into Advisors), GIRoA,
more gender-responsive UN, NGOs,
and gender- Donors
transformative Gender Advisors Does UNICEF programming reach gender-responsive or gender-
programming? What are transformative goals? Please provide examples.
the early lessons learned?
UNICEF (Gender In integrating gender into programming, what, if any, contextualised
How can it be improved?
Advisors, Sector evidence is used. How? Please provide examples.
leads)
KEQ 9 How well is SEQ 9.1 To what extent IPs, GIRoA Has UNICEF supported you in building capacity for integrating
UNICEF leveraging has UNICEF been gender in programming/policies? For example, with the use of
its position in effective in promoting, disaggregated data, and gender analysis? Do you have any
strategic supporting, leading and examples? What have been the benefits/challenges?
Itad 4 August 2021 155
Final Report
partnerships to building capacity in IPs, Community Are there other organisations that support more than UNICEF in
promote gender in partners to produce terms of gender? How could UNICEF improve?
evidence disaggregated data,
UNICEF (Gender How, if at all, has UNICEF promoted and monitored progress
generation, undertake gender
Advisors, Sector towards its gender equality aims (for example, use of disaggregated
policies and analysis and apply gender
leads), IPs, data, gender analysis, etc.) – with all programmes and partners
programming? considerations for
Community (CSO, NGO, government)? What has worked well/not so well?
impactful programming?
SEQ 9.2 Is UNICEF IPs, Community Is UNICEF perceived to be a leader in promoting gender within your
operating in its areas of partnerships for evidence, for policies, and for programming? [adapt
comparative strengths based on specific stakeholder]. If so, are there any examples?
and advantages to UNICEF (Senior Do you perceive UNICEF as a leading agency/champion of gender
increase its visibility as an management, equality? If so, why? If not, why not?
organisation that is Sector leads),
committed to gender GIRoA, UN, NGOs,
equality and Donors,
collaboratively Community
influencing policies and UNICEF (Senior Is UNICEF a leader in promoting gender in external partnerships
programming related to management, across evidence, policies, programming etc? If so, why? If not, why
gender inequality in Sector leads), not? Who do you consider to be a leader in gender?
Afghanistan? GIRoA, UN, NGOs,
IPs, Donors
UNICEF, GIRoA, Do you think that ACO, when playing a leadership role in a multi-
UN, NGOs, agency context, has generally been able to successfully support
Donors, Extender, women and increase their role in decision making about children?
TPM, Community Can you give examples?
Itad 4 August 2021 156
Final Report
List of Key Informant Categories and Interviewees
The tables below detail the different stakeholder groups covered by the KIIs. In compliance with UNICEF
reporting standards, we have not included the names of the interviewees but rather their position and their
organisation.
Stakeholder Groups
Other UN
Donors
GIRoA
NGOs/CSOs
Community influencers/Women Groups/Shura leaders
Local service providers/frontline workers
NTAs, Extenders
TPMs
Title & Organisation Location (UNICEF only)
National
Internal UNICEF
Deputy Representative Operations UNICEF ACO
Director Health ROSA/HQ
Regional Child Protection Advisor ROSA/HQ
Regional Emergency Advisor ROSA/HQ
C4D Manager UNICEF ACO
Regional Security Manager ROSA/HQ
Chief Health UNICEF ACO
Deputy Director ROSA/HQ
Chief (Planning and Monitoring) UNICEF ACO
Regional Education Advisor ROSA/HQ
Regional Gender Advisor ROSA/HQ
Chief Nutrition UNICEF ACO
Chief Field Operations * UNICEF ACO
Regional Health Advisor ROSA/HQ
Chief WASH UNICEF ACO
Resource Mobilisation Manager* UNICEF ACO
Communication, Advocacy & Civic Engagement UNICEF ACO
Itad 4 August 2021 157
Final Report
Senior Advisor Gender ROSA/HQ
Chief Child Protection UNICEF ACO
Chief Social Policy (SPEAR) UNICEF ACO
Deputy Regional Director ROSA/HQ
Regional WASH Advisor ROSA/HQ
Security Advisor UNICEF ACO
Evaluator, UNICEF Adolescent Programme ACO
Gender Programme Specialist* UNICEF ACO
Government partners
MoE
MRRD - Gender focal point
Ministry of Justice (MoJ) - Director of Civil Law
MoE - OIC for General Director of Teacher Education
MRRD - CLTS Manager (WASH)
UN partners
UNDP - Country Representative
DACAAR - Project Manager (WASH)
UN Women - Deputy Country Representative
Save the Children - Country Director (Education)
WHO - Programme Manager
WCUK - Programme Manager (Child Protection)
Save the Children - Education in Emergencies Advisor
UNFPA - Deputy Representative
International Rescue Committee - Deputy Director Programmes (acting)
(Education)
Afghanistan Independent Human Rights commission - National Child
Rights Coordinator
UNFPA - Spotlight Coordinator
World Bank
Donors
USAID - Regional Advisor
Denmark - Head of Development and Cooperation
USAID - Humanitarian contact point for UNICEF
ECHO - Technical assistant
SIDA - First Secretary, Development Cooperation
EU - Head of Development Cooperation
Other
Itad 4 August 2021 158
Final Report
Director of Afghanistan Analysts Network
Eastern Region
Education Extender (WADAN) Laghman Province
Head of M&E Dep. Of Education UNICEF Office Jalalabad
Headmaster Shaikh Misri CB School UNICEF Office Jalalabad
Director DOE Laghman Province
Focal Point Polio UNICEF UNICEF Office Jalalabad
CB Focal Point, Dep. Of Education UNICEF Office Jalalabad
Head of Nutrition UNICEF UNICEF Office Jalalabad
Provincial coordinator, HNTPO UNICEF Office Jalalabad
Director of Health Unit Sokai District of Kunar Sokai district Kunar
Health Extender Supervisor UNICEF Office Jalalabad
Head of CDC Pacheer Agam UNICEF Office Jalalabad
Head of CDC Pacheer Agam UNICEF Office Jalalabad
Field Coordinator DACAAR UNICEF Office Jalalabad
CBE Teacher Laghman Province
Headmaster Jooy-e-11 CB School UNICEF Office Jalalabad
Head of CDC Dari Noor UNICEF Office Jalalabad
Gender Focal Point UNICEF UNICEF Office Jalalabad
Head of WASH UNICEF UNICEF Office Jalalabad
Principal Mastora Girls High School Laghman Province
Secretary CDC Shingam Kunar Province
Health Specialist UNICEF UNICEF Office Jalalabad
Hygiene and Sanitation Supervisor, DACAAR UNICEF Office Jalalabad
Head of UNAMA Office UNAMA Office Jalalabad
Headmaster Marwatzai village CB School UNICEF Office Jalalabad
OIC DRRD Kunar Province
Director of Public Health DoPH Office Jalalabad
Education Officer UNICEF UNICEF Office Jalalabad
Treasury CDC Shingam Kunar Province
Health Extender (WADAN) Laghaman Health Facility
Deputy Head CDC Shingam Kunar Province
Chief of Field Office UNICEF UNICEF Office Jalalabad
Social Mobiliser Sokai district Kunar
Female Mobiliser Vaccination UNICEF Office Jalalabad
P&M Officer UNICEF On the Road to Laghman
Coordination of CBS DoE Laghman Province
Itad 4 August 2021 159
Final Report
Head Admin Finance DRRD Kunar Province
Head of Teacher Training Laghman Province
Head of OCHA Sub-Office UNOCHA Office Jalalabad
Health Practitioner Sokai district Kunar
Social Mobiliser Sokai district Kunar
CBE Teacher Laghman Province
Southern Region
Head of Adam Darmal Health Facility Adam Darmal Health Facility
Child Protection Officer UNICEF Office Kandahar
Animator, HRDA Spin Boldak Health Facility
Social & Development Manager. MRRD UNICEF Office Kandahar
Security Associate UNICEF UNICEF Office Kandahar
Nurce Spin Boldak Mobile Team Head Spin Boldak Health Facility
CoAR, WASH Specialist UNICEF Office Kandahar
Vaccinator Spin Boldak Health Facility
Programme Associate/Gender Focal Point UNICEF Office Kandahar
Principal Malik Kabir School Spin Boldak Health Facility
Monitoring and Planning Officer UNICEF Office Kandahar
Head of Sub-Office WHO WHO Office Kandahar
Medical Mobile Unit Supervisor UNICEF Office Kandahar
Communication for Development Officer UNICEF Spin Boldak Health Facility
Head of Mirwais Regional Hospital Mirwais Regional Hospital
Health Promotion Officer Adam Darmal Health Facility Adam Darmal Health Facility
Medical Officer WHO WHO Office Kandahar
Health Specialist UNICEF UNICEF Office Kandahar
CAHD officer DoPH UNICEF Office Kandahar
Education Extender UNICEF Office Kandahar
Social Mobiliser UNICEF Office Kandahar
Head of CDC, Tahir Village Spin Boldak Health Facility
NTA, WASH Officer MRRD UNICEF Office Kandahar
Technical Extender Child Protection (DOLSA) UNICEF Office Kandahar
Communication Officer MoE UNICEF Office Kandahar
Nutritionist Spin Boldak Mobile Team Spin Boldak Health Facility
Social Mobilisation & Development Manager UNICEF Office Kandahar
WASH PO UNICEF UNICEF Office Kandahar
Health Extender UNICEF Office Kandahar
Humanitarian Affairs Officer UNOCHA UNOCHA Office Kandahar
Itad 4 August 2021 160
Final Report
Midwife Spin Boldak Mobile Team Spin Boldak Health Facility
Field Coordinator DACAAR UNICEF Office Kandahar
Education Specialist UNICEF UNICEF Office Kandahar
Itad 4 August 2021 161
Final Report
Survey Questions
UNICEF SPE – STAKEHOLDER SURVEYS
QUESTION SETS: ENGLISH-SPEAKING RESPONDENTS
STAKEHOLDER GROUP: UNICEF STAFF
Self-ID Questions Responses
Where do you currently work? Kabul Field/Zonal Outpost Outside
Office Afghanistan
What is/are the programme sector/s you primarily work in? Health Education Child Protection Water & Other/
Sanitation Multiple
sectors
What is your current category and level within the UN System? P2 or 3 P4 or 5 P6 or 7 NOC/NOB Other
What is your gender? Male Female Prefer not to say
How long have you been in your current role? 0–1 year 1–2 years 2–3 years 3+ years
How long have you been working with UNICEF in or on Afghanistan? 0–1 year 1–2 years 2–3 years 3+ years
No. UNICEF STAFF – Main Survey Questions Responses
1 UNICEF demonstrates a good practical understanding of how best to integrate humanitarian Strongly Agree No opinion/ Disagree Strongly
and development objectives at programme level. If asked, I would be able to give examples agree Don’t know disagree
of this.
2 In my programme sector or area of work, UNICEF staff generally know what the nexus is, and Strongly Agree No opinion/ Disagree Strongly
would be able to explain what it means in terms of programme design and implementation. agree Don’t know disagree
3 Compared to other agencies, UNICEF has strong, demonstrated capacity to link humanitarian Strongly Agree No opinion/ Disagree Strongly
and development programming. agree Don’t know disagree
4 In my programme sector or area of work, UNICEF has good, practical understanding of how Strongly Agree No opinion/ Disagree Strongly
to integrate peacebuilding objectives at programme level. If asked, I would be able to give agree Don’t know disagree
examples of this.
5 In my programme sector or area of work, the way ACO has prioritised provinces makes Strongly Agree No opinion/ Disagree Strongly
sense, and strikes a good balance between addressing the most acute needs and assisting agree Don’t know disagree
the greatest possible number of people.
Itad 4 August 2021 162
Final Report
6 In my programme sector or area of work, UNICEF strategy and guidelines have been useful Strongly Agree No opinion/ Disagree Strongly
to guide multi-sectoral programming on the ground. This has allowed my sector and other agree Don’t know disagree
programme sectors to work well together in support of children, adolescents and women.
7 In my programme sector or area of work, current approaches to accessing areas controlled Strongly Agree No opinion/ Disagree Strongly
by anti-government elements are generally effective. Little or no further improvement can agree Don’t know disagree
be made in those approaches.
8 In my programme sector or area of work, UNICEF have good capacity to respond to the Strongly Agree No opinion/ Disagree Strongly
needs of children, adolescents and women in areas controlled by anti-government elements. agree Don’t know disagree
Little or no further progress can be made to improve this, at least not without raising current
levels of funding and resources.
9 In the past year, UNICEF programmes in my sector or area of work have generally adapted Strongly Agree No opinion/ Disagree Strongly
well to the changing conflict situation and related risks. agree Don’t know disagree
10 In my programme sector or area of work, Extenders and TPMs are useful in contributing to Strongly Agree No opinion/ Disagree Strongly
quality programme delivery and monitoring. agree Don’t know disagree
11 In my programme sector, the systems in place to recruit, task and supervise Extenders and Strongly Agree No opinion/ Disagree Strongly
TPMs are good, and not much room exists for improvement. agree Don’t know disagree
12 In my programme sector or area of work, UNICEF’s partnerships with NGOs/CSOs generally Strongly Agree No opinion/ Disagree Strongly
take measures to differentiate between the different needs of boys and girls. Nothing much agree Don’t know disagree
can be improved in this regard, at least not without raising current levels of funding and
resources.
13 In my programme sector or work area, UNICEF's partnership with NGOs/CSOs are generally Strongly Agree No opinion/ Disagree Strongly
effective at delivering the agreed results. agree Don’t know disagree
14 In my programme sector or area of work, UNICEF ACO has a clear strategy on institutional Strongly Agree No opinion/ Disagree Strongly
strengthening and government capacity building. If asked, I would be able to explain how agree Don’t know disagree
this strategy applies to my programme sector.
15 In my sector or area of work, UNICEF has strong demonstrated capacity in institutional and Strongly Agree No opinion/ Disagree Strongly
systems strengthening compared to other development actors. If asked, I would be able to agree Don’t know disagree
give examples of this.
16 In my programme sector or area of work, the use of National Technical Assistants has been Strongly Agree No opinion/ Disagree Strongly
useful to build the capacity of government. agree Don’t know disagree
17 In my programme sector or area of work, UNICEF does a lot to enable a better understanding Strongly Agree No opinion/ Disagree Strongly
of gender issues through evidence, analysis and knowledge management. agree Don’t know disagree
18 In my programme sector or area of work, ACO's gender strategy has been useful to shape Strongly Agree No opinion/ Disagree Strongly
and guide programme design and implementation. agree Don’t know disagree
Itad 4 August 2021 163
Final Report
19 In my programme sector work, UNICEF has been effective in helping its partners to improve Strongly Agree No opinion/ Disagree Strongly
their understanding of gender, and to reflect this in their programme design. If asked, I agree Don’t know disagree
would be able to give examples of this.
STAKEHOLDER GROUPS: UN AGENCY STAFF, INGO/CSO STAFF, DONOR REPRESENTATIVES
Self-ID Questions Responses
How would you describe yourself? UN staff INGO/CSO Donor Other
staff representative
Where do you currently work? Kabul Afghanistan Outside
(other than Afghanistan
Kabul)
What is/are the programme sector/s you primarily work in? Health Education Child Protection Water & Other/
Sanitation Multiple
sectors
What is your gender? Male Female Prefer not to say
In the course of your current or past work, how much have you been exposed Not at all A little Quite a lot Almost
to UNICEF activities in Afghanistan? exclusively
No. UN AGENCY STAFF, INGO/CSO STAFF, DONOR REPRESENTATIVES – Main Survey Responses
Questions
1 UNICEF demonstrates a good practical understanding of how best to integrate humanitarian Strongly Agree No opinion/ Disagree Strongly
and development objectives at programme level. If asked, I would be able to give examples agree Don’t know disagree
of this.
2 Compared to other agencies, UNICEF has strong demonstrated capacity to link humanitarian Strongly Agree No opinion/ Disagree Strongly
and development programming. agree Don’t know disagree
3 UNICEF has good, practical understanding of how to integrate peacebuilding objectives at Strongly Agree No opinion/ Disagree Strongly
programme level. If asked, I would be able to give examples of this. agree Don’t know disagree
4 UNICEF plays a recognised leadership role on the nexus, in the context of One UN, ANPDF Strongly Agree No opinion/ Disagree Strongly
and other multilateral platforms or frameworks. agree Don’t know disagree
5 UNICEF's approach to selecting locations for its programmes (at provincial and district levels) Strongly Agree No opinion/ Disagree Strongly
allows it to strike the best possible balance between focusing on the most acute needs and agree Don’t know disagree
assisting the great possible number of people.
Itad 4 August 2021 164
Final Report
6 UNICEF's approach to multi-sectoral programming has produced good results in terms of Strongly Agree No opinion/ Disagree Strongly
enabling a combined approach to the diverse needs of children, adolescents and women. agree Don’t know disagree
7 Generally, UNICEF's approach to accessing areas controlled by anti-government elements is Strongly Agree No opinion/ Disagree Strongly
as effective as possible, given circumstances. agree Don’t know disagree
8 Generally, UNICEF's approach strikes a good balance between working with GIRoA on joint Strongly Agree No opinion/ Disagree Strongly
service delivery and maintaining enough independence to enable good humanitarian access agree Don’t know disagree
and coverage in areas controlled by anti-government elements.
9 UNICEF has generally demonstrated a good capacity to adapt its programmes to the Strongly Agree No opinion/ Disagree Strongly
changing conflict situation and to mitigate related risks. agree Don’t know disagree
10 Generally, UNICEF has successfully aligned its programme partnerships (with both Line Strongly Agree No opinion/ Disagree Strongly
Ministries and NGOs/CSOs) with GIRoA’s strategies and plans (ANPDF, National Priority agree Don’t know disagree
Programmes).
11 UNICEF contributes measurably to the One UN approach at both policy and programme Strongly Agree No opinion/ Disagree Strongly
levels. agree Don’t know disagree
12 Compared to other development actors, UNICEF has strong demonstrated capacity in Strongly Agree No opinion/ Disagree Strongly
institutional and systems strengthening. If asked, I would be able to give examples of this. agree Don’t know disagree
13 UNICEF is an authoritative voice on public sector capacity development. Strongly Agree No opinion/ Disagree Strongly
agree Don’t know disagree
14 UNICEF does a lot to enable a better understanding of gender issues through evidence, Strongly Agree No opinion/ Disagree Strongly
analysis and knowledge management. agree Don’t know disagree
15 Gender is well integrated into ACO's own programme planning and implementation. Strongly Agree No opinion/ Disagree Strongly
agree Don’t know disagree
16 UNICEF has demonstrated good leadership in multi-agency efforts to integrate gender in the Strongly Agree No opinion/ Disagree Strongly
system-wide UN response. agree Don’t know disagree
17 UNICEF is widely recognised as a champion of gender equality. Strongly Agree No opinion/ Disagree Strongly
agree Don’t know disagree
18 UNICEF has demonstrated its capacity to achieve progress on gender through partnerships Strongly Agree No opinion/ Disagree Strongly
with local actors (GIRoA or CSOs). agree Don’t know disagree
QUESTION SETS: PASHTU/DARI RESPONDENTS
STAKEHOLDER GROUPS: EXTENDERS, NTASs, FRONTLINE WORKERS
Itad 4 August 2021 165
Final Report
Self-ID Responses
Where do you currently work? Mostly at district Mostly in Mostly in Kabul
level provincial
capital
How are security and access conditions where you work? Very good Good No opinion/ Bad Very bad
Prefer not to
say
What is/are the programme sector/s you primarily work in? Health Education Water & Child Other/
Sanitation Protection Multiple
Sectors
What is your gender? Male Female Prefer not to
say
How long have you been active in an area of work that involves UNICEF? 0–1 year 1–2 years 2–3 years 3+ years
EXTENDERS – Main Survey Questions (Note: Where relevant, questions to be preceded by: ‘In your area of work or sector – Health, Edu, CP, WASH’)
1. Does your position involve working across more than one UNICEF programme Yes No
sector (WASH, education, health, child protection, nutrition)?
2. Do you work in areas which only Extenders can access, and which are not Yes, those Yes, but I also No opinion/ Yes, but I No, never
accessible to other UNICEF staff? are the only work in areas Don’t know mostly
areas in accessible to work in
which I work UNICEF staff areas
accessible
to UNICEF
staff
3. If there are areas that only you can access: Are the needs in those areas higher Yes, much Yes, generally No opinion/ No, not No, they are
than in areas which other UNICEF staff can access (e.g. relating to WASH, education, higher higher Don’t know/ really generally
health, child protection)? Not applicable higher lower
4. If there are other service providers in the areas where you work (GIRoA, UN), do Yes, very Yes, generally No opinion/ No, not No, not at all
you feel that UNICEF programming (e.g. in WASH, education, health, child protection) well Don’t know/ really
complements these providers well? Not applicable
7. Do you feel that you have a good understanding of the responsibilities and tasks Yes, very Yes, quite No opinion/ No, not No, not at all
that come with your position? good good Don’t know really
Itad 4 August 2021 166
Final Report
5. Have you received training/guidance from UNICEF on how to include all members Yes No
of the community, including women, in discussions on programmes (e.g. in WASH,
education, health, child protection)?
5a. If you answered ‘yes’ to 5 above: Was the training/guidance you have received Yes, very Yes, generally No opinion/ No, not No, not clear
clear and understandable? clear clear Don’t know really clear at all
5b. If you answered ‘yes’ to 5 above: How easy or difficult is it to put this Very easy Quite easy No opinion/ Quite Very difficult
training/guidance in practice? Don’t know difficult
6. Do you consider that addressing gender issues is an important part of your work? Yes, very Yes, generally No opinion/ No, not No, not at all
much Don’t know really
7. How easy or difficult is it to take into account the different needs of boys and girls Very easy Quite easy No opinion/ Quite Very difficult
in your sector or area of work (e.g. WASH, education, health, child protection)? Don’t know difficult
8. Has your job description and/or work location changed since you started to work Yes No
with UNICEF?
8a. If you answered ‘yes’ to 8 above: Do you feel that these changes were justified Yes, very Yes, mostly No opinion/ No, not No, not at all
and in line with UNICEF programming needs? much Don’t know really
9. How good is your working relationship with your UNICEF manager? Very good Good No opinion/ Not so Not good at
Don’t know good all
10. How good is your working relationship with your local CDC/GIRoA authorities? Very good Good No opinion/ Not so Not good at
Don’t know good all
NTAs – Main Survey Questions (Note: Where relevant, questions to be preceded by: ‘In your area of work or sector – Health, Edu, CP, WASH’)
1. How easy or difficult is it to ensure that GIRoA has a good understanding of the Very easy Quite easy No opinion/ Quite Very difficult
different needs of boys and girls? Don’t know difficult
2. Do you feel that there is good alignment between UNICEF programmes and the Very good Good No opinion/ Not so Not good at all
NPPs? Don’t know good
3. Do you feel that your role in capacity building is well understood by your GIRoA Yes, very Yes, mostly No opinion/ No, not No, not at all
counterparts (WASH, education, health, child protection)? much Don’t know really
4. In your view, is your actual role working with GIRoA mainly about filling a capacity Much more Generally Equally about Generally Much more
gap, or mainly about helping to improve existing capacity? about filling more filling a gap more about
a gap about and improving about improving
filling a capacity improving capacity
gap capacity
5. Since you have started in this role, do you feel that your GIRoA colleagues have Yes, very Yes, mostly No opinion/ No, not No, not at all
become more able to take on responsibilities and make decisions without you? much Don’t know really
6. Do you feel that your support fully matches the needs of the GIRoA? Yes, very Yes, mostly No opinion/ No, not No, not at all
much Don’t know really
Itad 4 August 2021 167
Final Report
7. If you were assigned to another job tomorrow, would the capacity that you have Yes, very Yes, mostly No opinion/ No, not No, not at all
helped to build in your current job remain intact after you leave? much Don’t know really
8. Do you consider that addressing gender issues is an important part of your position? Yes, very Yes, No opinion/ No, not No, not at all
much generally Don’t know really
9. Do your GIRoA counterparts consider that addressing gender issues is an important Yes, very Yes, No opinion/ No, not No, not at all
part of your joint activities? much generally Don’t know really
10. Was the training/guidance you have received from UNICEF clear and Yes, very Yes, mostly No opinion/ No, not No, not clear
understandable? clear Don’t know really clear at all
11. How easy or difficult is it to put this training/guidance in practice? Very easy Quite easy No opinion/ Quite Very difficult
Don’t know difficult
Frontline Workers – Main Survey Questions (Note: Where relevant, questions to be preceded by: ‘In your area of work or sector – Health, Edu, CP,
WASH’)
1. Does your position involve working across more than one programme sector (WASH, Yes No
education, health, child protection nutrition)?
2. If there are other service providers in the areas where you work (GIRoA, UN), do you Yes, very Yes, No opinion/ No, not No, not at all
feel that UNICEF programming (e.g. WASH, education, health, child protection) well generally Don’t know/ really
complements these providers well? Not applicable
3. How easy or difficult is it to take into account the different needs of boys and girls in Very easy Quite easy No opinion/ Quite Very difficult
your sector or area of work (WASH, education, health, child protection)? Don’t know difficult
4. Have you received UNICEF training/guidance on how to include all members of the Yes No
community, including women, in discussions on programmes (WASH, education, health,
child protection)?
5. If you answered ‘yes’ to 4 above: How easy or difficult is it to put this Very easy Quite easy No opinion/ Quite Very difficult
training/guidance into practice? Don’t know difficult
6. Have you received training/guidance from UNICEF on any other aspects of your work? Yes No
7. If you answered ‘yes’ to 6 above: Was the training/guidance you received clear and Yes, very Yes, mostly No opinion/ No, not No, not clear
understandable? clear Don’t know really clear at all
8. Do you consider that addressing gender issues is an important part of your work? Yes, very Yes, No opinion/ No, not No, not at all
much generally Don’t know really
9. How good is your working relationship with your local CDC/GIRoA authorities? Very good Good No opinion/ Not so Not good at all
Don’t know good
10. How good is your working relationship with UNICEF’s local implementing partner? Very good Good No opinion/ Not so Not good at all
Don’t know good
Itad 4 August 2021 168
Final Report
11. How helpful is UNICEF in supporting the work you do? Very Helpful No opinion/ Unhelpful Very unhelpful
helpful Don’t know
Itad 4 August 2021 169
Final Report
Disaggregation of Respondent Sample
Key informant interviews
The team conducted 124 KIIs among UNICEF Sector Leads, Country Reps and Deputy Reps in NGOs
and other donor agencies, and other relevant sector specialists.
English language surveys
The team targeted UNICEF managers and sector specialists in other organisations through a
SurveyMonkey online questionnaire. Of total survey responses, 71% were by men and 27% by
women (2% of respondents preferred not to state their gender).
Itad 4 August 2021 170
Final Report
Dari and Pashto surveys
The team administered 90 email or phone surveys in Dari and Pashto to extenders, NTAs and
frontline workers. Men made up 56% of respondents and women 44%. In terms of the typical place
of work of respondents, 63% work at district level, 31% in provincial capitals and 6% in Kabul.
Itad 4 August 2021 171
Final Report
Itad 4 August 2021 172
Final Report
Budgetary Categorisation of ACP Outputs
The table below represents the budgetary categorisation the ET used to understand budgetary
balance between humanitarian and development outputs.
Output Statement ET Rating
Health
Deprived provinces and other focus areas have skilled healthcare workers, Humanitarian
especially females, to provide quality and equitable MNCH services that
meet minimum national standards.
Polio vaccines are effectively managed and communities are adequately Other
mobilised towards interruption of wild polio virus transmission.
Deprived provinces and other focus areas have qualified EPI service Humanitarian
providers (including primary healthcare workers for outreach, especially
females) for quality and equitable immunisation services that meet
minimum national standards.
Health facilities in deprived provinces and other focus areas have cold chain, Humanitarian
vaccine and adequate infrastructure to provide routine immunisation
services.
National and subnational procurement and supply chain management Other
system for pharmaceuticals, vaccines and equipment improved to manage
stock –outs.
Individuals, families and communities, especially from deprived provinces Development
and other focus areas, have the relevant knowledge, demand key MNCH
services and appropriate behaviours.
National capacity is increased for polio vaccine management and social Development
mobilisation to maintain sustained interruption of wild poliovirus
transmission.
National and provincial implementing partners have the capacity to collect, Development
analyse and disseminate data relevant for development and monitoring of
the health and immunisation programme.
Increased country capacity for evidence-based policy dialogue and advocacy, Development
with special focus on improving coverage and quality of MNCH and
immunisation.
Increased national and subnational capacity for resilience plan and to deliver Development
health services for preventing excess mortality among children and women
in humanitarian situation.
Capacities and systems at national and subnational levels related to Development
maternal, newborn and child health outcomes are strengthened, data-driven
and relevant for improved policy, programmes, dialogue and advocacy.
National and subnational capacity is increased for the provision and demand Humanitarian
of timely essential health services for women, girls and boys affected by
humanitarian situations, and emergency services are delivered, in line with
the CCCs.
Itad 4 August 2021 173
Final Report
MNCH: Quality maternal, newborn and child health services are available Development
and demanded by families to ensure mothers and girls and boys are healthy,
especially in the most deprived areas.
EPI: Quality expanded programme of immunisation (EPI) services are Development
available and demanded by families to protect women, girls and boys from
vaccine-preventable diseases, especially in most deprived areas.
ER: M&E – training, meetings & transportation. Other
Health COVID-19 response. Humanitarian
Excess mortality among girls, boys and women in humanitarian crisis is Humanitarian
prevented.
WASH
Strengthened capacity of government departments at all levels to cost- Development
effectively deliver sustainable drinking water and sanitation services.
Increased access and use of improved drinking water supply and sanitation Humanitarian
facilities by deprived and vulnerable populations.
Deprived and vulnerable populations demonstrate improved hygiene Humanitarian
behaviour (washing hands at critical times, safe disposal of child faeces, safe
handling and storage of food and use of smokeless stoves). UNICEF-
supported programmes (polio, nutrition and education).
Impact on child health, nutritional status and education is optimised through Other
increased convergence of WASH programming within WASH and in other
UNICEF-supported programmes (polio, nutrition and education).
Increased access for gender-sensitive and integrated WASH services in Humanitarian
schools and health centres.
Increased national and subnational capacity for resilience plans and delivery Development
of services to children and women for protected and reliable access to
sufficient safe water, sanitation and hygiene facilities in humanitarian
situations.
Relevant government ministries at national and subnational levels have Development
increased capacity and commitment to manage equitable and
sustainable WASH programmes.
Deprived communities, schools and health facilities have increased capacity Development
to ensure open defecation-free status, access to and use of a safely managed
drinking water supply, and individual and collective adoption of appropriate
hygiene practices.
Communities and schools have strengthened capacity to ensure adequate Development
information on, and appropriate facilities for, menstrual hygiene for
adolescent and pre-adolescent girls.
Effective coordination for a timely humanitarian WASH response at national Humanitarian
and subnational levels, and emergency services are delivered, in line with
the CCCs.
WASH COVID-19 response. Humanitarian
Itad 4 August 2021 174
Final Report
Girls, boys and women have protected water, and reliable access to Humanitarian
sufficient sanitation and hygiene facilities.
Education
Access to primary education for girls and boys in deprived provinces and Humanitarian
other focus areas scaled up to meet the minimum defined standards for
Afghanistan.
National and subnational education authorities (MoEs) have management Development
and financial capacity to progressively manage community-based
education and ensure higher transition rate from grade 3 to grade 4 for girls
and boys (including EiE).
GPE in Afghanistan leveraged for resources and results to meet national Other
education objectives.
Strengthened national and subnational capacity to implement child-friendly Development
schools (CFS), especially in targeted schools in deprived provinces and other
areas.
National capacity strengthened to develop and operationalise a system for Development
monitoring of learning achievements and setting of national standards in
core subjects for primary grades.
Girls’ education and community-based early childhood care and education Humanitarian
developed and demonstrated in selected communities in deprived provinces
and other focus areas.
Education authorities have increased capacity in evidence-based national Development
and decentralised sector analysis, planning, coordination and management.
Education authorities have increased capacity in evidence-based national Development
and decentralised sector analysis, planning, coordination and management.
Education stakeholders at national and subnational levels have increased Development
capacity to implement at scale sustainable programmes to improve
equitable access for the most disadvantaged children, especially girls.
Education duty bearers and rights holders at national and subnational level Development
have increased capacity to plan for, implement and monitor a child-friendly
education environment and develop and monitor student learning
outcomes.
By end 2021, the operationalisation of an intersectoral strategy and action Development
plan for all girls in school has significantly contributed to a more conducive
policy environment, mobilisation of civil society, increased girls’ enrolment,
learning and retention, and decreased drop-out rates of girls at every age.
National and subnational education authorities have increased capacity to Humanitarian
mitigate, prepare for and respond to emergencies, and emergency services
are delivered, in line with the CCCs.
Education COVID-19 response. Humanitarian
Girls and boys have access to safe and secure education and critical Humanitarian
information for their own well-being in humanitarian situations.
Itad 4 August 2021 175
Final Report
Child Protection
National and subnational institutional management capacity strengthened Development
for CP systems and services for most vulnerable children.
Key stakeholders participate in and contribute to strengthened coordination Other
towards a multi-sectoral CP system/programme.
Government and non–government functionaries and caregivers in contact Development
with children have the responsibility to prevent and respond to violence,
abuse and exploitation of children.
Monitoring, reporting and referral capacity within CP system for children Development
affected by humanitarian situations including armed conflict is improved and
fully functional.
Responsible national and subnational entities have increased capacity to Development
enact and operationalise implementation of the legal and normative
framework aligned with international child rights conventions and child
protection standards.
Statutory service providers have increased authority, resources and Humanitarian
knowledge to provide quality child protection services to the most
vulnerable boys and girls in Afghanistan.
Community members and leaders are better able to prevent and respond to Development
harmful practices and violence against girls and boys within their
communities.
Girls and boys affected by humanitarian crises, including children affected by Humanitarian
armed conflict, displacement and unsafe migration, are assisted,
reintegrated and provided appropriate support as per CCCs.
Child Protection COVID-19 Response. Humanitarian
Girls’ and boys’ right to protection from violence, abuse and exploitation is Humanitarian
sustained and promoted in humanitarian situations.
Itad 4 August 2021 176
Final Report
Bibliography
A Strategic Review of UNICEF Gender Capacity Building & Credentialing Initiatives Report, Social
Development Direct, 2020
Afghanistan - Country Programme Snapshot 2020-2022, Spotlight Initiative
Afghanistan - UNICEF Communication, Advocacy, and Civic Engagement Annual Workplan 2020-2021
Afghanistan - UNICEF Communication, Advocacy, and Civic Engagement Annual Workplan 2020-2021
- Budget
Afghanistan - UNICEF Gender Section 2020 Annual Work Plan, UNICEF, 2020
Afghanistan - UNICEF Programme of Cooperation 2015-2021, Rolling Workplan 2020-2021 - Child
Protection
Afghanistan - UNICEF Programme of Cooperation 2015-2021, Rolling Workplan 2020-2021 - Child
Protection - Budget
Afghanistan - UNICEF Programme of Cooperation 2015-2021, Rolling Workplan 2020-2021 -
Education
Afghanistan - UNICEF Programme of Cooperation 2015-2021, Rolling Workplan 2020-2021 -
Education - Budget
Afghanistan - UNICEF Programme of Cooperation 2015-2021, Rolling Workplan 2020-2021 - National
Health
Afghanistan - UNICEF Programme of Cooperation 2015-2021, Rolling Workplan 2020-2021 - National
Health - Budget
Afghanistan - UNICEF Programme of Cooperation 2015-2021, Rolling Workplan 2020-2021 -
Nutrition
Afghanistan - UNICEF Programme of Cooperation 2015-2021, Rolling Workplan 2020-2021 -
Nutrition - Budget
Afghanistan - UNICEF Programme of Cooperation 2015-2021, Rolling Workplan 2020-2021 - WASH
Afghanistan - UNICEF Programme of Cooperation 2015-2021, Rolling Workplan 2020-2021 - WASH -
Budget
Afghanistan - UNICEF Programme of Cooperation 2015-2021, Rolling Workplan 2020-2021 - WASH -
Targets
Afghanistan Annual Report on Protection of Civilians in Armed Conflict, UN, 2019
Afghanistan Country Office Results Compacts: 2019 - 2021: Nutrition - May 2019, UNICEF
Afghanistan Law on Protection of Child Rights 2019, Islamic Republic of Afghanistan, Ministry of
Justice, 2019
Afghanistan National Peace and Development Framework (ANPDF II) 2021 to 2025, Islamic Republic
of Afghanistan, Ministry of Finance
Afghanistan Partnership Framework, Afghanistan Conference in Geneve November 2020
Afghanistan Top Donors, One UN for Afghanistan, UNICEF UN OECD DAC, 2020
Analysis of current and projected conflict trends to inform UNICEF’s engagement in Afghanistan,
Afghanistan Country Office, 2020
Audit of Afghanistan Country Office, Summary of Draft Observations, OIAI, 2019
Itad 4 August 2021 177
Final Report
Child Marriage in Afghanistan: Changing the Narrative, UNICEF, 2018
Community Based Nutrition Package Process Evaluation in Afghanistan 2018-2019, Final Report,
UNICEF, 2020
Core Commitments for Children in Humanitarian Action - What's New, UNICEF, 2020
Core Commitments for Children in Humanitarian Action, UNICEF, 2020
CPD Funding Status, Updated Feb 2020
Education Joint Sector Review, Islamic Republic of Afghanistan, Ministry of Education, 2018
Enhancing Gender in Humanitarian Response UNICEF ROSA, Presentation, 2018
Evaluation of Improving Adolescents Lives in Afghanistan, Midline report, C4ED, 2019
Evaluation of UNICEF's coverage and quality in complex humanitarian situations: Afghanistan,
UNICEF, 2020
GAP Results and indicators matrix, Indicators on integrated gender results, Goal Area 1, 2, 3, 4, and
5, UNICEF
Gender Action Plan 2018-2021, UNICEF, 2018
Gender Equality and Rights: Gender Programmatic Review Afghanistan Country Office 2018, UNICEF,
2018
Gender Expenditure Markers and Gender Expenditure, UNICEF, Webinar April 2020
Gender Programmatic Review Toolkit, UNICEF, 2018
Gender Strategy for the Afghanistan Country Office 2019-2021, UNICEF, 2019
Guidance on Staffing for Gender Action Plan (GAP) Results, Revised, UNICEF, 2019
HO UNICEF Nexus Inception Report Version 3 COVID Final, 2020
Humanitarian Action for Children, Afghanistan, reports from 2019 and 2020
Humanitarian Needs Overview - Afghanistan, 2019 and 2020
Humanitarian Response Plan Year End Report- Afghanistan, 2018 and 2019
Internal Audit of the Afghanistan Country Office, OIAI, 2019
Mid term review of UNICEF Afghanistan Country programme 2015-2019, Government of the Islamic
Republic of Afghanistan and UNICEF, 2017
Mid-Term Evaluation of Increasing Access to Basic Education and Gender Equality Programme
(Afghanistan) 2015-2019, USAID, 2019
One UN for Afghanistan 2018-2021, Islamic Republic of Afghanistan and the United Nations, 2018
One UN for Afghanistan Results Framework 2018-2021
Quality Assurance Checklist for Gender Integration in Country Programme Documents, UNICEF, 2018
Resource Mobilisation Strategy 2015-2021, UNICEF Afghanistan, 2019
Results Assessment Module 2019 End-Year Reporting - Child Protection, UNICEF Afghanistan, 2019
Results Assessment Module 2019 End-Year Reporting - Education, UNICEF Afghanistan, 2019
Results Assessment Module 2019 End-Year Reporting - Health and Polio, UNICEF Afghanistan, 2019
Results Assessment Module 2019 End-Year Reporting - Nutrition, UNICEF Afghanistan, 2019
Itad 4 August 2021 178
Final Report
Results Assessment Module 2019 End-Year Reporting - Operations Effectiveness, UNICEF
Afghanistan, 2019
Results Assessment Module 2019 End-Year Reporting - Programme Effectiveness, UNICEF
Afghanistan, 2019
Results Assessment Module 2019 End-Year Reporting - SPEAR UNICEF Afghanistan, 2019
Results Assessment Module 2019 End-Year Reporting - WASH, UNICEF Afghanistan, 2019
Security Risk Management Manual - Annex E Reflecting Acceptance in SRM, March 2019
Summary of the Child-Centered, multi-hazard risk analysis, UNICEF Afghanistan, 2020
Summative Evaluation and Randomized Control Trial of the Adolescent Women’s Leadership
Initiative Project in Afghanistan, UNICEF, 2020
Third Party Monitoring (TPM) of UNICEF Programs, Rahman Safi International, Presentation June
2020
UNICEF Afghanistan Annual Management Plan, reports from 2019 and 2020
UNICEF Afghanistan Annual Report, 2015, 2016, 2017, 2018, and 2019
UNICEF Afghanistan Child Protection Programme Strategy Note (2017-2019), UNICEF, 2018
UNICEF Afghanistan Education Programme Strategy Note (2017-2019), UNICEF, 2018
UNICEF Afghanistan Health and Polio Programme Strategy Note (2017-2019), UNICEF, 2018
UNICEF Afghanistan Nutrition Programme Strategy Note (2017-2019), UNICEF, 2018
UNICEF Afghanistan Office Instruction, AFGH-CO-2019-031 SOP-Extenders, 2019
UNICEF Afghanistan Programme Action Plan (2015-2019) ANNEXES, UNICEF, 2014
UNICEF Afghanistan Programme Action Plan (2015-2019), UNICEF, 2014
UNICEF Afghanistan SitRep studies, September 2019 and Year End 2020
UNICEF Afghanistan Water, Sanitation and Hygiene Programme Strategy Note 2017-2019, UNICEF,
2018
UNICEF guidance on Field Monitoring, FRG/GUIDANCE/2018/001, UNICEF, 2018
UNICEF Organogram (Proposed), Afghanistan Country Office and Office of the Representative, June
2020
UNICEF SICs by goal and gender tag, 2020
UNICEF Strategic Plan 2018-2021, Executive Summary, UNICEF, 2018
Update on UNICEF humanitarian action with a focus on linking humanitarian and development
Programming, UNICEF Board Session Feb 2019
What is Gender-transformative Programming? Gender Section, PDHQ, UNICEF, 2020
Itad 4 August 2021 179
Itad Principles and Values
This Statement of Ethical Principles sets a standard to which all Itad staff, consultants and partners
aspire when working on Itad-managed evaluations. Itad evaluators operate in accordance with
international human rights conventions and covenants to which the United Kingdom is a signatory,
regardless of local country standards. They will also take account of local and national laws.
Itad takes responsibility for identifying the need for and securing any necessary ethics approval for
the study they are undertaking. This may be from national or local ethics committees in countries in
which the study will be undertaken, or other stakeholder institutions with formal ethics approval
systems.
The conduct of all those working on Itad-managed evaluations is characterised by the following
general principles and values:
• Principle 1: Independence and impartiality of the researchers. Itad evaluators are
independent and impartial. Any conflicts of interest or partiality will be made explicit.
• Principle 2: Avoiding harm. Itad evaluators will ensure that the basic human rights of
individuals and groups with whom they interact are protected. This is particularly important
with regard to vulnerable people.
• Principle 3: Child protection. Itad follows the code of conduct established by Save the
Children (2003) which covers awareness of child abuse, minimising risks to children, and
reporting and responding where concerns arise about possible abuse. Itad evaluators will
obtain informed consent from parents or caregivers and from children themselves. Children
will not be required to participate even if their parents consent.
• Principle 4: Treatment of participants. Itad evaluators are aware of differences in culture,
local customs, religious beliefs and practices, personal interaction and gender roles,
disability, age and ethnicity, and will be mindful of the potential implications of these
differences when planning, carrying out and reporting on evaluations.
• Principle 5: Voluntary participation. Participation in research and evaluation should be
voluntary and free from external pressure. Information should not be withheld from
prospective participants that might affect their willingness to participate. All participants
have a right to withdraw from research/evaluation and withdraw any data concerning them
at any point without fear of penalty.
• Principle 6: Informed consent. Itad evaluators will inform participants how information and
data obtained will be used, processed, shared and disposed of, prior to obtaining consent.
• Principle 7: Ensuring confidentiality. Itad evaluators will respect people’s right to provide
information in confidence, and must ensure that sensitive information cannot be traced to
its source. They will also inform participants about the scope and limits of confidentiality.
• Principle 8: Data security. Itad is registered under the UK Data Protection Act 1998 and has
a data protection policy which includes procedures on data retention and confidentiality.
Itad evaluators will guard confidential material and personal information by the proper use
of passwords and other security measures. Itad evaluators have an obligation to protect
data and systems by following up-to-date recommendations to avoid damage from viruses
and other malicious programs. There is also a duty to state how data will be stored, backed
up, shared, archived and (if necessary) disposed of.
• Principle 9: Sharing of findings. Itad evaluators are responsible for the clear, accurate and
fair written and/or oral presentation of study limitations, findings and recommendations.
Itad 4 August 2021 180
Overview of Itad’s approach to QA
Our four-stage QA process will lead to concrete actions before and throughout the Evaluation. These
are summarised below.
Table 3: QA approach
What? How? Who?
When preparing a bid, we put a lot of effort
in carefully selecting team members on the
basis of their Evaluation competencies, skills
Business
& sector (matching the ToR) as well as their
Development
interpersonal and managerial skills. We also
Stage 1: Select the right team and Bid lead/
strive to make sure that the competencies
Project
Establishing and experience of different team members
Director
quality ex are complementary to each other and that all
ante the requirements of the ToR are exhausted
by the presented team
All team members will be assigned clear Project
Set the preconditions for
technical roles and responsibilities based on Director,
successful delivery
their respective areas of expertise Team Leader
When preparing the bid and again during the
Ensure the best Evaluation inception phase our Project Director/Quality Team Leader
design, within resource Assurer provides advice on how to best tailor and Quality
constraints the Evaluation design to the budget and time Assurer
resources available
During the inception phase, the ET will refine
Selection of the most together the methodology under the TL’s Team Leader,
appropriate and robust direction. Our Project Director/Quality and Quality
methodology and tools Assurer will then review them and assure Assurer
their quality
Project
The Project Director, together with the
Director,
Project Officer, will periodically review the
Project
Realistic planning Evaluation budget and workplan making sure
Stage 2: Manager,
that delivery is within budget and planning
Quality of Project
for next phases realistic
the Officer
Evaluation The Evaluation design (KIIs sample size,
process survey sample size, depth of analysis etc.) will
be tailored to ensure delivery within
Project
deadlines.
Timely delivery Director,
The Project Director, together with the TL,
Team Leader
will periodically review the Evaluation
workplan making sure that delivery is on
track and planning for next phases realistic
Our team members are highly experienced
All team
evaluators with several years of expertise in
members, TL,
Adherence with UNEG this field. They uphold the UNEG Ethical
Project
Ethical Guidelines for Guidelines for Evaluation and Code of
Director and
Evaluation Conduct for Evaluation and are fully
Quality
committed to respect them. In particular,
Assurer
they will:
Itad 4 August 2021 181
Be independent, express their opinion in a
free manner and avoid conflict of interest.
protect the anonymity and confidentiality of
individual informants. We will provide
maximum notice, minimise demands on time,
and respect people’s right not to engage. We
will respect respondents’ right to pull out of
interviews at any time. We will respect
people’s right to provide information in
confidence and ensure that sensitive
information cannot be traced to its source
(through data management, analysis,
reporting and dissemination).
Be sensitive to beliefs, manners and customs
and act with integrity and honesty in their
relations with all stakeholders
Project
This is a key QA function. The Project Director,
Challenging the
Director/Quality Assurer will review each Team Leader
deliverables
deliverable and Quality
Stage 3:
Assurer
Quality of Making sure they are
the end written in clear language One of our professional proof-readers will be
Proof-reader
product and contain no typos or proofreading all the deliverables
grammar mistakes
The proof-reader will also carefully edit
Making sure that
deliverables that will be shared with external
deliverables are properly Proof-reader
stakeholders to ensure that they are in the
edited
right format and properly formatted
Throughout the project, the team will be
Securing feedback on seeking feedback from UNICEF on quality of Team Leader
Stage 4:
quality of the project and delivery. Upon project completion, the and Project
Improving the team from Client Project Director will be seeking feedback on Director
quality ex- how to improve our services
post
Upon completion, the project will undergo an Project
Closing the feedback loop – internal Project Review and findings will be Director and
acting on feedback translated in concrete actions and lessons Project
learned for the future Manager
Itad 4 August 2021 182
Itad 4 August 2021 183