Multi-Country Formative and Summative
Evaluation of Elimination of Violence
against Children in Egypt, Jordan and
Lebanon
Final Evaluation Report
Prepared for // Robert Stryk, Senior IOD PARC is the trading name of
Evaluation Manager International Organisation Development Ltd
By // Rima Al-Azar (Team Leader), Sirsa Omega Court
Qursha (Child Protection Specialist), Sherry 362 Cemetery Road
Boutros (Researcher- Egypt), Leen Al Refai Sheffield
(Researcher-Jordan), and Rachelle El- S11 8FT
Hasrouny (Researcher-Lebanon) United Kingdom
Date // 21 June 2021 Tel: +44 (0) 114 267 3620
www.iodparc.com
Table of Contents
Acknowledgements ................................................................................ 1
Acronyms and Abbreviations .................................................................. 1
Executive Summary ................................................................................. i
Objective, intended users, and scope ..................................................................... i
Context .................................................................................................................... i
Methodology ............................................................................................................ i
Key Findings ............................................................................................................ ii
Conclusions ............................................................................................................ iv
Recommendations .................................................................................................. vi
1. Introduction .................................................................................... 1
1.1 Objective ........................................................................................................... 1
1.2 Intended Users.................................................................................................. 1
1.3 Scope................................................................................................................ 2
2. VAC Context in the Three Countries ............................................... 3
2.1 Background ...................................................................................................... 3
2.2 Impact of Covid-19 on Levels of VAC ............................................................... 4
2.3 Violence within the Home ................................................................................. 5
2.4 Emotional Violence and Neglect ....................................................................... 6
2.5 Violence in Schools ........................................................................................... 8
2.6 Bullying ............................................................................................................. 8
2.7 Sexual Violence................................................................................................. 9
2.8 Commercial Sexual Exploitation and Trafficking ............................................ 11
2.9 Online Child Sexual Exploitation (OCSE) ........................................................ 12
3. UNICEF VAC Activities in the Three Countries ............................. 12
3.1 UNICEF EVAC Activities in Egypt ................................................................... 12
3.2 UNICEF EVAC Activities in Jordan ................................................................. 13
3.3 UNICEF EVAC Activities in Lebanon ............................................................... 14
4. Analytical Framework ................................................................... 15
5. Methodological Approach ............................................................ 15
5.1 Quality Assurance Mechanisms ...................................................................... 17
6. Evaluation Challenges, Mitigation Measures and Limitations ....... 18
7. Findings ........................................................................................ 21
7.1 Relevance ....................................................................................................... 21
7.2 Efficiency ........................................................................................................ 36
7.3 Effectiveness ................................................................................................... 45
7.4 Sustainability ................................................................................................... 67
7.5 Gender ............................................................................................................ 73
8. Conclusions.................................................................................. 80
9. Recommendations ....................................................................... 82
Annexes
Annex 1. ToRs of the Evaluation
Annex 2. EVAC Theory of Change
Annex 3. References
Annex 4. Stakeholder Analysis
Annex 5. Mapping of EVAC Interventions in the Three Countries
Annex 6. Evaluation Matrix
Annex 7. Proposed Modifications to EQs
Annex 8. KII Interview Protocol
Annex 9. Evaluation sub-questions per type of stakeholder
Annex 10. List of People Interviewed
Annex 11. Steering Committee Terms of Reference
Annex 12. Research Ethics Approval
Annex 13. Alignment of UNICEF EVAC Interventions with SDGs 5 and 16
Annex 14.
Annex 15.
Children Programme Guidance: Seven Strategies
Annex 16: Global School-Based Student Health Survey
Annex 17. UNICEF Egypt External Communications EVAC Campaigns 2020
Annex 18. Select RAM Indicators 2019-2020
Annex 19. Case Management Indicators in Lebanon
Annex 20. Planned Targets and Results Achieved (SitReps)
Acknowledgements
The Evaluation Team and the staff of IOD PARC wish to express their gratitude to all the
UNICEF staff in Egypt, Jordan and Lebanon who gave their time and insights and helped the
Team to better understand the context and the EVAC activities being implemented in the
three countries. The evaluation was facilitated by the support provided by
East and North Africa Regional Office and by focal points at the Jordan, Lebanon and Egypt
Offices. Special thanks go to the UNICEF staff who assisted the Team in arranging meetings
with key stakeholders and patiently responded to our queries and provided valuable data and
information for analysis. ng
Government representatives, UN agencies, NGOs, and private sector stakeholders who
shared their insights and perspectives.
The Evaluation Team would also like to take the opportunity to convey our gratitude to all
those who contributed to the successful completion of the evaluation. In particular, we thank
participants of the three country debriefings as well as those who provided written comments
for their openness, and feedback which enabled production of a quality evaluation. We
appreciate the support, guidance, and understanding demonstrated by UNICEF COs in
Egypt, Jordan and Lebanon Child Protection and Planning Monitoring and Evaluation teams.
Acronyms and Abbreviations
AWP Annual Workplan
BPP Better Parenting Program
C4D Communication 4 Development
CAPMAS Central Agency for Public Mobilization and Statistics (Egypt)
CEDAW Convention on the Elimination of all Forms of Discrimination Against Women
CETS Child Exploitation Tracking Systems
CMR Clinical Management of Rape
CO Country Office
COAR Country Office Annual Report
CP Child Protection
CPC Child Protection Committee
CPD Country Programme Document
CPIMS Child Protection Information Management System
CP SWG Child Protection Sub-Working Group
CRC Convention on the Rights of the Child
CSO Civil Society Organization
DCPC District Child Protection Committee
DHS Demographic and health Survey
DRC Danish Refugee Council
ECD Early Childhood Development
EDHS Egypt Demographic and Health Survey
EFACC Egyptian Foundation for Advancement of the Childhood Condition
EQ Evaluation Question
ET Evaluation Team
EU European Union
EVAC Elimination of Violence Against Children
FBO Faith Based Organization
FGD Focus Group Discussion
FGM Female Genital Mutilation
FPD Family Protection Department (Jordan)
FVTS Family Violence Tracking System
GBV Gender Based Violence
HCC High Council of Childhood (Lebanon)
HQ Head Quarters
HRBA Human rights-based approach
ICCS Islamic Center Charity Society (Jordan)
ICT Internet and Communications Technology
ILO International Labour Organization
IMAGES International Men and Gender Equality Survey
IMC International medical Corps
IOM International Organization for Migration
IP Implementing Partner
IRC International Refugee Committee
JRF Jordan River Foundation
JWU
KAP Knowledge, Attitude, and Practice
KII Key Informant Interview
LGBTI Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, Transgender and Intersex
M&E Monitoring and Evaluation
MCIT Ministry of Communications and Information Technologies (Egypt)
MEHE Ministry of Education and Higher Education (Lebanon)
MENA Middle East and North Africa
MENARO Middle East and North Africa Regional Office
MICS Multiple Indicator Cluster Survey
MoE Ministry of Education (Jordan)
MoETE Ministry of Education and Technical Education (Egypt)
MoFA Ministry of Foreign Affairs (Egypt)
MoHP Ministry of Health and Population (Egypt)
MoJ Ministry of Justice (Egypt and Lebanon)
MoLD Ministry of Local Development (Egypt)
MoPH Ministry of Public Health (Lebanon)
MoPIC Ministry of Planning and International Cooperation (Jordan)
MoSA Ministry of Social Affairs (Lebanon)
MoSD Ministry of Social Development (Jordan)
MoSS Ministry of Social Solidarity (Egypt)
MoU Memorandum of Understanding
MSC Most Significant Change
NGO Nongovernmental Organization
NCCM National Council for Childhood and Motherhood (Egypt)
NCFA National Council for Family Affairs (Jordan)
NCW National Council for Women (Egypt)
OCSE Online Child Sexual Exploitation
OECD DAC Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development's Development
Assistance Committee
PHC Public Health Center
PER Performance Evaluation Review
PSEA Preventing Sexual Exploitation and Abuse
PSS Psychosocial Support
RAM Result Assessment Module
RFP Request for Proposal
RIMS Referral Information Management System (Lebanon)
RO Regional Office
SADD Sex and age disaggregated data
SBCC Social and behavioural change communication
SC Steering Committee
SDC Social Development Center (Lebanon)
SDG Sustainable Development Goal
SITAN Situation Analysis of Children
SMQ Strategic Monitoring Questions
SOP Standard Operating Procedure
TDHL Terre des Hommes Lausanne
ToC Theory of Change
ToR Terms of Reference
ToT Training of Trainers
UN United Nations
UNEG United Nations Evaluation Group
UNFPA United Nations Population Fund
UNHCR United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
UNICEF
UNODC United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
UNRWA United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
USAID United States Agency for International Development
VAC Violence Against Children
VASyR Vulnerability Assessment of Syrian Refugees
VAW Violence Against Women
WHO World Health Organization
Executive Summary
Objective, intended users, and scope
Multi Country Formative and Summative Evaluation of Elimination of Violence Against
Children (EVAC)
Regional Office (RO) and has the dual objectives of accountability and learning.
The main audience of this report are UNICEF staff in the Middle East and North Africa
Regional Office (MENARO) and the three Country Offices (CO) covered by this evaluation. A
secondary audience will be UNICEF staff in other COs, ROs or in HQ that may have an interest
in the findings of the evaluation to feed into their programming; learn from MENA experiences;
and/or eventually replicate or adapt to their own contexts.
The evaluation covers three countries of the region - Egypt, Jordan and Lebanon. These three
countries were selected because it is where UNICEF has partnered most closely with national
governments in the MENA region to deliver a wide variety of EVAC programmes. It covers all
activities planned and/or implemented during the period between July 2019 and December
2020 that either protect children from violence directly or develop improved responses for
when violence against children occurs.
Context
The MENA region is affected by political instability, economic stresses and demographic
challenges. It is also home to the largest refugee and displacement crisis of modern times;
with a total of 10.5 million Syrian refugees and with the Syrian crisis impacting each one of
the three countries under study differently. The reg
constituting 36 percent of its population according to UNICEF (2017), with more than one
It is home to some of the highest rates of
violent disciplinary methods, with 106 million children (aged 2-14) regularly subjected to
violent discipline in the home and 27 million children having experienced severe physical
punishment; with the odds of boys being subjected to severe punishment being 1.3 times
more likely than girls. Furthermore, the same study found that 80 per cent in the MENA region
had experienced psychological aggression. While the three countries under study have
ratified the Convention on the Rights of the Child (CRC) as well as the Convention on the
Elimination of all Forms of Discrimination Against Women (CEDAW), significant concerns
regarding the protection of children from violence within Egypt, Jordan and Lebanon very
much exist.
Methodology
The evaluation s analytical framework was based on Global Theory of Change for
Programme Guidance (2018). The evaluation was conducted remotely and was based on in-
depth document review and key informant interview with 100 stakeholders. Debriefings were
held with key stakeholders in the three countries to validate the key findings.
Furthermore, the evaluation followed a gender-sensitive and human rights based approach.
It also adhered to the United Nations Evaluation Group (UNEG) ethical standards and norms.
i
The evaluation faced severe limitations due to the COVID-19 pandemic and the team was
was unable to meet with key stakeholders (e.g., government and donor staff) which limited in
some cases the triangulation of information.
Key Findings
Relevance
At the country level,
level of violence against children in the three countries. Its activities are also aligned with
national priorities, strategies and frameworks. At the global level, are
aligned with SDGs 5 (gender equality) and 16 (peace, justice and strong institutions) as well
as Global EVAC Framework. Furthermore,
with six out of the seven Violence Against Children
Programme Guidance document c
Similarly, in the three countries, EVAC initiatives are
generally in line with six out of seven of INSPIRE strategies. However, the evaluation did not
come and economic
Notwithstanding the overall relevance of U in the
three countries, UNICEF did not fully consider the gender dimensions and the specifics for
of violence along the life cycle. Furthermore, EVAC programmes in the three countries were
not fully framed to address violence occurring across all social classes and environments.
Finally, UNICEF displayed its adaptive capacity by quickly responding to the changing
context due to the COVID-19 pandemic in three countries as well as to the Beirut port
explosion in Lebanon.
Efficiency
The evaluation found little evidence that EVAC initiatives use resources in a way that allows
for cost monitoring. Based on an analysis of the funding gaps reported in the SitReps,
financial resources available for Child Protection (CP)1 activities are adequate in Jordan and
Lebanon but insufficient in Egypt. Though EVAC has been identified as one of the
humanitarian financing as a result of the Syria crisis. The evaluation identified several steps
that UNICEF in the three countries implemented to improve the efficiency of programme
delivery, including partnering with national non-governmental organizations (NGOs), reducing
operating costs and sharing information and tools across the three countries.
Notwithstanding these cost-efficient measures, the evaluation noted several issues both
internal and external - that limit the efficiency of EVAC interventions by either increasing the
cost and/or decreasing the number of people reached. These inefficiencies were caused
mostly by COVID-19 related delays, internal UNICEF processes, limited leveraging of
public/private funding, insufficient local capacities and lack of trust among different
stakeholders.
Effectiveness
Overall, the three countries were able to achieve the expected results in 2019. In 2020, and
partly due to the COVID-19 pandemic (and in Lebanon also because of the multiple crises
the country faced in 2019-2020), not all the planned results were met. There is some evidence
outlined in the Global EVAC Theory of Change (ToC). Children/adolescents and caregivers
1 Financial information specific to EVAC was not available.
ii
have gained greater
behaviours have changed. At the institutional level, UNICEF supported the development of
Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs), Clinical Management of Rape (CMR), the rolling out
of the CPIMS/FVTS and capacity building of government staff. At the level of legal and
political frameworks, the changes included the development of an EVAC strategy in Egypt, a
Child Protection, Social and Behavioural Change Communications (SBCC), and sectoral
strategies in Lebanon, and amendments to laws in Jordan. Limited evidence exists that
changes occurred at the society/community and social norms levels. Several factors
contributed or hindered progress towards achieving the expected results. These include (i)
the existence of processes that increase commitment, ownership and buy-in, integration of
EVAC into other sectors, and mechanisms that provide incentives and ensure accountability;
(ii) the capacity levels of all stakeholders, including staff of UNICEF, Implementing Partners
(IPs) and government; and (iii) external factors, including the crises, funding and existence of
multiple Helplines which render coordination and collaboration more difficult.
From the information made available, the evaluation concluded that UNICEF COs would be
able to monitor results disaggregated by gender, nationality, age, disability, geographic area,
but it is not clear (i) to what extent this is being done, and (ii) to what extent this can be done
across all interventions, i.e., some intervention results may be disaggregated by gender but
not by nationality, some may be disaggregated by age, and others by disability or geographic
location. Furthermore, though there are several M&E reports that provide information
regarding EVAC interventions, not all were made available to the Evaluation Team (e.g.,
CPMIS and GBVIMS). As a result, the evaluation was unable to determine the extent to which
they are being used to effectively measure progress in achieving planned results and to guide
programme implementation.
The evaluation identified five unplanned effects of the EVAC interventions in the countries
under study. Two had unintended positive consequences: (i) wide acceptance by caretakers
of receiving psychosocial support remotely during COVID-19 and (ii) greater ease in involving
men through online means. Three had unintended negative impacts and they include (i)
overwhelming the Child Helpline as a result of a successful social media campaign in Egypt;
(ii) several repercussions due to target setting by nationality in Lebanon; and (iii) resentment
due to targeting only teachers in the programme in Jordan. In addition, the evaluation
identified two initiatives that would merit deeper analysis and an assessment how they could
develop impact at the national, regional and possibly global level. They are: (i) delivering
prevention and response services remotely; and (ii) addressing EVAC through leveraging the
power and influence of religious leaders, which is a necessary approach to achieve change
in societal norms in the region. In addition, case management would merit an in-depth
assessment which would analyse in-take, referral, case resolution, coordination and the roll
out of the CPIMS.
UNICEF in the three countries has coordinated with different government institutions, UN
agencies, NGOs and the private sector which has contributed to achieving the expected
results. However, there is a missed opportunity for greater coordination and collaboration
with UN Women, especially to carry out high-level advocacy as well as to better integrate
VAC and Violence Against Women (VAW) interventions. The extent of internal coordination
and complementarity varies between one sector and another, with the greatest integration
taking place between the Child Protection and Education sectors within UNICEF.
Sustainability
Existence of national legal frameworks in Egypt, which has a National Child Law, and, in
Jordan, which Juvenile Laws, contributes to long-
term sustainability. However, Lebanon still does not have a unified national framework to
iii
address EVAC since family and personal status laws are regulated by religious courts. Due
to their institutional setup which limits their leverage, the National Council for Childhood and
Motherhood (NCCM-Egypt), the National Council for Family Affairs (NCFA-Jordan) and the
High Council of Childhood (HCC-Lebanon) are limited in their abilities to ensure multisectoral
coordination. In terms of financial sustainability, the evaluation identified two national
strategies (Egypt and Jordan) that were costed and none which has been included in the
national budget. The lack of outcome level data did not allow the evaluation to assess the
extent of changes in attitudes and behaviour and even less their sustainability. Sustainability
of direct interventions varies among the three countries and is a function of several factors,
including institutional arrangements, continuity of funding, and sufficient human and technical
capacities. Finally, the evaluation identified four initiatives that could be replicable and/or
scalable: (i) partnering with the private sector in Egypt which can be leveraged in other
countries in the region; (ii) conducting monthly online surveys in Jordan; (iii) provision of
integrated services at the community level in Jordan; and, potentially, (iv) mainstreaming
EVAC within municipalities in Lebanon.
Gender
There is inconclusive evidence on the extent to which UNICEF COs are using gender
considerations in the design of EVAC response and prevention activities. At the
implementation level, the three COs are supporting several initiatives which have a strong
gender dimension at different levels, however there is room for enhanced gender
mainstreaming by (i) targeting male caregivers, (ii) supporting boy victims of violence; (iii)
enha ; (iv) partnering with UN Women; (v) linking gender-
related EVAC interventions with other sectors; and (vi) strengthening collaboration between
the response (case management) and prevention (psychosocial support, parenting
programmes, social and behavioural change communication) at the community level. In terms
of monitoring, sex-disaggregated data is being collected through the different case
management information systems as well as through the Helplines though this is not captured
in the formal reports in a systematic manner.
Conclusions
Conclusion 1
with national child protection and EVAC strategies and are relevant to the context in the three
countries, given the high level of VAC.
Conclusion 2 (based on Finding 4).
allows its partners in each country to
with all stakeholders. While UNICEF COs have responded to the multiple crises in the last
emergency situations. UNICEF in Egypt has developed an EVAC ToC; however, Jordan does
not have an EVAC-specific ToC and Lebanon has an outdated one.
Conclusion 3 (based on Findings 9 and 10). UNICEF has successfully adapted its
interventions to the changing context and needs due to multiple crises in the three countries.
However, there is room for increasing the relevance of activities for specific target groups
(e.g., adolescents, children who attend private schools, male caretakers, etc.).
Conclusion 4 (based on Findings 11, 12 and 13). UNCEF has received substantial resources
to respond to the Syria crisis in the three countries which has provided an opportunity to
strengthen EVAC national systems. However, insufficient information was available to assess
iv
the ability of UNICEF to carry out cost-monitoring of its activities or to analyze the efficiency
of UNICEF funding, particularly regarding awareness raising and prevention efforts.
Conclusion 5 (based on Findings 14 and 15). Although UNICEF is taking concrete steps to
improve efficiency across programme delivery, particularly in areas related to reducing
operational costs, enhancing cross sectoral collaboration and strengthening service delivery
of national NGOs, duplication of services/programming, use of multiple data tracking
systems decrease the efficiency of the systems. A significant opportunity exists which is not
being utilized fully for sharing experiences and resources among the three countries.
Conclusion 6 (based Findings 16 and 17). Overall, the three countries were able to achieve
their planned results in 2019 and were affected by the COVID-19 pandemic in 2020 which
slowed down implementation. UNICEF-Lebanon experienced additional crises that had an
impact on its results. Nevertheless, there is some evidence that UNICEF in the three countries
has contributed to changes at the different levels of society, most significantly at the level of
children and their caregivers.
Conclusion 7 (based on Findings 19, 20, 21 and 22). While several prevention activities are
designed using evidence-based approaches, response interventions are less grounded on
evidence-based methods. There are multiple reports and approaches that could be used to
assess progress. However, there was little evidence that UNICEF COs have capitalized on
these reports to inform programme implementation and monitor their effectiveness in
reducing violence (or the risk factors associated with violence).
Conclusion 8 (based on Findings 25 and 26). UNICEF is coordinating with several external
stakeholders through the CP Sub-Working Group coordination meetings and/or through
technical task forces. In addition, the COs have a strong collaboration with several NGOs
(especially, Lebanon) and the private sector (in particular, Egypt). Nevertheless, there are
unexplored opportunities to strengthen external collaboration with UN Women, WHO and the
private sector. Internally, UNICEF CP Sector coordinates mostly with the Education and
Communications for Development (C4D) Sectors and there is unused potential to do joint
programming with the Youth, Health and Social Protection Sectors.
Conclusion 9 (based on Findings 27 and 28). There are elements of sustainability in place
(e.g., legal frameworks, varying degrees of multi-sectoral coordination and political
commitment), however there are still several issues that need to be addressed in order to
ensure long-term sustainability (e.g., inclusion of EVAC costs in national budgets and
strengthening multi-sectoral coordination). Furthermore, and more importantly than a costing
exercise, there is a need to develop a detailed financing strategy which would present the
business case for EVAC and would include an assessment of the cost of inaction. None of
the EVAC programmes, with the exception of the Programme in Jordan, have
developed an articulated exit or sustainability strategy.
Conclusion 10 (based on Findings 30 and 31). Insufficient information is available to assess
the sustainability of changes in attitudes and behaviours. Without creating such deep-seated
changes in society as a whole and shifting social norms, the long-term sustainability of EVAC
intervention will not be assured. Sustainability of direct interventions varies among the three
countries and depends on several factors, including institutional, financial, technical and
human capacities, and effective case management systems.
Conclusion 11 (based on Findings UNICEF Jordan and Lebanon have endeavored to link
emergency response with a longer-term development approach, by implementing both
response and prevention activities and supporting systems strengthening. However, heavy
reliance on humanitarian funding jeopardises the sustainability, scalability and replicability of
interventions.
Conclusion 12 (based on Findings 33, 34, 35 and 36). Several UNICEF EVAC interventions
have integrated gender considerations in their design and implementation. However, gender
v
mainstreaming was not systematically carried out at the three levels of assessments/design,
implementation and, especially M&E.
Conclusion 13 (based on Findings 13 and 29). UNICEF, especially in Jordan and Lebanon,
has opportunistically used the humanitarian funding received due to the Syria crisis to
implement EVAC interventions targeting both refugees and host communities as well as to
build national capacities. This was an occasion to generate awareness regarding EVAC and
how the three COs are strategically pl
national systems in order to make it sustainable.
Recommendations
Recommendation 1. Continue to build on and strengthen existing EVAC programming at
the country level by (i) developing a multi-sectoral strategy for integrating EVAC along the
life-cycle and link it to social protection interventions (in Egypt and Lebanon); (ii) enhancing
integration within CP Sector (e.g., better parenting, case management, GBV) and with other
UNICEF Sectors (Youth, Health, Social Protection); (iii) developing an updated EVAC ToC (in
Jordan and Lebanon) to guide EVAC interventions in a strategic way, even when short-term
response to immediate crises may warrant some adaptations; share the ToC with government
and IPs; (iv) continuing to support the strengthening of national systems at the national and
decentralized levels by building capacities of front-line staff working on EVAC; (v) reviewing
the case management/response services in order to ensure that capacities to respond and
provide services meet demand generated by SBCC campaigns; and (vi) further aligning
.
Recommendation 2. Implement credible and consistent monitoring and reporting of
EVAC interventions (programmatic and financial) by (i) putting in place systems to carry out
both cost-monitoring and outcome monitoring of interventions per IP in order to improve
efficiency and assess effectiveness; (ii) applying in a consistent manner (across indicators
and countries) the self-rating in RAM reports; (iii) including SADD in RAM reports (tabular
form) to ensure ease in monitoring, consistency from year to year and capture differences
between children and adolescents and gender; (iv) including disability disaggregated
indicators by integrating the Washington Group Questions into existing data collection
systems; (v) defining measurable behavioural targets and monitor SBCC and social media
campaigns in a consistent way; (vi) assessing the impact of promising EVAC interventions
and share information/lessons learned at the regional level; (vii) building the capacity of M&E
staff for identifying and measuring appropriate indicators, collecting and analyzing data, and
improving RAM reports (self-ratings and data disaggregation); and (viii) avoiding target setting
by nationality in order to minimize unintended consequences and adhere to the humanitarian
.
-
term sustainability by (i) supporting and strengthening multi-sectoral coordination
mechanisms at the national level (NCCM, NCFA and HCC) in order to deliver through and
with other partners; (ii) developing an EVAC financial strategy and continue advocacy efforts
for inclusion of EVAC into national budgets and expand partnerships to Ministries of Planning
and Finance; while showcasing social cost of inaction regarding VAC; (iii) initiating
discussions and collaborate in co-design with governmental counterparts to manage
expectations and integrate exit strategies within programme planning; (iv) advocating for the
inclusion of EVAC criteria into accreditation processes and ensure the integration of EVAC
modules and SOPs into the formal training of social workers, teachers and public health staff;
vi
(v) expanding partnerships with community-based organizations to ensure sustainability and
better coverage of service provision; Require UNICEF IPs to partner with CSOs (especially in
Lebanon); (vi) continuing to roll-out the CPIMS ensuring complementarity and inter-
operability with the Ministry of Social Solidarity
developing further the FVTS and integrating the CPIMS and GBVIMS into it (Jordan);
expanding the number of IPs using the CPIMS and build trust among the different partners
in order to institutionalize the case management system in the three countries (Lebanon); and
(vii) developing, implementing and monitoring programmes that address social norms and
cultural attitudes in order to ensure long-term change.
Recommendation 4. Strengthen gender mainstreaming throughout EVAC programming
by (i) ensuring that formative research includes gender aspects and provides operational
recommendations on how to include gender into programme design and implementation; (ii)
addressing gender issues in EVAC programme implementation, especially for increasing
participation of male caregivers; providing Gender-Based Violence (GBV) support to boys;
and clarifying the differences between VAC and GBV; (iii) strengthening partnerships with UN
Women and NGOs who work on gender issues to carry out joint advocacy efforts; (iv)
partnering with National Women Councils and leveraging their high profile to advocate for
GBV and VAC-related legislation, policies, etc.; (v) strengthening programmatic linkages
between family violence and VAC; (vi) monitoring systematically gender-disaggregated
indicators in order to assess progress (Egypt); (vi) building the capacity of UNICEF,
government and IP staff on gender-responsive/ transformative programming; (vii) including
organizing a workshop to disseminate and discuss the ways to operationalize in each country
Gender Dimensions of Violence Against Children
.
Recommendation 5. Share experiences, tools, lessons learnt at the regional level by (i)
developing an e-library which includes key documents (e.g., SOPs, Codes of Conduct,
Strategies, COVID-19 response approaches, digital tools, etc.) which can be accessed by all
countries in the region; (ii) organizing on a quarterly basis and based on CO interest, technical
seminars to share experiences and lessons learned (e.g., partnering with the private sector,
working with Faith-Based Organizations, case management systems, online violence, etc.);
(iii) providing technical guidance on designing innovative M&E for SBCC interventions, in
particular to capture changes in attitudes and practices; (iv) providing technical support to
develop new indicators based on the revised Global Strategic Plan; (v) developing the
integrating EVAC into sectoral interventions (education, health, social
protection) which can be used for both high-level advocacy as well as for mobilizing
resources; and (vi) carrying out a deeper assessment of some of the promising interventions
identified by this evaluation.
vii
1. Introduction
In the Middle East and North Africa (MENA) region, UNICEF has developed several
programmes, action plans, and interventions to end violence against children (EVAC). The
governments to establish and run initiatives that correspond to Global EVAC
theory of change. The form that this support takes varies from country to country
depending upon national institutional and financial capacity, local context, and other
Multi Country Formative and Summative Evaluation of Elimination of
has been commissioned by
.
1.1 Objective
with the dual objectives of accountability
and learning. It is intended to examine the extent to which UNICEF has supported high-
level, national government efforts to implement data / research-informed EVAC
programming. This exercise is a starting point for the UNICEF Regional Office to analyse
how it can best support national efforts to EVAC in the region, identify opportunities for
evidence generation, and implement strategy and programme improvements at the
regional level. The evaluation is the first in a series of research and strategy exercises that
will take place in the UNICEF regional office over the short term as UNICEF refines its
regional EVAC strategy.
1.2 Intended Users
As mentioned above, the main audience of this report are UNICEF staff in the Regional
Office (RO) and the three Country Offices (CO) covered by this evaluation. In particular,
the Child Protection, EVAC and Gender Specialists will be able to use the
findings and recommendations as a basis to assess their interventions and as an
opportunity to re-orient or scale up their programming based on findings and conclusions.
UNICEF Regional Management Team made EVAC one of its five regional areas of
acceleration. The evaluation will inform the work in accelerating action to end
violence against children. Furthermore, and per the Terms of Reference (ToRs, see Annex
1), a specific use for this evaluation is a regional network meeting on child protection
planned to be held in the near future.
A network meeting on child protection is planned to improve the regional understanding of best
practices and to inform coordination initiatives. The meeting will cover the results of this
evaluation as well as findings from recent systematic reviews about strategies to prevent and
respond to EVAC. One focus of this meeting will be a discussion of the evidence about the
intersections between EVAC and violence against women in the region, with the goal of
identifying possible opportunities for collaboration across these domains.
1
A secondary audience will be UNICEF staff in other COs, ROs or in HQ that may have an
interest in the findings of the evaluation to feed into their programming; learn from MENA
experiences; and/or eventually replicate or adapt to their own contexts.
National governments, where the interventions are being implemented, will also benefit
from the evaluation findings and recommendations which can be used for learning
purposes and, eventually, to adapt their own programmes in line with the findings. Other
UN Agencies, Non-Governmental Organizations (NGOs) and Civil Society Organizations
(CSOs) in the field of gender-based violence and child protection may also have an
y lead to future
collaborations.
Finally, this evaluation could be of interest to donors and implementing partners, both
governmental and non-governmental, as well as beneficiaries and communities, as a
mechanism to strengthen transparency and share experiences and identify lessons
learned.
1.3 Scope
Geographical scope. The evaluation covers three countries of the region - Egypt, Jordan
and Lebanon. These three countries were selected because it is where UNICEF has
partnered most closely with national governments in the MENA region to deliver a wide
variety of EVAC programmes.
Period covered. The evaluation covers all activities planned and/or implemented during
the period between July 2019 and December 2020 that either protect children from
violence directly or develop improved responses for when violence against children
occurs2.
Focus of the evaluation. As presented in the Inception Report and approved by the
Steering Committee, the evaluation has assessed
did not evaluate
, as originally stated in the ToRs but amended at
inception stage.
Definition of VAC for the purpose of this evaluation. The definition used for the purpose
of this evaluation is aligned with three key UNICEF documents: (i) the UNICEF Global
Evaluation3, (ii) A Familiar Face: Violence in the lives of children and adolescents4, and
(iii) the draft Expanded Guidance on Preventing and Responding to Violence Against
Children which focus on four specific forms of violence: violent discipline and exposure
to domestic abuse during early childhood; violence at school; violent deaths among
adolescents; and sexual violence in childhood and adolescence.
examined EVAC in the family/household, in/around schools and online. This included:
• Sexual violence5 of all types: incest; abuse in communities, schools, residential care;
and commercial sexual exploitation.
2 This included initiatives planned earlier but still implemented during the past 18 months
3
Programme Performance
4 UNICEF (2017). A Familiar Face: Violence in the lives of children and adolescents, UNICEF, New York, 2017
5 Sexual violence would include all forms of abuse including rape, molestation, and involving children in
commercial sexual exploitation (prostitution, pornography of all types)
2
• Physical violence: beatings and other forms of domestic violence; corporal
punishment in schools and residential care; and infanticide.
• Psychological violence: humiliating threats and discipline; bullying; other degrading
treatment; and forcing children to perpetrate acts of violence in any setting.
• Deliberate neglect and/or maltreatment by the caregiver6, including deliberate
danger, and/or obtain medical or other services despite financial or other means
available7. Although included in the scope was not assessed because as foreseen
in the Inception Report - there was limited information regarding activities addressing
2. VAC Context in the Three Countries
2.1 Background
The Middle East and North Africa (MENA) region is affected by political instability,
economic stresses and demographic challenges. It is also home to the largest refugee
and displacement crisis of modern times; with a total of 10.5 million Syrian refugees8 and
with the Syrian crisis impacting each one of the three countries under study differently.
percent of its population
according to UNICEF (2017), with m
Egypt alone.9 Within the region, available data on Violence Against Children (VAC) and
its manifestations are scarce; yet it is home to some of the highest rates of violent
disciplinary methods, with 106 million children (aged 2-14) regularly subjected to violent
discipline in the home10 and 27 million children having experienced severe physical
punishment; with the odds of boys being subjected to severe punishment being 1.3 times
more likely than girls11.
While the three countries under study have ratified the Convention on the Rights of the
Child (CRC) as well as the Convention on the Elimination of all Forms of Discrimination
Against Women (CEDAW), significant concerns regarding the protection of children from
violence within Egypt, Jordan and Lebanon very much exist. Egypt suffers from grave
child protection concerns on a considerable scale and in response, the National Council
for Childhood and Motherhood (NCCM) with the technical input of UNICEF developed a
National Plan of Action on Ending Violence Against Children (EVAC) based on the
strategic priorities identified in the National Strategic Framework for Ending Violence
against Children, which was endorsed in 201812. While advancements have been made
6 Neglect is included however the team is aware that there is very little information/interventions regarding this
form of violence.
7 UN General Assembly, Report of the independent expert for the United Nations study on violence against
children, Sixty-first session, United Nations, New York, 2006
8 UNICEF MENARO (2019). Regional Office Annual Report. [online] Available at:
<https://www.unicef.org/about/annualreport/files/MENA-2019-ROAR.pdf> [Accessed 28 November 2020].
9 UNICEF (2017). Progress for Children with Equity in the MENA. [online] Available at:
<https://www.unicef.org/mena/sites/unicef.org.mena/files/2018-02/Progress_for_Children_in_MENA_Web.pdf?
[Accessed 2 December 2020]
10 UNICEF (2020). Ending Violence Against Children. MENARO Orientation on Child Protection; gender-
disaggregated information not provided.
11 UNICEF (2019). Violent Discipline in the Middle East and North Africa Region (MENA)
12 NCCM (2018). Ending Violence Against Children. Plan of Action for the National Strategic Framework
3
to protect children from violence, particularly at the legislative level13, significant needs
remain and a national multi-sectoral response to VAC is still necessary14.
Jordan has made significant strides in addressing VAC. Legislative milestones and
advancements in child protection have taken place since the development of the National
Strategy for Family Protection15, the endorsement of the National Framework for Family
Protection in 2007 (updated in 2016)16 and the establishment of multiple prevention and
response services among governmental and non-governmental organizations17. Yet, the
overall child protection system continues to be weak; VAC continues to be socially
condoned and an enforcement of laws can be challenged by social, cultural and
economic constraints18. Additionally, significant legal reform is still necessary and, while
Jordan has ratified the CRC, it has yet to pass a childhood law codifying key provisions
of the Convention19.
A wide range of political, social and economic factors have contributed to the increased
vulnerability of children in Lebanon. These factors are further exacerbated by the Syrian
refugee crisis. Lebanon continues to host the highest number of refugees per capita on a
global level, of which 630,000 are refugee children (aged between 3 and 18 years of age)20.
Children in Lebanon are being exposed to violence in its various forms, whether in the
home, or as child laborers or in instances of child marriage. A WHO survey (2017) revealed
that 47 percent of children reported that their parents/guardians understood their
problems and worries; thus reflecting a lack of emotional support amongst parents
towards their children21. Variations between male and female child respondents were
minor, with males reporting their parents understood their problems at 46 percent and
females at 48 percent22. The Vulnerability Assessment of Syrian Refugees (VASyR) 2020
report also revealed that 57 percent of Syrian refugee children have experienced violent
discipline with 48 percent of caregivers reporting using psychological violence and 43
percent reporting the use of physical violence with the highest rates of violence being
reported in the Bekaa governorate23.
2.2 Impact of Covid-19 on Levels of VAC
In addition to the above-mentioned regional context, in 2020, the global pandemic has
protection concerns. A recent UNICEF regional study (conducted in seven countries,
which included Egypt and Jordan) revealed an increase in the use of violent disciplinary
practices (shouting, screaming) by parents as well as an increase (albeit to a lower extent)
13 UNICEF (2018). Ending Violence Against Children in Egypt. National Strategic Framework
14 Ibid
15 NCFA (2005). National Strategy for Family Protection
16 UNICEF (2017). Situation Analysis of Children in Jordan
17 NCFA (2016). National Council for Family Affairs. (2016, March 7). NCFA updates the National Framework for
Family Protection against Violence. Retrieved from National Council for Family Affairs:
http://ncfa.org.jo:85/NCFA/en/content/NCFA-updates-National-Framework-FamilyProtection-against-Violence
18 Unicef.org. 2020. Child Protection. [online] Available at: < https://www.unicef.org/jordan/child-protection >
[Accessed 29 November 2020]
19 Committee on the Rights of the Child, 2014
20 Unicef.org. 2020. Child Protection. [Online] Available at: < https://www.unicef.org/lebanon/child-protection >
[Accessed 29 November 2020]; gender-disaggregated information not provided on number of male and female
child refugees.
21 WHO (2017). Global School-based Student Health Survey Lebanon 2017 Fact Sheet
22 Ibid
23 UNICEF, UNHCR and WFP (2021). Vulnerability Assessment of Syrian Refugees in Lebanon
4
in physical violence (hitting and spanking)24. The same study also revealed that the stress
and anxiety as a result of lockdowns and economic hardships also increased the risk of
domestic violence25, which also leaves children vulnerable to witnessing violence. In an
assessment on the social and economic impact of COVID-19 on children and youth in
Jordan, results revealed that 65 percent of parents surveyed expressed an increase in
use of physical punishment as a result of the COVID-19 lockdown and 40 percent of
households reported children experiencing both psychological and physical violence with
higher rates of violence being reported in female headed households (56 percent) and in
Syrian homes (53 percent) and in larger households, (8+ family members) (at 44 percent)26.
2.3 Violence within the Home
Within the region, the prevalence of violent discipline is 84 percent with 80 percent of
children experiencing psychological aggression and 70 percent of children experiencing
physical punishment27. While gender disaggregated information for the three countries is
limited within the regional studies, the data suggests that both sex and age of children
pose important risk factors, with boys ages five to nine years being particularly vulnerable
to physical abuse28.
According to a 2019 regional UNICEF report, over 90 percent of children in Egypt are
exposed to some form of violent discipline at home29. This finding was consistent with
statistics revealed from a 2014 Egypt Demographic and Health Survey (EDHS), which
revealed that 93 percent of children between the ages of 1 and 14 were exposed to violent
disciplinary practices at home30; with no significant difference between girls and boys31.
Additionally, the UNICEF study revealed that 40 percent of children ages 2-14 are
exposed to severe physical punishment.32 Furthermore, the EDHS 2014 estimated that
approximately 91 percent of children experienced psychological aggression while 78
percent experienced physical punishment, with no significant difference between boys
and girls, with the prevalence of physical punishment being the highest amongst children
ages 5-9 years of age33.
24 UNICEF (2020). The impact of COVID-19 on children in the MENA. [Online] Available at:
<https://reliefweb.int/sites/reliefweb.int/files/resources/Impact%20of%20COVID%20on%20Children-
Snapshot%20report.pdf%20.pdf>[Accessed 3 December 2020]. No gender -disaggregated information
available
25 UNICEF (2020). The impact of COVID-19 on children in the MENA. [Online] Available at:
<https://reliefweb.int/sites/reliefweb.int/files/resources/Impact%20of%20COVID%20on%20Children-
Snapshot%20report.pdf%20.pdf>[Accessed 3 December 2020]
26 UNICEF (2020). Socio-Economic Assessment of Children and Youth in the time of COVID-19 Jordan [Online]
Available at:
<https://www.unicef.org/jordan/media/3041/file/Socio%20Economic%20Assessment.pdf>[Accessed 3
December 2020]
27 UNICEF (2020). Ending Violence Against Children. MENARO Orientation on Child Protection. No gender
disaggregated information is provided
28 UNICEF (2019). Violent Discipline in the Middle East and North Africa Region
29 UNICEF (2019). Violent Discipline in the Middle East and North Africa Region. No gender disaggregated
information is provided per country
30 Ministry of Health and Population (2018). Ending Violence Against Children: Plan for Action for the National
Strategic Framework, Egypt (2020-2030)
31 Prevalence rate of 93.4 percent for males and 92.6% for females
32 UNICEF (2019). Violent Discipline in the Middle East and North Africa Region. No gender disaggregated
information is provided for this statistic in Egypt
33 Ministry of Health and Population [Egypt], El-Zanaty and Associates [Egypt], and ICF International. 2015.
Egypt Demographic and Health Survey 2014. Cairo, Egypt and Rockville, Maryland, USA: Ministry of Health and
Population and ICF International
5
children aged 1-14 years had experienced violent discipline in the month preceding the
study; with almost 83 percent being male and 80 percent being female. Additionally, 76
percent experienced psychological aggression (78 percent for males and 74 percent for
females), 59 percent experienced physical punishment (61 percent for males and 57
percent for females), and 13 percent experienced a type of severe physical punishment
(at prevalence rates of 14 percent for males and 11 percent for female children)34.
Similarly, in 2019, UNICEF estimated that approximately 90 percent of children aged 2-
14 were exposed to some form of violent discipline at home, while over 40 percent of
children aged 2-14 were subjected to severe physical punishment35. Regarding attitudes
and outlook on VAC in Jordan, significant awareness raising efforts are still needed, with
47 percent of parents believing it is sometimes important to use corporal punishment at
home as a method of discipline36.
In Lebanon, results of a study from World Vision in Lebanon revealed that the prevalence
of Violent Child Discipline of Lebanese parents is 27.8 percent37.
revealed that approximately 60 percent of children aged 2-14 are exposed to some form
of violent discipline within the home, and over 50 percent of children aged 2-14 are
subjected to physical punishment, while less than 15 percent of children of the same age
group are exposed to severe physical punishment38. According to the study, it is worth
highlighting, violent discipline is less common within Lebanese households than in
refugee groups residing in Lebanon39; a finding which may have important implications
on the customization of service design and delivery within the country. More specifically,
and according to the results of a household survey conducted by UNICEF in 2016, 82
percent of Palestinian refugees in Lebanon, 77 percent of Palestinian refugees from Syria,
65 percent of Syrians and 57 percent of Lebanese children in the age group of 1-14 years
have been exposed to at least one form of physical or psychological punishment by
household members during the past month of conducting the survey￼40 2017 UNICEF
Knowledge, Attitude, and Practice (KAP) study in Lebanon revealed that 71 percent of
to hit children41; leaving room for deliberation on the gap that exists between parental
perceptions/attitudes and actual parental practices.
2.4 Emotional Violence and Neglect
of data on emotional violence and neglect - which is not limited to the three countries
included in this evaluation - due to the challenges in measuring it42. In Egypt, a national
study reported that 86 percent of children experienced emotional violence during the year
34
35 UNICEF (2019). Violent Discipline in the Middle East and North Africa Region. No gender disaggregated
information is provided for this statistic in Jordan
36 UNICEF (2007). Violence against Children Study in Jordan. Gender disaggregated information on this finding
is not presented
37 World Vision (2019). Violent Child Discipline in Lebanon. [Online] Available at:
https://www.wvi.org/sites/default/files/2019-09/Violent%20Child%20Discipline%20-
%20WVL%20Full%20Report.pdf [Accessed May 25 2020]
38 UNICEF (2019). Violent Discipline in the Middle East and North Africa Region. No gender disaggregated
information is provided for these statistics in Lebanon
39 Knowledge to Policy Center (2018). Briefing Note: Strengthening Child Protection Practices in Healthcare
Institutions in Lebanon. No gender-disaggregated information is provided
41 UNICEF (2020). Underneath the Surface: Understanding the root causes of violence against children and
women in Lebanon
42 UNICEF (2014). Hidden in Plain Sight: A statistical analysis of violence against children.
6
preceding the study. The same study also revealed that within the home, 65 percent of
boys and 82 percent of girls reported emotional abuse (in the form of verbal abuse) in
Cairo43. In Alexandria the rates for emotional violence were 60 percent for boys and 73
percent for girls while it was 62 percent for boys and 77 percent for girls in Assiut.
Additionally, 25 percent of children surveyed in Alexandria and Cairo and 10 percent in
Assiut reported that they had experienced neglect; yet no gender disaggregated
information on neglect was reported44.
Data on neglect in Jordan is extremely limited and outdated. Statistics from 2007 reveal
that 37 percent of 2,402 cases dealt with by the Social Services Offices were those of
neglect45. In a recent rapid assessment conducted in Jordan, 56 percent of parents
reported using psychological violence against their children during lockdown as a result
of COVID-1946.
In Lebanon, a study conducted by Insan Association revealed that 39 percent of children
surveyed reported being neglected by their parent/caregiver, with the most prevalent type
citing no significant gender associations reported to neglect47. Comparatively, only 24.7
percent of parents reported they neglected their children48. A study conducted by World
Vision in Lebanon in 2019 revealed interesting findings related to attitudes towards
emotional abuse and neglect. The study highlighted that 24 percent of parents did not
consider screaming at their children as a form of violence, 13 percent did not define
neglect as violence and 9 percent did not consider emotional abuse as a form of
violence49. Another study carried out by WHO revealed that 48 percent of children (40
percent male and 55 percent female) reported that their parents/guardians always really
knew what they were doing with their free time during the 30 days before the survey50 thus
outlook on parental attention. Also
within Lebanon, migrant children experienced higher rates of neglect than their Lebanese
counterparts; with a response rate of 68 percent of children of documented migrants and
31 percent of children of undocumented migrants feeling neglected by their parents. The
study attributed higher rates of neglect experienced by migrant children as being due to
from their children51.
43 NCCM-UNICEF (2015). Violence against Children in Egypt Quantitative Survey and Qualitative Study in
Cairo, Alexandria and Assiut
44 NCCM-UNICEF (2015). Violence against Children in Egypt Quantitative Survey and Qualitative Study in
Cairo, Alexandria and Assiut
45 UNICEF (2007). Violence against Children Study in Jordan. No gender-disaggregated information is provided.
46 UNICEF (2020). UNICEF study highlights plight of children and youth in Jordan during COVID-19 Jordan
Online] Available at: https://www.unicef.org/jordan/press-releases/unicef-study-highlights-plight-children-and-
youth-jordan-during-covid-19 [Accessed 3 December 2020]. No gender-disaggregated information is provided.
47 Insan Association (2014). Unprotected Childhood: The Experience of Lebanese and Non-Lebanese Children
in Abuse, Maltreatment & Discrimination in Lebanon. Online] Available at:
<https://resourcecentre.savethechildren.net/sites/default/files/documents/unprotected-childhood-report-
insan.pdf>[Accessed 3 December 2020]
48 Ibid
49 World Vision. (2019). Violent Child Discipline in Lebanon. [Online] Available at:
https://www.wvi.org/sites/default/files/2019-09/Violent%20Child%20Discipline%20-
%20WVL%20Full%20Report.pdf [Accessed May 25 2020]
50 WHO (2017). Global School-based Student Health Survey Lebanon 2017 Fact Sheet
51 Ibid
7
2.5 Violence in Schools
While corporal punishment in schools is prohibited by law in Egypt, Jordan and Lebanon,
the incidence of violence is still high and - in the instances when it is reported it is
seldom addressed52. In Egypt, according to a joint study by NCCM and UNICEF, almost
half the children have experienced physical violence in school, which was mainly
associated with child-to-child violence, and then followed by disciplinary physical
punishment by teachers53. The study also revealed some gender disparities; with boys
in Alexandria (82 percent) and Cairo (83 percent), reporting they experienced more
violence from teachers/ school workers than their female counterparts54. In the same
study, 35 percent of surveyed teachers found physical violence to be acceptable, despite
a smaller percentage reporting they resorted to it. The study also showed that the majority
of teachers felt that it is up to the teacher to decide whether corporal punishment is
appropriate in a specific situation or not55.
In Jordanian schools, the prevalence of physical violence was as follows: 18 percent in
Ministry of Education (MoE) public schools, 5 percent in UNRWA schools, 16 percent in
schools for Syrians, and 17 percent in military schools while the prevalence of verbal
violence in schools was higher in each of the types of schools with a rate of 29 percent in
MoE public schools, 11 percent in UNRWA schools, 28 percent in Schools for Syrians
and 24 percent in military schools56.
In a Lebanese study (2012) which involved 1,177 school children, it was found that more
than 76 percent had experienced physical abuse, with male students being more likely to
have experienced physical abuse than female students and 81 percent had experienced
emotional abuse at least once at school (with the male gender being significantly
associated with emotional abuse)57. According to a survey conducted by WHO in 2017,
37.5 percent of children aged 13-17 reported being seriously injured at least once in the
past year, with males reporting higher rates at 44 percent to female children at 32
percent58.
2.6 Bullying
The incidence of bullying in Egypt, Jordan and Lebanon varies within each country. In
Egypt, one in every three children experience bullying on a regular basis and, according
to the UNICEF-NCCM study, 29-47 percent of children reported physical violence
amongst friends59. In Jordan, the literature is quite dated. Yet a 2007 study revealed
52 NCCM and UNICEF (2015). Violence against Children in Egypt Quantitative Survey and Qualitative Study in
Cairo, Alexandria and Assiut
53 NCCM and UNICEF (2015). Violence Against Children in Egypt Quantitative Survey and Qualitative Study in
Cairo, Alexandria and Assiut
54 Ibid
55 As cited in the 2020-2030 Plan for Action for the National Strategic Framework
56
gender-disaggregated information is provided for prevalence amongst males and females in the various
categories of schools.
57 Bcheraoui, C. E., Kouriye, H., & Adib, S. M. (2012). Physical and verbal/emotional abuse of schoolchildren,
Lebanon, 2009/Violence physique et psychologique/verbale sur des eleves au Liban en 2009. Eastern
Mediterranean Health Journal, 18(10), 1011.
https://link.gale.com/apps/doc/A309729122/AONE?u=googlescholar&sid=AONE&xid=7ed1b31e
58 WHO (2017). Global School-based Student Health Survey Lebanon 2017 Fact Sheet
59 NCCM and UNICEF (2015). Violence against Children in Egypt Quantitative Survey and Qualitative Study in
Cairo, Alexandria and Assiut. No gender-disaggregated information is provided for prevalence of bullying
amongst male and female participants of the study.
8
approximately one third of children were abused daily by schoolmates and around one
quarter suffered daily abuse by other children at home. One in every eight children was
abused daily by other neighbourhood children and approximately one third of children
were abused once or twice a month on average60 Data on the rates of violence in schools
perpetuated by schoolmates revealed important gender disparities; with 55 percent of
females reporting higher rates of verbal abuse than males (35 percent) and severe
physical abuse in school was reported by 44 percent of females and 35 percent of
males61. In a more recent study, the prevalence of bullying in Jordan was 41 percent, with
higher rates amongst males (46 percent) than females (37 percent)62 and frontline workers
within Makani Centers reported that 63 percent children receiving support reported being
bullied by other children63 For Syrian refugee children in Jordan, bullying remains the
biggest reason for drop out following costs associated with schooling64 and according to
ur and Social Norms to Address
VAC, 1600 Syrian children dropped out of Jordanian schools as a result of bullying in
201665.
In Lebanon, a 2018 study by Save the Children revealed that physical bullying affects 42
percent of children and is the most common form of bullying, followed by verbal (30
percent), and social bullying (22 percent), while cyberbullying affects 6 percent of
children66. The study also found that children between 9-12 years report higher rates of
bullying than teens, and boys were found to be more likely to be bullied than girls, across
all types of bullying (physical, verbal, social and cyber bullying). Regarding nationality, the
study did not reveal any discrepancies between Lebanese and Syrian children, with their
reporting to being bullied at 50 percent, while Palestinian children reported higher rates
at 58 percent. As for the impact of bullying on school enrolment, the study found that, 16
percent of children who experienced bullying skipped one or more school days, and 12
percent dropped out totally67. Additional findings on bullying in Lebanon from a WHO
survey in 2017 revealed that almost 39 percent of children reported getting into physical
fights one or more times 12 months prior to the survey with around 38 percent
experiencing a serious injury. Rates for both fights and physical injury were significantly
higher in male respondents; at 55 percent in males compared to 24 percent in females in
relation to fighting, while physical injury rates were 44 and 32 percent in males and
females respectively68.
2.7 Sexual Violence
Within the region, there is a concerning lack of robust data on the issue of sexual violence.
The complexity of the issue is also compounded by the culture of shame around
discussing sexual violence in the different contexts and within conservative communities.
Additionally, and consistent with global findings, statistics on sexual violence against
boys in the region are significantly lacking. According to a study conducted by UNICEF
in Egypt, two-thirds of girls surveyed in Cairo expressed they had experienced sexual
60 UNICEF (2007). Violence against Children Study in Jordan
61 Ibid
62 UNESCO (2019). Behind the Numbers: Ending school violence and bullying. [Online] Available at:
<https://www.unicef.org/media/66496/file/Behind-the-Numbers.pdf>[Accessed 3 December 2020]
63 UNICEF (2019-2021). Changing Norms and Behaviours to End Physical Violence Against Children in Jordan.
64 UNICEF (2016). Running on Empty: The Situation of Syrian Children in Host Communities in Jordan: A
Longitudinal Welfare Study of Syrian Refugee Children Residing
65 UNICEF (2018). Changing Norms and Behaviours to End Physical Violence Against Children in Jordan 2019-
2021.
66 Save the Children, Lebanon (2018). Bullying in Lebanon, Research Summary
67 Ibid
68 WHO (2017). Global School-based Student Health Survey Lebanon 2017 Fact Sheet
9
harassment and 2-6 percent of adolescent girls (aged 13-17) surveyed reported sexual
touching, while the study also stated that few boys cited any examples of sexual violence
against themselves or other boys69. Additionally, verbal sexual harassment is the most
common form of sexual violence reported by girls (two-thirds of the girls that participated
in the study in Cairo) and boys surveyed70. The 2013 UN Women Study on Ways and
Methods to Eliminate Sexual Harassment in Egypt confirmed these results, revealing that
over 99 percent of Egyptian girls and women surveyed experienced some form of sexual
harassment in their lifetime, ranging from whistling and verbal abuse, to unwanted
touching and rape71. While the NCCM-UNICEF s
reported 206 cases of sexual assault and rape between 2011 and 2014. It is believed that
the incidence of rape is higher, due to the culture of silence and shame, with many victims
unable to report their experience72.
In Jordan, data on sexual abuse are dated. The most comprehensive statistic on sexual
abuse was from the 2007 VAC study conducted by UNICEF which highlights that one
third of children were subjected to sexual harassment inflicted by adults and children
within their neighbourhood and 2-7 percent are sexually abused by parents, guardians,
relatives, siblings and school personnel, with girls experiencing sexual abuse by
parents/legal guardians at higher rates than boys73. Yet in regards to sexual violence
perpetrated by school teachers/administrators and school maters, boys were abused at
higher rates than girls74. In 2017, the Situation Analysis of Children (SITAN) reported that
sexual violence is significantly under-reported by Syrian refugees75 residing in urban
settings, due to stigma and fear of retaliation by family and community members. Verbal
harassment is common, resulting in a high number of female refugees not being allowed
to leave their shelters unaccompanied76.
In Lebanon, a national study reported that 4 percent of the 2,162 children who were
interviewed, were exposed to some form of sexual abuse; of which almost 54 percent
were female and 46 percent were male. The same study also revealed that children of
migrants were more likely to be subjected to neglect and sexual abuse than their
Lebanese counterparts77. According to the VASyR 2020 report, 1 percent of respondents
in sampled households experienced sexual harassment during the previous three months
of the study. The same report also highlights the challenges with underreporting as most
of the respondents were men and interviews did not take place in a confidential setting78.
Separately, the KAP survey revealed that for boys in Lebanon physical and sexual
harassment of boys was perceived as one of the top three protection risks amongst 32
69 NCCM-UNICEF (2015). Violence against Children in Egypt Quantitative Survey and Qualitative Study in
Cairo, Alexandria and Assiut
70 NCCM (2018). Ending Violence Against Children in Egypt. National Strategic Framework. [Online] Available
at: <http://nccm.gov.eg/wp-
content/uploads/2019/05/%D8%A5%D8%B3%D8%AA%D8%B1%D8%A7%D8%AA%D9%8A%D8%AC%D9
%8A%D8%A9-%D9%85%D9%86%D8%A7%D9%87%D8%B6%D8%A9-
%D8%A7%D9%84%D8%B9%D9%86%D9%81.pd> [Accessed 3 December 2020]
71 UN WOMEN (2013). Study on Ways and Methods to Eliminate Sexual Harassment in Egypt
72 NCCM-UNICEF (2015). Violence against Children in Egypt Quantitative Survey and Qualitative Study in
Cairo, Alexandria and Assiut
73 UNICEF (2007). Violence against Children Study in Jordan
74 Ibid
75 No gender-disaggregated information is provided for prevalence of sexual violence amongst male and
female refugees
76 UNICEF (2017). Situational Analysis of Children in Jordan
77 El Monla, B., Abu Shakra, M. (2015). The National Study on Child Sexual Abuse in Lebanon. . [Online]
Available at: <https://ecpat-france.fr/www.ecpat-france/wp-content/uploads/2018/10/the-national-study-on-
child-sexual-abuse-in-lebanon-2015-english-ilovepdf-compressed.pdf? [Accessed 3 December 2020]
78 UNICEF, UNHCR and WFP (2021). Vulnerability Assessment of Syrian Refugees in Lebanon
10
percent of respondents while for girls it was 42 percent. The same survey also revealed
that women and girls are disproportionally represented at 90 percent in reported incidents
of GBV, most of which involved physical violence, sexual violence, and forced or child
marriage79.
2.8 Commercial Sexual Exploitation and Trafficking
According
sexual exploitation, most notably: poverty, social exclusion, lack of educational and
vocational opportunities, or racial discrimination - all of which are present in different
forms in the MENA region80. It is also well worth mentioning that
particularly prone to sexual exploitation, due to the humanitarian crises within the region81.
As a result of displacement, children continue to face many child protection risks,
including child labour, child marriage, and sexual violence and exploitation due to family
separation, constantly being on the move and in temporary accommodation which often
increases the chances of children being exposed to violence and exploitation82.
In Egypt, 2018 data from the Department of Labour has revealed that some girls are
subjected to commercial sexual exploitation under the pretext of temporary marriage to
wealthy foreign men, mostly from Persian Gulf countries83. The 2018 US State Department
report on Trafficking in Persons states that Syrian refugees residing in Egypt are forced
into child labour, sex trafficking and transactional marriages84.
In Jordan an ECPAT report reveals that while prostitution, brothel ownership and pimping
are illegal, cases of prostitution among Syrian girls have been reported; yet no precise
data seems available85.
According to an ILO study on Street Children in Lebanon, illicit activities including
prostitution have also been documented among Lebanese and Syrian refugee adolescent
girls on the streets (15-17 years)86. Specific data on sexual exploitation and trafficking of
boys is lacking.
Regarding trafficking of children in MENA, national and regional statistics are scarce.
According to a UNODC Global Report on Trafficking in Persons (2014), in MENA 45
percent of victims are males while 55 percent are females and 62 percent of trafficking
79 UNICEF (2017). What Do They Think? Knowledge, Attitude and Practices of the Lebanese; Syrian and Palestine
Refugees in Lebanon, University of Sweden, for UNICEF Lebanon, supported by the Government of Lebanon
80 ECPAT International. (March, 2016). Power Impunity and Anonymity: Understanding the Forces Driving the
Demand for Sexual Exploitation of Children. Bangkok: ECPAT International
81 UNICEF (2018). Humanitarian Action for Children 2018: Overview. New York: UNICEF. [Online] Available at:
<https://reliefweb.int/sites/reliefweb.int/files/resources/UNICEF_Humanitarian_Action_for_Children_2018_Overvi
ew_ENG_0.pdf > [Accessed 2 December 2020]
82 UNHCR. (2014). Protection of Refugee Children in the Middle East and North Africa. [Online] Available at:
<https://www.refworld.org/pdfid/54589a6a4.pdf>[Accessed 2 December 2020
83 United States Department of Labour (2018). Findings on the Worst Forms of Child Labour [Online] Available
at: <https://www.dol.gov/sites/dolgov/files/ILAB/child_labor_reports/tda2018/egypt.pdf> [Accessed 3
December 2020]
84 Ibid. No gender-disaggregated information is provided.
85 ECPAT (2018). Sexual Exploitation of Children in Jordan Submission. [Online] Available at:
<https://www.ecpat.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/07/Universal-Periodical-Review-Sexual-Exploitation-of-
Children-Jordan.pdf? Accessed 3 December 2020
86 ILO (2015). Children Living and Working on the Streets in Lebanon: Profile and Magnitude.
https://www.ilo.org/wcmsp5/groups/public/---arabstates/---ro-beirut/documents/publication/wcms_344799.pdf
11
victims are children87. As with other forms of exploitation, children also refrain from
reporting incidents of trafficking due to their fear of traffickers, the stigma behind the
abuse and a general mistrust towards authority personnel88. Separate reports reveal that
Egyptian children are also being trafficked to Europe where they were used for bonded
child labour, commercial sexual exploitation, and illicit activities; whereby approximately
930 unaccompanied Egyptian children were registered in Italy in 201889.
2.9 Online Child Sexual Exploitation (OCSE)
Attempting to understand the situation of online child sexual exploitation (OCSE) in the
region is extremely challenging due to an almost complete lack of data. At the same time,
data on how many online users are children90. A somewhat dated UNICEF report on child
safety online noted that Africa and the Middle East lagged in monitoring and in
91. In Egypt, while no specific
data are available on OCSE, some advancement has been made such as partnerships
between the Ministry of Communications and Information Technologies (MCIT), and
Microsoft in applying Child Exploitation Tracking Systems (CETS) technology to assist
with the protection of youth online and its ability to police these crimes. Additionally, a
national initiative entitled Harassmap was launched to enable young women to report
incidents of violence and sexual harassment92.
In Jordan, the government recognizes that online sexual exploitation of children occurs
yet the lack of data hinders understanding the extent of the problem given the absence
of government cap.
3. UNICEF VAC Activities in the Three
Countries
3.1 UNICEF EVAC Activities in Egypt
In Egypt, UNICEF supports the development of the national EVAC Plan of Action93 and
collaborates closely with the Government of Egypt under the auspices of a national social
protection framework. UNICEF prioritizes its interventions in improving service provider
capacity, addressing social perceptions regarding VAC, and improving national capacity
87 UNODC (2014). Global Report on Trafficking in Persons 2014. United Nations Publication
https://www.unodc.org/res/cld/bibliography/global-report-on-trafficking-in-
persons_html/GLOTIP_2014_full_report.pdf. No gender-disaggregated information is provided on the statistic of
62 percent of child trafficking victims.
88 Tidey, C. (2018). Children Account for Nearly One-Third of Identified Trafficking Victims Globally. UNICEF.
https://www.unicef.org/press-releases/children-account-nearly-one-third-identified-trafficking-victims-globally
89 United States Department of Labour (2018). Findings on the Worst Forms of Child Labour [Online] Available
at: <https://www.dol.gov/sites/dolgov/files/ILAB/child_labor_reports/tda2018/egypt.pdf> [Accessed 3
December 2020]. No gender-disaggregated information is provided on the 930 children.
90 UNICEF (2016). Child online protection in the MENA Region
91 UNICEF (2011). Child Safety Online: Global Challenges and Strategies. UNICEF Innocenti Research Centre.
[Online] Available at:< https://www.unicef-irc.org/publications/pdf/ict_eng.pdf >[Accessed 2 December 2020].
92 UNICEF (2016). Child online protection in the MENA Region
93 UNICEF (2019). End of Year Results Summary Narrative
12
to legislate, plan, monitor and budget for child protection and response94. Under
Strengthening Whole Systems, UNICEF activities have focused heavily on the
development of Child Protection Committees (CPCs) at the governorate and district
levels; developing the capacity of the social workforce95; scaling up of the Ministry of
Social Solidarity (MoSS) case management systems96; and finalizing the social workforce
accreditation scheme and training plan97. Sectoral interventions were also conducted
through the design of a comprehensive model endorsed by the Ministry of Education to
create a violence-free culture in schools98. Within Service Provision, UNICEF supported
the provision of mental health and psychosocial support to children and caregivers,
provided positive discipline advice through phone services, and case management
services to children through the N
(NCCM) child helpline and other community-based protection services99 . Under
Prevention and Changing Behaviour and Social Norms to Address VAC, UNICEF has
developed a national parenting programme100; launched an anti-bullying campaign in
2019; and continued to implement Dawwie, a social and behavioural change initiative
using innovative programming tackling gender inequality as a root cause of harmful
societal practices101.
3.2 UNICEF EVAC Activities in Jordan
has focused on three areas: (i)
strengthening national child protection policy framework to prevent and respond to
violence against children; (ii) providing community-based child protection and case
management services; and (iii) changing social norms, while humanitarian interventions
also continued. In an effort to reach the most vulnerable children, UNICEF-Jordan has
shifted to a vulnerability-based approach that focuses on vulnerability indicators rather
than on status indicators (e.g., refugee versus non-refugee status) to ensure the provision
of a national protection system for all children102. Under Strengthening Whole Systems,
efforts were on supporting the development national Standard Operating Procedures
(SOPs) for Gender-Based Violence (GBV) and Child Protection (CP)103, strengthening case
management and child protection information management104, advocating for the
adoption of the draft Child Rights Law105 and the institutionalization of the
programme106. Jordan also endorsed the Safe to Learn Call to Action in 2020107 and is the
first country in the region that has signed up to the INSPIRE framework and aims to
become a Pathfinder country108. Within Service Provision, UNICEF ensured the
continuation of comprehensive case management services to children through partners109
94 Terms of Reference - Multi Country Formative and Summative Evaluation of Elimination of Violence against
Children in Egypt, Jordan and Lebanon; no referenced data.
95 Unicef.org. 2020. Child Protection. [online] Available at: <https://www.unicef.org/egypt/child-protection>
[Accessed 23 November 2020]
96 Ibid
97 UNICEF (2020). Egypt RAM Combined Outcomes, Outputs and End Year Summary Narratives Report
98 UNICEF (2020). Egypt RAM Combined Outcomes, Outputs and End Year Summary Narratives Report
99 UNICEF (2020). End of Year Results Summary Extended Narrative
100 NCCM (2018). Ending Violence Against Children. Plan of Action for the National Strategic Framework
101 UNICEF (2019). Egypt COAR Report Summary Narrative
102 UNICEF (2019). Jordan Country Programme 2018-2022.
Retrieved from https://www.unicef.org/jordan/media/371/file/Jordan-Reports.pdf
103 UNICEF (2019). End of Year Results Summary Extended Narrative
104 UNICEF (2020). Jordan RAM Combined Outcomes, Outputs and End Year Summary Narratives Report.
105 Ibid
106 UNICEF (2019). End of Year Results Summary Extended Narrative
107 Global Partnership to End Violence Against Children (2020). Ministry of Education. Letter of Commitment.
108 As reported to the ET by Ms. Ettie Higgins on Dec. 1, 2020 during the inception meeting
109 UNICEF (2020). Jordan RAM Combined Outcomes, Outputs and End Year Summary Narratives Report
13
and implemented its Child Protection Programme through Makani centres110. As
for Prevention and Changing Behaviour and Social Norms to Address VAC, UNICEF
through its strategy aims to reduce the incidence of corporal punishment in schools and
the home by 50 percent through leveraging partnerships with the media, capitalizing on
the networks of the Makani Centres 111. The efforts of
UNICEF Jordan over the past two years have been multi-layered in addressing VAC;
in 2019, UNICEF launched social media campaigns112 and in 2020 developed a manual on
VAC in partnership with the Ministry of Awqaf113; launched a television programme on anti-
bullying114 redesigned the Better Parenting Programme115; and launched Tarbiyah to
address the highest rates of violence in boys’ schools116.
3.3 UNICEF EVAC Activities in Lebanon
UNICEF VAC activities in Lebanon are carried out through partnerships with key
ministries,117 implemented in collaboration with NGOs, community groups and
community-based entities, and address EVAC through three distinct priority areas
including: improving legislative enforcement and governmental coordination; improving
services available to those affected by VAC; and improving the capacity of the most
vulnerable to promote practices that end VAC118. In 2020, a significant advancement
towards addressing VAC took place with the launch of a strategic plan on strengthening
the national system of response and prevention to child protection violations and gender-
based violence by the Ministry of Social Affairs (MoSA) and UNICEF to ensure
coordination, integration and enhanced service delivery119. Under Strengthening Whole
Systems, work continues on the expansion of the use of the Child Protection Information
Management System (CPIMS)120, professional capacity development on child rights,
protection, gender-based violence and case management SOPs121; strengthening local
governance processes and structures of 29 municipalities122; and developing an outreach
strategy for 46 partners (including the CP programme)123. In terms of Service Provision,
UNICE Social Development Centers (SDCs), offers child protection
prevention and response through psychosocial and counselling services and provides
safe space and social welfare support124. Addressing Prevention and Changing Behaviour
and Social Norms to Address VAC, UNICEF Lebanon also delivers parenting support,
a seven year programme - which aims at promoting protective social
husbands, employers of children, community and religious leaders)125. It has also
110UNICEF (2019). Jordan RAM Combined Outcomes, Outputs and End Year Summary Narratives Report
111 UNICEF (2018). Changing Norms and Behaviours to End Physical Violence Against Children in Jordan
2019-2021
112 UNICEF (2019). End of Year Results Summary Extended Narrative
113 UNICEF (2020). Jordan RAM Combined Outcomes, Outputs and End Year Summary Narratives Report
114 Ibid
115 UNICEF (2020). Jordan RAM Combined Outcomes, Outputs and End Year Summary Narratives Report
116 Ibid
117 Notably the Ministry of Social Affairs (MoSA), Ministry of Justice (MoJ), Ministry of Education and Higher
Education (MEHE), Ministry of Public Health, Ministry of Interior and Municipalities and the Ministry of Defense
(as stated on https://www.unicef.org/lebanon/child-protection)
118 Terms of Reference - Multi Country Formative and Summative Evaluation of Elimination of Violence against
Children in Egypt, Jordan and Lebanon; no referenced data
119 https://www.unicef.org/lebanon/press-releases/ministry-social-affairs-launched-partnership-unicef-its-
2020-2027-strategic-plan
120 UNICEF (2019). Lebanon Country Office Annual Report
121 UNICEF (2020). Lebanon RAM Combined Outcomes, Outputs and End Year Summary Narratives Report
122 Ibid
123 Ibid
124 Ibid
125 Ibid
14
supported nine Child Protection Networks within Palestinian refugee camps, which
promote positive discipline methods using community-based care models126.
4. Analytical Framework
As the basis for analysis, t y of Change for
EVAC (see Annex 2 for the simplified version)
defined in the Violence Against Children Programme Guidance (2018): (1) Ensure high-
level engagement; (2) Strengthen whole systems; (3) Build the evidence base; (4)
Strengthen legislative frameworks; (5) Engage in multisectoral approaches to end VAC
(including changing behaviour and social norms to address VAC); (6) Enhance parent and
caregiver support; and (7) Strengthen public financing for child protection.
5. Methodological Approach
To carry out this evaluation, the Evaluation Team (ET) applied a variety of approaches to
allow for triangulation of findings.
Desk Review and Content Analysis: During the first phase of the evaluation, the ET
conducted a thorough document review and content analysis of qualitative and
quantitative data which were made available to the team. Annex 3 includes the list of
documents reviewed.
Stakeholder Mapping Tool: A stakeholder analysis was done to understand the different
institutions/organizations working with UNICEF on EVAC in the three countries (see Annex
4). This served the dual purposes of informing sampling strategies for holding the Key
Informant Interviews (KIIs), as
direct and indirect EVAC partners. Furthermore, a stakeholder mapping guided the design
of the Evaluation Matrix and was intended to be the basis for the triangulation of data.
The ET identified key UNICEF staff, Government officials, donors, NGOs and UN
presentatives127, the private sector, and civil society organizations who have
collaborated on EVAC initiatives in the three countries. The list of stakeholders was meant
to include a cross-section of organizations public, private and non-governmental to
capture a variety of perspectives. Furthermore, the ET by interviewing a diversity of
stakeholders intended to capture feedback regarding both the design as well as
implementation of EVAC activities as well as to obtain feedback that is both retrospective
as well as forward-looking.
Mapping of EVAC Interventions in the Three Countries: In addition to the identification
of key stakeholders, the ET carried out a mapping of EVAC interventions in the three
countries included in this evaluation to ensure that all the EVAC activities implemented
during 2019-2020 were included in the assessment (see Annex 5). The mapping was
included in the Inception Report and was shared with the three countries for their
validation.
126 UNICEF (2018). Country Office Annual Report
127 The ET met with WHO to discuss the INSPIRE Framework and with UNFPA and UN Women to assess
EVAC, Gender and GBV linkages
15
Evaluation Matrix (EM): The ET developed a detailed Evaluation Matrix (see Annex 6)
which included sub-questions for each of the five main evaluation questions (relevance,
efficiency, effectiveness, sustainability, and gender). It also included the sources and data
collection techniques that were intended to be used. It is important to note that the ET -
together with the Steering Committee - carefully reviewed the evaluation questions listed
in the ToRs and revised them to render the evaluation a manageable exercise (Annex 7
includes the rationale for the modifications which were introduced).
Key Informant Interviews (KII): Based on the stakeholder mapping, the ET held remotely
a series of informal and semi-structured interviews with the main information sources for
the evaluation, including UNICEF regional and country office staff, Government staff at
technical and decision-making level, UN partners, civil society partners, private sector
representatives, and donors (see Annex 8 for the semi-structured KII protocol and Annex
9 for the sub-questions addressed per each type of stakeholder). The ET interviewed in
total 100 key informants, 75 percent of whom were women (see Annex 10 for list of people
interviewed). Table 1 below provides the breakdown.
16
Table 1. Breakdown per type of stakeholders interviewed per country
Stakeholder Egypt Jordan Lebanon Total
UNICEF 19 13 15 47
UN Agencies 3 3 4 10
Donors 2 1 0 3
NGOs 6 5 14 25
Government 1 11 1 13
Private Sector 1 1 0 2
Total 32 34 34 100
Women 21 24 30 75
Men 11 10 4 25
Throughout the evaluation, the ET took steps to ensure that a participatory and human
rights-based approach and gender sensitivity were followed:
• Human rights-based approach (HRBA): The ET followed a human rights-based
approach which puts people at the center of the evaluation as rights holders,
highlighting the importance of empowerment and advocacy towards the securing of
those rights. The ET adhered to the UNEG guidance on integrating human rights and
gender equality in evaluations.
• Gender Sensitivity: Throughout the evaluation, the team used a gender-sensitive
approach. This was supported by the combined use of quantitative and qualitative
data. This approach entailed examining the extent to which gender was incorporated
The team also strived to ensure the collection of sex and age disaggregated data
(SADD) when available - to allow gender-sensitive analysis and identification of gaps
and recommendations specific to girls and boys.
• Debriefing with COs: Though not included in the original ToRs, the ET conducted
individual debriefings with the UNICEF CO following the data collection phase. This
allowed the team to share with UNICEF COs their preliminary findings and tentative
conclusions and receive feedback from the COs as well as select external
stakeholders.
• Evaluation Steering Committee (SC): The progress of the evaluation was followed
closely by the Steering Committee consisting of members of UNICEF (HQ, Regional
and country-level staff) and WHO. The SC approved the terms of reference of this
evaluation and endorsed the inception report, including the revised evaluation
questions, the list of identified stakeholders and the mapping of the EVAC activities.
Annex 11 includes
5.1 Quality Assurance Mechanisms
A series of measures were put in place for quality assurance at all levels throughout the
evaluation. Some of these include:
• Vetting and approval of all evaluation tools both the Regional Evaluation Advisor as
well as by the Ethics Review Board (see Annex 12 for approval).
• Transcribing the KIIs by national staff based on sound understanding of the culture,
context, Arabic language and technical knowledge of child protection.
17
• Maintaining regular contact and sharing updates between all team members for
shared understanding of approaches, implementation process, challenges and
mitigation measures.
• Provision of quality assurance by IOD PARC at all key stages of the evaluation
(inception, debriefing with COs, and drafting of evaluation report).
6. Evaluation Challenges, Mitigation
Measures and Limitations
In addition to the risks associated with COVID-19 which were identified in the Inception
Report, the evaluation faced a few challenges and constraints. To the extent possible, the
ET was able to mitigate or reduce negative effects of most of these, without affecting the
overall quality of the evaluation. Table 2 below summarizes the challenges the evaluation
faced as well as the mitigation measures put into place to minimize their impact on quality
and timeliness of the evaluation.
Table 2. Challenges Faced and Mitigation Measures Undertaken
Challenges Mitigation Measures
Inability to meet key Though the Inception Report had envisaged that the
stakeholders or carry out ET would be able to meet with
field visits due to COVID- caregivers/teachers/social service center staff as well
19 restrictions as to carry out field visits, this was not possible due to
COVID-19 lockdowns in Jordan and Lebanon. In
Egypt, although there was no lockdown, most
interviews were held virtually due to COVID-19
contagiousness. To mitigate this limitation, the ET
increased the number of KIIs from around 15/country
to more than 30/country to collect more information.
Incomplete The ET was not provided with a comprehensive e-
documentation from library with relevant documentation for carrying out the
UNICEF evaluation. As a result, the ET spent a considerable
time requesting and following up with COs to obtain
the necessary documents. The ET attempted to obtain
key documentation with mixed results. Furthermore,
CPIMS data was not shared because UNICEF COs did
not have a data sharing protocol agreed and signed
between CPIMS users, and therefore, were unable to
share aggregated data with the ET.
Unavailability of EVAC- Most of the EVAC interventions in the three countries
specific information are completely integrated in wider Child Protection
programmes and EVAC-specific information was not
always available. This is particularly relevant in the
case of Lebanon where there are no separate EVAC
activities and therefore, it was not possible for the CO
to provide M&E data specific to EVAC in order to
address efficiency/effectiveness questions.
18
Challenges Mitigation Measures
Limited time of key The data collection phase was initially planned to take
UNICEF staff place in January 2021 - a busy time for the COs who
are preparing the 2021 workplans. The ET postponed
data collection to February in order to ensure that
UNICEF CO staff would be more available to
participate in KIIs.
Different levels of CO There were at times signs of variable level of
evaluation buy-in ownership of the evaluation process, which in specific
situations resulted in limited resource sharing and
challenges in coordinating for interviews which
required additional time to be invested by the ET, at
the expense of other activities.
Unavailability of key Introductory emails to connect the ET with external
informants stakeholders were either not sent or were sent very
late in the process. As a result, the ET was unable to
meet with donors in Lebanon and with key
governmental stakeholders in both Egypt and
Lebanon. In order to mitigate this risk, the ET
Partners and organized KIIs with them. Furthermore,
the ET extended the data collection phase from three
to four weeks in order to allow for such emails to be
sent out by the COs.
Rights-holders (children
and adolescents) were to accessing rights holders as interviewing children
not interviewed takes special skills compounded by the COVID
Instead, the ET had planned to interview
service providers and caregivers who would be able to
provide additional information to draw conclusions.
However, due to COVID-19 restrictions, this was not
possible.
UNICEF EVAC Focal Though UNICEF-Egypt CO staff stepped in to help the
Point was on sick leave evaluation, it nevertheless caused delays/omissions in
throughout the data sending out the introductory emails and in setting up
collection phase KIIs in Egypt. As a result, the ET did not obtain the
necessary clearances to visit the Child Protection
Committees as originally envisaged in the Inception
Report.
National consultant in IOD PARC, thanks to its network in the region, was
Jordan resigned in the able to immediately replace the national consultant
middle of the evaluation and this had no impact on the evaluation.
Inability to carry out Due to COVID-19 lockdowns in Jordan and Lebanon,
direct observation the ET was unable to carry out field visits. There were
19
Challenges Mitigation Measures
no mitigation measures possible since the ET had to
follow national regulations and respect the lockdown.
Challenges related to Logging on to video conferencing platforms
technology use challenged some participants of the KIIs and at times
the quality of the call was impacted by connectivity
issues.
Availability of the The Regional Evaluation Manager was absent (for
Regional Evaluation health reasons) for part of the evaluation.
Manager Consequently the ET had minimal guidance and
support during key periods of the process (e.g.,
finalization of the Inception Report and Data Collection
phases). This impacted the timeline of the evaluation
and had other significant impacts on the process.
UNICEF assigned another focal point for the
evaluation to provide cover, and the Evaluation
Manager returned to the office in time for the key
workshops.
20
7. Findings
7.1 Relevance
Key Findings:
F1.
equality) and 16 (peace, justice and strong institutions).
F2. o varying degrees,
F3.
document, whereby more actions l
need to be implemented.
F4. In the three countries, several EVAC-related ToCs were developed (CP sector,
EVAC-specific, or programmatic) which are used to guide EVAC interventions
and ensure their alignment with global and national priorities.
F5. In the three countries, EVAC initiatives are generally in line with six out of seven
of INSPIRE strategies. The ET did not find any evidence of alignment of CP
activities economic
F6.
priorities, strategies and frameworks.
F7.
level of violence against children in the three countries.
F8. The three countries are using formative research to design appropriate and
evidence-based several EVAC interventions. Egypt is basing its advocacy on
case studies which generate evidence on the prevalence of VAC and Jordan is
the only country that the evaluation identified that modified its programming as
a result of evidence generated by a mid-term evaluation.
F9. EVAC interventions in the three countries did not sufficiently take into
consideration the different risks and needs of specific segments of the
population (e.g., girls/boys, adolescents, students in private schools), nor were
they always designed with appropriate approaches to reach the different target
groups (e.g., male caretakers, nationalities, geographic areas, etc.), nor address
the increasing risk of the different types of online violence.
F10. UNICEF was able to adapt quickly to the changing context due to the COVID-19
pandemic in three countries as well as in response to the Beirut port explosion.
7.1.2 Alignment with SDGs
(SDG) 5 (gender equality) and SDG 16 (peace, justice and strong institutions). Specifically,
the EVAC interventions in the three countries contribute to achieving SDG Target 5.2,
21
Table 3 includes the core initiatives being implemented in the three countries which
contribute to the three SDG Targets mentioned above and Annex 13 provides a
comprehensive list of the different EVAC interventions and maps them to the SDG
Targets.
Table 3. Alignment of EVAC interventions with SDGs 5 and 16
Country/ 5.2 16.1 16.2
SDG
Definition Eliminate all forms of Significantly reduce all End abuse,
violence against all forms of violence and exploitation,
women and girls in the related death rates trafficking and all
public and private everywhere forms of violence
spheres, including against and
trafficking and sexual torture of children
and other types of
exploitation
Egypt - Dawwie initiative: - Awladna Positive - Children and
establish foundations Parenting parents reached
of a long-term gender Campaign130 through
norms transformative - Parents and prevention and
strategy128 caretakers targeted responses
- Girls Empowerment with positive parenting interventions
Initiative: to reduce programmes131 addressing
acceptance of VAC129 VAC132
Jordan - Children offered Child - Better parenting - Case
Protection programme (BPP) and management and
programming positive parenting multisectoral
(includes info on information through protection
EVAC) through social media services for VAC
Makani Centers133 campaigns and GBV134
- Girls and women - Collaboration
offered GBV case between UNICEF
management services and FPD Unit on
Prevention of
Online Sexual
Exploitation 135
- Multi-sectoral
National Plan of
128 UNICEF (2019). Egypt RAM Combined Outcomes Outputs and End Year Summary Narrative Report
129 Ibid
130 IBF International Consulting (2019): Mid-term Evaluation of the EU funded programme "PAGODA
Delegation Agreement for Expanding Access to Education and Protection for at Risk Children in Egypt
131 UNICEF (2019). Syria Crisis Humanitarian Situation Report
132 UNICEF (2019). Egypt Ram Combined Outcomes Outputs and End Year Summary Narrative Report
133UNICEF (2019). Jordan Child Protection End Year RAM. Pre-post test results show that percentage of
children experiencing violence decreased from 24 to 14 and children who believe they have the right to be
protected from violence increased from 86 to 91 per cent
134 UNICEF (2019) Child Protection End Year RAM
135 Ibid
22
Country/ 5.2 16.1 16.2
SDG
Action to End
Physical VAC in
Jordan136
Lebanon - Dual approach - Child victims of - Continued
programming violence, abuse and collaboration with
targeting, adolescent exploitation and key Ministries
girls at risk of GBV women at risk offered (Social Affairs,
through protection case management, Education,
support and counselling, psycho- Health, Justice,
vocational skills social support, safe Interior) in
training137 spaces and other advancing a more
- Women and girls interventions to help effective national
accessing mobile and address their system so that
safe spaces138 situation139 fewer children
- Strong commitment to and women will
prevention through experience
Qudwa Strategy violence, abuse
and exploitation
in the future140
7.1.3 Alignment with global EVAC frameworks
Table 4 below outlines the extent to which UNICEF activities in the three countries under
study are aligned with different global frameworks on EVAC.
Table 4 A Global Framework,
Programme Guidance and INSPIRE
Country Violence Against INSPIRE: Seven
Framework: Six Levels Children Programme Strategies for
Guidance: Seven Ending Violence
Priority Areas against Children
Indicato Micro level: (1) Boys, (1) Ensure high-level (1) Implementation
r Girls and Adolescents, (2) engagement, (2) and enforcement of
Parents, Mothers and Strengthen whole laws, (2) Norms and
other caregivers. At the systems, (3) Build the values, (3) Safe
Meso level: (3) Society / evidence base 4) environments, (4)
Communities, (4) Strengthen legislative Parent and caregiver
Systems and institutions. frameworks, (5) Engage support, (5) Income
At the Macro Level: (5) in multisectoral and economic
Legal and political approaches, (6) strengthening (6)
frameworks and (6) Enhance parent and Response and
Coordinated caregiver support, (7) support services, (7)
multisectoral national Strengthening public Education and life
action financing skills
136 UNICEF. (2019). Changing Norms and Behaviours to End Physical Violence Against Children in Jordan.
137 UNICEF (2019). Lebanon COAR Report Analysis.
138 UNICEF(2019). Syria Crisis Humanitarian Situation Report
139 UNICEF (2019). Lebanon COAR Report Analysis
140 Ibid
23
Country Violence Against INSPIRE: Seven
Framework: Six Levels Children Programme Strategies for
Guidance: Seven Ending Violence
Priority Areas against Children
Egypt, Three countries in full Three countries in Three countries in
Jordan alignment; to varying alignment with six out of alignment with six
and degrees of strength and seven priority areas out of seven
Lebano impact met; exception is (7) strategies met;
n Strengthening public exception is (5)
financing Income and
economic
strengthening
In the three countries, EVAC initiatives are generally in line with six out of seven of
INSPIRE strategies. Annex 14 outlines the overlap between national initiatives and the
INSPIRE framework. In the case of Egypt, one specific reference to the INSPIRE
National Strategic Framework (NSF)141, indicating a
complementarity between the two frameworks. Separately, a UNICEF document (in draft
format) proposes a National Programme on Child Protection - and not VAC in particular -
which highlights a cross over on four out of the seven strategies.142 In Jordan, the Strategy
implementation framework was grounded on the INSPIRE Framework. While the strategy
itself does not include a ToC, it is based on six strategic approaches which overlap with
five of the seven INSPIRE strategies143. Furthermore, and as mentioned earlier, Jordan
has signed up to the INSPIRE framework and aims to become a Pathfinder country (see
Box 1). Qudwa Strategy, an alignment was identified between three
strategies of the INSPIRE framework144. Finally, full alignment with the INSPIRE strategies
entails implementing evidence-based approaches which are addressed further below
(see Paragraph 64).
Box 1. Lessons on becoming a Pathfinder Country
Some preliminary lessons can be drawn from
Pathfinder country. They are the following:
141 NCCM (n.d.) Ending Violence Against Children. Plan of Action for the National Strategic Framework. Arab
Republic if Egypt 2020-2030. Referencing the following: implementation and enforcement of laws; norms and
values; safe environments; parent and caregiver support; income and economic strengthening; response and
support services; and education and life skills
142 UNICEF (n.d.). Child Protection Egypt: Framework for National Program. Strategies include: protective laws
and policies (Implementation and enforcement of laws); strong service delivery structures at various levels
(response and support services); strong civil society partnerships (Safe environments) and the involvement of
children and their participations ( Parent and caregiver support)
143 UNICEF (2018). Changing Norms and Behaviours to End Physical Violence Against Children in Jordan.
Strategies include nonviolent parenting (Parent and caregiver support); changing norms (Norms and Values);
creation of safe spaces (Safe environments); generating demand for support services and reporting mechanisms
(Response and support services); and advocating implementation of laws prohibiting corporal punishment
(Implementation and enforcement of laws)
144 UNICEF (n.d.) Qudwa Social and Behavioural Change Communications Plan to Prevent Violence against
Children & Women, Child Marriage and Child Labour. Strategies include: Advocacy (Implementation and
enforcement of laws), Edutainment/Mass and social media (Norms and values), community engagement (Parent
and caregiver support).
24
1. Importance of approaching the appropriate national institution mandated to address
VAC in order not to derail/delay the process through strategic advocacy meetings;
2. Global Partnership
into consideration specific cultural sensitivities; and
3. Interest by government to become a Pathfinder country for several reasons: (i)
prestige associated of being accepted as a Pathfinder country; (ii) easier access to
funding once the country is recognized globally as a leader in EVAC; and (iii) greater
opportunities for providing/receiving technical assistance.
Source: KIIs
The ET did not find any overlap in any of the
and cross collaborate on design and implementation with other initiatives being
Protection/Livelihoods programmes.
7.1.4 Alignment with national priorities
s,
strategies, and frameworks. One of the key strategies adopted by UNICEF to combat
violence against children is through helping governments build/strengthen/institutionalize
existing child protection systems. As Table 5 below demonstrates, in the three countries
under study, it is evi
priorities.
Table 5. Alignment with National Priorities
Country Framework UNICEF
Objectives/Activities Activities/
Alignment
Egypt • Ending Violence • Legislative and policy Mostly Aligned
Against Children. reforms • Policy reform
Plan of Action for the • Functional and • Community
National Strategic accessible M&E engagement
Framework. Arab mechanisms • Life skills and
Republic of Egypt • Community livelihoods
2020-2030145 engagements • Positive
• Life skills and parenting
livelihoods
• Positive parenting
• Child friendly and
gender
sensitive/transformative
services
Jordan • National Framework • Policy reform Mostly Aligned:
for Family Protection • Institutionalizing child • Strengthening
Against Violence protection systems national
(2016)146 • Developing institutional legislative and
capacities
145 NCCM (2018). Ending Violence Against Children in Egypt: National Strategic Framework
146 NCFA (2016). National Framework for Family Protection Against Violence
25
Country Framework UNICEF
Objectives/Activities Activities/
Alignment
• Ministry of Education • Prevention efforts policy
Strategic Plan 2018- framework
2022147 • Improving
• National Council for equal access
Family Affairs (NCFA) to, and quality
Strategy of, child
• National Social protection
Protection services:
Strategy148 SOPs, BPP,
Makani, Case
Management
etc.
• Changing
negative
social norms
and
behaviours149
Lebanon • • Legal frameworks Mostly Aligned:
Strategic Plan for the • Developing institutional • Policy reform
Protection of Women capacities • Training and
and Children (2020- • Services capacity
2026) 150 Development/Quality building
• Assurance • Service
Protection Policy in • Behavioural and Social provision
the School151 Change though SDCs
and
Implementing
Partners
• Prevention
through
Qudwa
In Egypt, Government EVAC initiatives
by focusing interventions on the most vulnerable areas of the country152. According to
-2022, UNICEF focuses on
advocacy while engaging with the government and the NCCM on the national social
protection framework in addressing increased rates of VAC with special attention focused
on girls and adolescents153. In Jordan, UNICEF works closely with both governmental and
non-governmental organizations, most notably the NCFA; responsible for overseeing the
National Framework for Family Protection Against Violence (updated in 2016)154 as well
147 Ministry of Education Jordan (2018). Strategic Plan 2018-2022
148 UNICEF (2019). National Social Protection Strategy 2019-2025
149 UNICEF (2020). Jordan RAM Combined Outcomes, Outputs and End Year Summary Narratives Report
150 Ministry of Social Affairs (2020). Strategic Plan of the Ministry of Social Affairs on the Protection of Women
and Children
151 MEHE (n.d.) Child Protection Policy in the School
152 UNICEF (2019). Egypt Country Programme Document Egypt (2018-2022)
153 Ibid
154 NCFA (2016). National Framework for Family Protection Against Violence
26
as focusing on enhancing service delivery and addressing social norms. In Lebanon, it is
aligned with national priorities and the Child Protection Programme contributed to
155. UNICEF also
ensures an alignment with national strategic plans, through participatory planning and
design. For example, the ToC established for the Qudwa Strategy was developed based
on consultations with several partners156.
Framework157. Looking towards Egypt, the
national EVAC ToC is aligned with the global EVAC framework in that it also adopts a
socio-ecological lens, highlighting interventions within four key areas including justice,
social services, health and education across the micro, meso and macro levels of
intervention as well as relies heavily on inter-sectoral collaboration among key players in
order to combat VAC through both prevention and response158. In Jordan, the six levels
of the EVAC Framework are also being addressed, albeit to differing degrees, through
building capacity and developing minimum standards for both prevention and response
services159. Similarly, in Lebanon, UNICEF interventions are implemented at the six levels
through efforts to build a CP and GBV system while advancing policies, building
workforce capacity, improving cross sectoral collaboration while continuing to deliver CP
services to vulnerable children and families160.
In the three countries, EVAC initiatives are generally in line with six out of the seven priority
In the three countries,
governmental expenditure and budgeting on EVAC programming is limited161. In Egypt,
while EVAC is a priority, and notwithstanding the support UNICEF has provided in costing
EVAC interventions, the government has not allocated funds to implement EVAC
interventions and most activities have relied on donor funding, most notably from the
European Union (EU) over the past five years162. In Jordan, results of the interviews with
both governmental and non-governmental entities revealed that governmental
expenditures on EVAC initiatives are very restricted and social protection initiatives are
163. In Lebanon, though some discussions were held with MoSA
to undertake a budget analysis, the assessment was delayed and is expected to be
undertaken in 2021164.
In the three countries, several EVAC-related ToCs were developed (CP sector, EVAC-
specific, or programmatic). Egypt is the only country that has developed a specific ToC
for EVAC. In Jordan, a Child Protection ToC has been developed, of which EVAC is one
key programme area. MoSA, in Lebanon, has an overarching Women and Child Protection
155 UNICEF (n.d.) Qudwa Social and Behavioural Change Communications Plan to Prevent Violence against
Children & Women, Child Marriage and Child Labour
156 UNICEF (n.d.) Qudwa Social and Behavioural Change Communications Plan to Prevent Violence against
Children & Women, Child Marriage and Child Labour
157 The UNICEF Global 2017 Theory of Change for EVAC adopts a socio‐ecological lens to addressing VAC
which covers six levels: (1) Boys, Girls and Adolescents, (2) Parents, Mothers and other caregivers. At the meso
level: (3) Society / Communities, (4) Systems and institutions. At the macro Level: (5) Legal and political
frameworks and (6) Coordinated multisectoral national action
158 Ibid
159 UNICEF (2020). Jordan RAM Combined Outcomes, Outputs and End Year Summary Narratives Report
160 UNICEF (2020). Lebanon RAM Combined Outcomes, Outputs and End Year Summary Narratives Report
161 .
162 Egy-UNICEF-08
163 Jor-Gov-02 and Jor-NGO-03
164 RAM 2020
27
ToC as part of its strategy and a ToC addressing the prevention of VAC is included in the
Qudwa Strategy (see Table 6).
28
Table 6. ToCs related to Child Protection/EVAC per country
Availability Egypt Jordan Lebanon
of National
ToCs
Child n/a Jordan Country Office Child Strategic Plan of the
Protection Protection Theory of Change Ministry of Social Affairs
(2018-2022)165 on the Protection of
Women and Children
ToC166
EVAC National n/a n/a
EVAC Task
Force ToC167
Thematic n/a • Ex-post ToC for Qudwa ToC171
Campaign 168
• Ex-post Toc for Case
Management169
• BPP Programme ToC170
In Jordan, ex-post172 ToC models were developed for the Campaign and the Child
Protection Case Management, as part of evaluation studies173. Both programme ToCs are
aligned with the Global Framework outcomes most notably on Enhanced System and
Institutional Responses174. As for the ToC developed for the revamped Better Parenting
Programme (BPP), child and parent/caregiver related outcomes were included and were
fully aligned with the Global ToC outcome related to Households, Families and
Caregivers175. In Lebanon, the CPD stipulates that an integrated ToC for Children and
Women in Lebanon was developed in 2018; with a specific ToC developed for Child
Protection in September of the same year176, yet the components of the ToC were not
identified by the ET. Instead, an out-of-date ToC developed in 2016 was identified which
does not include the new initiatives UNICEF-Lebanon has embarked on, such as working
with municipalities and on online violence. A more recent and specific ToC was developed
for the Qudwa Strategy and is in alignment with the Global ToC outcomes, namely on:
165 UNICEF (2018). Strategy Note for Child Protection. Jordan Country Programme 2018-2022
166 Ministry of Social Affairs (2020). Strategic Plan of the Ministry of Social Affairs on the Protection of Women
and Children
167 NCCM (2018). Ending Violence Against Children in Egypt: National Strategic Framework
168 n towards a Safe School Environment Program
169 Economic Policy Research Institute (2018). Comprehensive Evaluation of the UNICEF supported specialized
child protection case management response in Jordan 2013-2017: Final Report
170 UNICEF (n.d.). Report of the Adaptation of the Better Parenting Programme 2019-202 (draft version)
171 UNICEF (n.d.) Qudwa Social and Behavioural Change Communications Plan to Prevent Violence against
Children & Women, Child Marriage and Child Labour
172 The programmes were implemented without a ToC Ima, pls change font
173
Economic Policy Research Institute (2018). Comprehensive Evaluation of the UNICEF supported specialized
child protection case management response in Jordan 2013-2017: Final Report
174 UNICEF (n.d). ToC
Comprehensive Evaluation of the UNICEF supported specialized child protection case management response in
Jordan 2013-
School Environment Program and Economic Policy Research Institute (2018). Comprehensive Evaluation of the
UNICEF supported specialized child protection case management response in Jordan 2013-2017: Final Report.
175 UNICEF (n.d.). Better Parenting Program PowerPoint Presentation
176 UNICEF (2018). Mid-Term Review of the UNICEF Lebanon Country Programme Document (2017-2020)
29
Stronger Legal and Policy Frameworks and Households, Families and Caregivers177.
Annex 15 offers an overview of how the national initiatives within each country align to
7.1.5 Appropriateness
violence against children in the three countries as outlined in Section 2. As
aforementioned, the region, as a whole, and the three countries covered by this evaluation
have some of the highest rates of violence within the home and in schools. Furthermore,
due to cultural and social norms, violence is still acceptable by a large segment of the
population. Lastly, due to COVID-19 restrictions as well increasing economic hardships
faced by both the host communities and refugee populations, the risk of violence is on
the rise. This was also confirmed in various evaluations that assessed the relevance of
found it to be an appropriate intervention to tackling corporal punishment in schools and
was endorsed by the MoE particularly in regard to raising awareness on the detrimental
consequences of VAC and to promote positive behaviours amongst students and
teachers178. Additionally, the Multi-sectoral National Plan of Action to End Physical VAC
in Jordan specifically targeted the reduction of physical violence in the country due to its
widespread prevalence and societal acceptance179. Similarly, in Egypt, an assessment
of the Awladna Campaign outreach revealed that the campaign was successful in terms
of relevance, persuasion and appeal among the target group (with an 89 percent rating)180.
Finally, the relevance of and need for EVAC programmes was also highlighted by a variety
of stakeholders. Most of these participants confirmed the widespread nature of the
problem and considered the different activities being implemented as suitable to lessen
the burden of VAC in the three countries.
The three countries are using formative research to design several appropriate and
evidence-based EVAC interventions. Egypt is basing its advocacy on actual court cases
studies which generate evidence on the prevalence of VAC and Jordan is the only country
- which the evaluation identified - that modified its programming as a result of evidence
generated by a mid-term evaluation. In Lebanon, the first national Social and Behavioural
Change Communication Plan to prevent violence against girls, boys and women, child
marriage and child labour was based on an evidence-based participatory process.
Through this participatory exercise, drivers of violence were identified and in turn became
the basis of the social and behavioural change approach181. Furthermore, UNICEF-
Lebanon is planning a new initiative to render public health centers (PHCs) more
adolescent-friendly based on an assessment which revealed that teenage girls are not
seeking health services because PHCs are not sufficiently appealing to adolescents182.
An interesting case of using evidence is the one implemented by UNICEF-Egypt whereby
every two years, UNICEF compiles the list of all the court cases of VAC and uses these
cases to both advocate for policy changes as well as training material for judges and
public prosecutors183. In Egypt, UNICEF supported a research study to develop evidence,
177 UNICEF (n.d.) Qudwa Social and Behavioural Change Communications Plan to Prevent Violence against
Children & Women, Child Marriage and Child Labour
178
179 UNICEF. (2019). Changing Norms and Behaviours To End Physical Violence Against Children in Jordan
2019-2021
180 Byan Research & Consultancy (2017). Final Report: Assessing AWLADNA Campaign Outreach
181 UNICEF (n.d.) Qudwa Social and Behavioural Change Communications Plan to Prevent Violence against
Children & Women, Child Marriage and Child Labour
182 Leb-UNICEF-01
183 Egy-UNICEF-02, Egy-NGO-02, Egy-Gov-01
30
which informed the design of a national positive parenting program, focusing on non-
violent parental practices184. In Jordan, the BPP was developed based on evidence
generated from a global literature review on parenting progammes as well feedback from
stakeholders in regard to their experience implementing the programme 185. Finally, the
only EVAC programme which was modified based on evidence generated by a mid-term
evaluation is the programme in Jordan which focused on the institutionalization of
the programme within the Ministry of Education (MoE)186; included programming to
address sexual violence; and re-focused the design of prevention efforts to address the
status of violence outside of schools187. Also, set up a monthly monitoring system
of VAC in schools with the highest rates of violence which generated evidence on EVAC
in the targeted schools188. Furthermore, a summative and formative evaluation of UNICEF-
supported case management services was conducted in Jordan covering the period
between 2013-2017, and examined the impact of case management services in
addressing the needs of at-risk children in the country as well as attempted to determine
how to adjust case management services in the future189. The most notable changes as a
result of the recommendations include strengthening of SOPs, training and capacity
building efforts, as well as fostering a better understanding of case management across
agencies190.
However, the EVAC interventions in the three countries while generally appropriate
did not sufficiently take into consideration the different risks and needs of specific
segments of the population (e.g., girls/boys, adolescents, students in private schools) nor
were they always designed with appropriate approaches to reach the different target
groups (e.g., male caretakers). UNICEF-Lebanon has tried to address the different groups
in the design of its Qudwa Strategy which is in its early stages of implementation. Finally,
there are emerging themes such as online violence - that are being tackled in an ad hoc
manner.
Gender differentiation in EVAC programming needs to take into account the difference
in how boys and girls experience of violence. As noted in Section 2 above, girls tend to
be more subject to verbal abuse and online harassment whereas boys suffer more from
physical violence. With the exception of Dawwie in Egypt, little to no differentiation of
EVAC programming which targets girls versus boys was identified; even though violence
is experienced differently by boys and girls; whether based on type of violence or where
violence takes place191. Additionally, within Makani centers, the only major differentiator
in boys versus girls' sessions on VAC is the manner in which they are facilitated by the
trainer, yet the messaging/content is the same192.
Insufficient strategic programming targeting adolescents. Given the youth bulge in the
region, with children and young people accounting for 50 percent of the population193,
184 El-Zanaty, Fatma; El-Ghazaly, Noha; and El-Sheikh, Aliaa. 2020. Formative research and development of an
evidence based Positive Parenting Intervention in Egypt 2019. Cairo, Egypt: UNICEF, Ministry of Social
Solidarity, and El-Zanaty & Associates
185 UNICEF (2019). Report of the adaptation of the Better Parenting Programme, 2019-2020 (unpublished)
186 AAN Associates (2017). Evaluation of
Jor-UNICEF-03
187 UNICEF (2018). Strategy Note for Child Protection. Jordan Country Programme 2018-2022
188 am
189 Economic Policy Research Institute (2018). Comprehensive Evaluation of the UNICEF supported specialized
child protection case management response in Jordan 2013-2017: Final Report
190 Jor-UNICEF-10
191 Jor-UNICEF-05
192 Jor- UNICEF-07
193 UNICEF (2019). MENA Generation 2030. Online available at: https://data.unicef.org/resources/middle-east-
north-africa-generation-2030/
31
and in Egypt, which is forecasted to become home to 24 million adolescents by 2030194,
there is a need to design EVAC interventions for this target group at multiple levels and
across various domains. Adolescents are both victims and perpetrators of violence as
well as future parents. Within the three countries, a number of interventions have been
designed to address violence within the adolescent target group. In all countries, BPP
programmes use a life-cycle approach and education modules are segmented by age
groups. Similarly, the social and behavioural change communication (SBCC) programmes
in the three countries (Dawwie, in Egypt195, the Changing Norms and Social Behaviours
to End Physical Violence Against Children Strategy in Jordan196, and the Qudwa Strategy
in Lebanon197) have engaged with children and adolescents in different ways. In Egypt, a
social media campaign was developed with TikTok to reach a greater number of
Generation Z adolescents198. In Jordan, GAGE and UNICEF Jordan made significant
strides through the implementation of a multi-year study on Adolescent Capabilities and
Makani Impact199. The study offered concrete recommendations on how to address
violence, yet no data has been sourced revealing how these findings have been reflected
in future programmatic design and implementation. In Lebanon, UNICEF is specifically
targeting adolescent girls through the provision of reproductive health services, including
Clinical Management of Rape (CMR), and the availability of safe spaces. Notwithstanding
the above mentioned awareness-raising/SBCC/service provision interventions which take
into account adolescents, there was no evidence that UNICEF in the three countries is
engaging in a strategic way with this age group, specifically targeting, or integrating youth
and EVAC activities in a way that meets the developmental needs of adolescents at a
deeper level. Additionally, there are missed opportunities for cross sectoral programme
design and collaboration between the CP and the Youth Sectors that can be further
capitalized200.
In Lebanon, EVAC programs in schools do not include private schools. Though the
number of Lebanese students in private schools is substantially higher than those in
public schools201; and though the 2017 WHO202 study demonstrated that bullying is more
prevalent in private schools (
confirms that violence against children affects children from poor and rich households203,
and notwithstanding the Ministry of Ed EHE) Child
Policy eradicate violence in all its forms and sources whether in public
204, UNICEF-Lebanon focuses its work on EVAC in public schools. As
a result, the vast majority of school children in Lebanon are not benefitting from EVAC
interventions205 and UNICEF is missing an opportunity to better align with both
government and UNICEF global strategies, to expand coverage and to address the
prevalence of VAC in the country.
Better parenting programmes are not sufficiently reaching male caregivers. In the three
countries both UNICEF as well as implementing partners recognized the need to increase
194 UNICEF (2019). End of Year Results Summary Narrative Analysis Egypt
195 UNICEF (2019). End of Year Results Summary Narrative Analysis Egypt
196 UNICEF (2018). Changing Norms and Behaviours to End Physical Violence Against Children in Jordan
197 UNICEF (n.d.) Qudwa Social and Behavioural Change Communications Plan to Prevent Violence against
Children & Women, Child Marriage and Child Labour
198 Egy-UNICEF-09
199 GAGE consortium (2020). 2019 Gender and Adolescent Global Evidence Baseline (GAGE) - GAGE
overview: Jordan
200 Jor-UNICEF-09
201 According to the World Bank, in 2018, 71 percent of Lebanese students were enrolled in private schools.
202 WHO (2017). Global School-based Student Health Survey Lebanon, private vs public schools
203 UNICEF (2017). A Familiar Face: Violence in the lives of children and adolescents, UNICEF, New York, 2017
204 MEHE (n.d.). Child Protection Policy in the School
205 UNICEF staff in Lebanon noted that following the Beirut explosion in August 2020, private schools
contacted MEHE requesting the PSS modules which UNICEF developed.
32
the inclusion of male caregivers in better parenting programmes206. In Egypt, a study on
evidence- ansformative
-
making dynamics, particularly in relation to the acceptance of violence towards women
and girls. Additionally, the study also explored gendered dimensions of household
decision-making, providing insight into power dynamics within couples and their
implications for parenting behaviour/decision making such as the use of violent
disciplinary measures. As such UNICEF Egypt has incorporated these gender ideologies,
power dynamics between males and females and social norms within its parenting
programming to target the root causes of VAC207. In the three countries, male participation
in such programmes is below 25 percent in the best of cases and can fall to less than 10
percent in some instances208. More adaptable programming is required to reach male
caregivers, this could include flexible arrangements in session delivery (such as shorter
and evening sessions), the recruitment of male facilitators/champions, and delivering
sessions online209.
Better tailored approaches and messages to reach diverse groups. Most messages
being developed are national ones which do not address the differences (nationality,
geographic, settings etc.). For example, a Knowledge, Attitudes, and Practices (KAP)
Survey implemented in Lebanon, demonstrated the wide differences between different
nationalities, settings and geographic areas210. Similarly, interviews in Jordan revealed
that the needs within the camps (notably Azraq; particularly in Village Five and Zaatari)
are very different with little to no customization of programming being taken into account
to meet the needs of the various target groups211. In Egypt, a more familiar and colloquial
Arabic needs to be used to reach diversified groups212.
Need to develop a comprehensive programme to address the rising phenomenon of
online violence. Several stakeholders in the three countries pointed to the increased
incidence of online violence, especially in the wake of COVID-19 lockdowns, and noted
the particular vulnerability of girls.
-week social media
campaign for promoting a safer internet in 2020. Similarly, UNICEF Lebanon is developing
a code of conduct and media strategy - not just for on-line social media. In Jordan and
ad hoc social media
campaigns on online sexual harassment online (e.g., JRF in Jordan213 and Himaya in
Lebanon) and the development of social media campaign on internet safety and online
bullying (Himaya in Lebanon214). While such social media awareness-raising campaigns
are useful, they would have a larger impact if they were anchored in a comprehensive
programme that tackles all aspects of online violence, including sexual harassment and
bullying. In Jordan, UNICEF developed a guidance note for online protection of children,
206 Leb-UNICEF-03 and Leb-UNICEF-12
207 Egy-UNICEF-10
208 For example, in 2019, in Jordan, ECD programming which included positive, non-violent, and
developmentally-appropriate parenting practices offered through Makani Centers reached 42,342
parents/caregivers (of which only 11 per cent were men). Similarly, in Egypt, as part of ECD activities
implemented in 2019, a total of 6,565 parents (23 percent were men), participated in parenting sessions, which
included a component on positive disciplining practices (source: UNICEF (2019). Egypt RAM Combined
Outcomes Outputs and End Year Summary Narratives Report)
209 Ibid
210 UNICEF (2017). What Do They Think? Knowledge, Attitude and Practices of the Lebanese; Syrian and
Palestine Refugees in Lebanon, University of Malmö, Sweden, for UNICEF Lebanon, supported by the
Government of Lebanon
211 Jor-UNICEF-11
212 Egy-UNICEF-09
213 Jor-NGO-01
214 https://www.facebook.com/himayaleb/videos/138997431387030
33
capacity building for educators on psycho-social programmes, and an online
safeguarding course for MoE staff215. It is also strengthening the capacity of the Family
Protection Department (FPD) to better respond to cases of online sexual exploitation216;
yet additional interventions are still required at both the prevention and intervention levels
in the three countries.
7.1.6 Adaptability
UNICEF was able to adapt quickly to the changing context due to the COVID-19
pandemic in the three countries as well as to the multiple crises in Lebanon. UNICEF COs
were successful in adapting EVAC interventions in order to maintain their appropriateness
in 2020. Following are the different steps undertaken to adapt to the changing context.
• COVID-19 impact assessments. UNICEF-Jordan carried out an assessment of the
social and economic impact of COVID-19 on children and youth in Jordan217. In
Lebanon, a study by ABAAD a UNICEF implementing partner - surveyed women
and girls on their perceptions of being safe during COVID-19 lockdown218.
Additionally, in Lebanon, the Inter-agency SGBV Task Force Assessment analyzed
the incidence of harassment, violence or abuse against other women and girls in their
household or their communities219. The Task Force also examined the extent to which
accessibility to GBV services and information by women and girls has been impacted
by COVID-19 lockdowns as well as the perception of increase in violence.
• These assessments helped to confirm the relevance and need for EVAC interventions.
• Shift to online service delivery. In the three countries, UNICEF was able to shift
awareness-raising and provision of services by using remote means of
communication. In Egypt, the Child Helpline was used to promote COVID-19 related
eir service
delivery modalities to continue providing them even during lockdowns. These
included using both online and offline means of communicating (e.g., WhatsApp,
conference calling, etc.) to reach even those who did not have Internet access220 and
to continue to provide a myriad of services including case management and
awareness raising221. In Lebanon, UNICEF - through its partners - provided GBV case
management services through several hotlines and a mobile approach222. In Jordan,
UNICEF relied on its strong network of volunteers to highlight trends/needs as well as
to disseminate messaging223 and set up hundreds of WhatsApp groups to provide
parenting support.
215 Jordan Country Programme Full Approved Report 9 February 2020
216 Jor-Gov-06
217 UNICEF (2020). Socio-Economic Assessment of Children and Youth in the time of COVID-19 Jordan
[Online] Available at:
<https://www.unicef.org/jordan/media/3041/file/Socio%20Economic%20Assessment.pdf>[Accessed 3
December 2020].
218 - -19 An
Unprecedented Global Crisis with Widespread Implications [Online] Available at:
https://www.unicef.org/lebanon/media/5616/file
219 Inter- -
May 2020, as cited in UNICEF (2020). COVID-19 An Unprecedented Global Crisis with Widespread Implications
[Online] Available at: https://www.unicef.org/lebanon/media/5616/file
220 Leb-UNICEF-05 and Leb-UNICEF-07
221 Jor-NGO-01
222 UNICEF (2019). Syria Crisis Humanitarian Situation Report
223 Jor-UNICEF-11
34
• Production of guidelines to deliver services remotely. In a short period of time,
UNICEF Lebanon developed guidelines for online PSS service delivery and remote
GBV management which were adopted globally by UNICEF224.
• Modifying content to respond to new needs. In Lebanon, and due to the multiple
crises, UNICEF Lebanon and its implementing partners increased delivery of
psychosocial support to address the identified needs of Lebanese, Palestinians and
Syrians who have been impacted by the economic, security and health crises.
Similarly, in Jordan, UNICEF and its partners responded to the increased
psychosocial needs expressed by both host communities and refugee populations.
UNICEF-Jordan, during the peak of COVID-19, developed guidelines for addressing
within camp settings225.
Another example was the guidance provided to address during the lockdown cases
of violence within the home and how to ensure the protection of the victim (awareness
on issues, plans, secret words to use, signals for beneficiaries to use on the camera
to communicate the need for protection)226. Finally, three parenting programmes were
adapted for online delivery in response to COVID-19.
• Innovative monitoring activities. The three COs piloted innovative monitoring
activities. In Egypt, the CO is planning to roll out RapidPro227. UNICEF partners in
Jordan called beneficiaries to assess the effectiveness of services received and the
CO organized virtual field mission with donors. Lebanon CO started real time
monitoring of its activities.
• Online capacity building activities. In Jordan, UNICEF developed an e-learning child
protection course which was launched in July 2020. The themes covered included the
different types of violence and policies for frontline workers to pre-empt COVID-19
from hindering the provision of protection services to vulnerable communities228. In
Egypt, UNICEF encouraged its implementing partners to attend online training
programmes and capacity building workshops during the COVID-19229. In Lebanon,
in early 2020, all training activities (on PSS, case management, alternative care, GBV,
etc.) were moved online.
• Building the capacity of implementing partners to deliver services during
lockdown. In Jordan, UNICEF supported the Jordan River Foundation (JRF) in fully
upgrading its helpline in order to continue responding to calls and providing services
even during lockdown230. This also allowed JRF to extend the hours of its hotline.
• Coordination with other partners. In Jordan, the Child Protection Sub-Working
Group (CPSWG) continued a 4W exercise231 for its COVID-19 response and brought
together parties to respond to the pandemic in a coordinated manner. Together with
the Child Protection Information Management Systems taskforce, guidance notes on
224 Child Protection in Emergencies Working Group Lebanon- PSS Committee (2020), Guidelines for the
Provision of Remote Psychosocial Support to caregivers during COVID-1
225 Jor-UNICEF-02
226 Jor-UNICEF-10
227 RapidPro collects data via short message service (SMS) and other communication channels (e.g. voice;
social media channels, such as Facebook Messenger, Telegram, WhatsApp) to enable real-time data collection
and mass-communication with target end-users, including beneficiaries and frontline workers
228 Sit Rep September 2020
229 Egy-UNICEF-10
230 Jor-NGO-01
231 Each week, campaign content is also shared with 56 local and community-based organizations, and nearly
155 social media pages and groups, who then disseminating the content on through their platforms.
Mobilization of social media influencers, community and religious leaders is ongoing, and trainings are now
being conducted online for government staff, volunteers, university students, and civil society partners. To
date,180 volunteers have been trained on COVID-19 response and community engagement through live online
sessions.
35
case management during COVID-19 were developed and used during COVID-19
lockdown232.
• Establishing new partnerships. In Lebanon, following the Beirut port explosion,
UNICEF reached out to new private sector partners (e.g., yoga and sport clubs)233 to
ensure that psychosocial services would be available to those who needed them. In
addition, it adapted its messages to better resonate with urban middle class children
and adolescents.
Based on the above, UNICEF in the three countries has clearly proven its adaptive
capacities. However, it is too soon to assess the extent to which these adaptations have
been successful in reaching the target population and in providing effective services. In
addition, several stakeholders reported a variety of challenges related to remote service
delivery, including: (i) increase in demand in services due to higher levels of violence,
however identification of cases decreased234; (ii) difficulty in guaranteeing confidentiality;
(iii) unavailability of a safe space to meet; (iv) lack of internet and/or devices at home235;
(v) even when available, girls, especially were not always allowed to use the internet; (vi)
most of the services were delivered to adults/parents and less to children236; (vii) difficulty
for social service workforce to assess remotely to
better understand context; (viii) particular challenges associated with when VAC is taking
place in the home237,238; (ix) in the instances that cases needed to be referred to other
partners, some were not operational; (x) monitoring was challenging; and (xi) in some
cases quality was compromised239.
7.2 Efficiency
Key findings:
F11. The ET found little evidence that EVAC initiatives use resources in a way that
allows for cost monitoring. Nevertheless, there are several opportunities to
improve cost-monitoring.
F12. Based on an analysis of the funding gaps reported in the SitReps, financial
resources available for CP activities are adequate in Jordan and Lebanon but
insufficient in Egypt.
F13.
region, funding for EVAC activities has been mostly through humanitarian
financing as a result of the Syria crisis.
F14. The evaluation identified several steps that UNICEF in the three countries
implemented to improve the efficiency of programme delivery, including
partnering with national NGOs, reducing operating costs and sharing
information and tools across the three countries.
F15. Notwithstanding the above mentioned cost-efficient measures, the evaluation
identified several issues both internal and external that limit the efficiency of
EVAC interventions by either increasing the cost and/or decreasing the number
of people reached. These inefficiencies were caused mostly by COVID-19
232 Sit Rep mid-2020.
233 UNICEF staff noted that this comes with its own challenges of making sure that the private sector partners
adhere to UNICE .
234 In Jordan, children were unable to come to Makani centers to report cases of violence.
235 Jor-UNICEF-06
236 Jor-UNICEF-07
237 Leb-UNICEF-05
238 Jor-NGO-01
239 Jor-UNICEF-06
36
related delays, internal UNICEF processes, insufficient local capacities and lack
of trust among different stakeholders.
7.2.1 Cost monitoring
The ET found little evidence that EVAC initiatives use resources in a way that allows
for cost monitoring. With the exception of Jordan which is implementing the
Campaign a stand-alone programme which aims to reduce violence against children in
schools Egypt and Lebanon are integrating EVAC activities into their CP programming.
As a result, the ET was unable to determine the extent to which the resources are used in
such a way that allows for cost monitoring and maximizes utility per dollar of investment.
For example, the ET was unable to assess which SDC, Makani Center or CPC was more
efficient since information of number of beneficiaries per dollar spent was unavailable.
Furthermore, in Jordan and Lebanon, the ET was unable to assess the difference in
efficiency between NGO-managed social development centers and those run by either
UNICEF or the government. Similarly, the ET was unable to determine whether the SBCC
campaigns in the three countries were doing any cost monitoring. One exception is the
cost monitoring of the social media campaigns implemented by UNICEF-Egypt which
looked at both the cost of each campaign as well as the number of people reached per
campaign and their level of engagement (see Annex 17). In Lebanon, both UNICEF and
UNHCR, have a pre-established cost per case which is around US $950 to $1,000 and
allows them to allocate budgets with their implementing partners based on set target
numbers. This has created in some cases some unintended consequences (see
Section 7.3.5).
A point that needs to be highlighted is the difference between cost-efficiency and value-
for-money. In Jordan, the evaluation of the programme carried an in-depth
efficiency analysis and found that the cost per child was three t
VAC - though higher -
value-for- 240. This is an important consideration when designing future
programmes to ensure that budget allocations take into consideration the higher costs
associated with high-risk cases. This also has implications when showcasing cost
efficacies of EVAC programming within national budgets; particularly when governmental
support is limited.
Nevertheless, there are several opportunities to improve cost-monitoring. For
example, in Lebanon, the Qudwa strategy, which includes 30 SBCC interventions, a cost-
benefit analysis or a prioritization of the different activities would allow for more efficient
ach type of
protection service which would also facilitate the cost monitoring of services delivered241.
UNICEF, in 2021, is also planning to conduct a child protection budget expenditure review
as part of the MoSA (ministry-wide) budget expenditure review242 which could lead to
improved efficiency in the future243. Similarly, in Egypt, a planned evaluation of the Child
Based on an analysis of the funding gaps reported in the SitReps, financial resources
available for CP activities are adequate in Jordan and Lebanon but insufficient in Egypt.
240 -
2016, Final Evaluation Report, 21 June 2017
241 MoSA (2020). Strategic Plan of the Ministry of Social Affairs on the Protection of Women and Children,
2020-2026
242 The ministry-wide expenditure review will be carried out by the World Bank.
243 Leb-UNICEF-06
37
Table 7 below provides the funding status for Child Protection244 programming for 2019
and 2020. As the Table indicates, UNICEF-Lebanon has been generously funded to
implement CP activities especially in 2020 - when it received more than 41 percent of
what it required245, followed by UNICEF-Jordan which almost closed the gap between
required and available funding in 2020. Due to relatively low numbers of Syrian refugees,
UNICEF-Egypt remained severely underfunded to implement CP activities, let alone EVAC
interventions. However, UNICEF-Egypt also had non-emergency sources of financing246.
Table 7: Child Protection Funding Status US$ million
Country Year Required Available Funding Gap
US$ Percentage
Egypt 2019 4.9 0.3 4.6 93%
2020 10.3 0.1 10.2 99%
Jordan 2019 25.1 17.3 7.8 31%
2020 19.8 19.1 0.7 3%
Lebanon 2019 28.7 30.3 -1.6 -6%
2020 24.7 34.7 -10.1 -41%247
Sources: 2019 data source: UNICEF Syria Crisis 2019 Humanitarian Situation Report, End of
Year Report as of 31 December 2019; 2020 data source: UNICEF Syria Crisis 2019 Humanitarian
Situation Report, September 2020, funding status as of 10 Oct 2020
for EVAC activities has been mostly through humanitarian financing as a result of the Syria
crisis. Financing of EVAC activities has been predominantly through humanitarian funding
received due to the Syrian crisis. Data regarding funds allocated to EVAC from other
sources of funding was not provided. Furthermore, no information was available regarding
the resource mobilization efforts undertaken for implementing EVAC targeting citizens of
Both UNICEF Lebanon and Egypt expect sustained donor interest to finance EVAC
interventions in the near future248. In the case of Lebanon, this is due to the severe
economic crisis that the country is going through, and for Egypt, continued funding of
EVAC activities is because its EVAC interventions are 249250.
UNICEF-
foresees a decrease in funding for CP interventions. This is leading UNICEF-Jordan to
actively explore more efficient ways to implement EVAC initiatives251 and to work in a more
integrated way across sectors in the future. The CO is immersing staff (employee sharing)
from different sectors in programme planning and design as a way to ensure
complementarity between sectors and by urging sectors to think more creatively about
cross collaboration252.
244 Specific EVAC budgets were not available.
245 According to UNICEF-Lebanon, the CO received substantial additional resources due to COVID-19 and the
Beirut explosion in August 2020.
246 Information regarding sources (humanitarian/non-humanitarian) and amount of funding was unavailable
247 UNICEF Lebanon received additional during in 2020 as a result of the Beirut port explosion in August 2020.
248 Egy-UNICEF-08, Leb-UNICEF-15, Leb-Gov-01
249 Egy-UNICEF-09, Egy-Donor-01
250 wider EVAC
interventions.
251 Jor-UNICEF-02
252 Jor-UNICEF-09
38
The three UNICEF COs use different models of human resource management to
implement EVAC activities which affect the level of integration among the sectors.
UNICEF-Egypt is the only CO which has a dedicated EVAC focal point who acts as a
liaison between the CP sectors and the other sectors. The Jordan CP section is currently
assessing how an expected decrease in donor funding will be reflected in decreased
technical capacity due to lower numbers of staff and what measures it needs to put in
place for greater integration with other sectors to improve efficiency and maintain a
certain capacity level253. In Lebanon, the CP section being one of the largest CP
programmes in the world - has focal points for health, education, SBCC, and gender who
liaise with the other sections. Though most CP staff in Lebanon admitted to having a very
high workload, they did not see the necessity to have an EVAC focal point within the CP
sector. Finally, UNICEF CP staff both in Jordan and Lebanon pointed out the risk of
burnout of personnel working in the EVAC sector254 and, in Lebanon, UNICEF staff noted
the importance of self-care and support that UNICEF provided to country office staff,
especially following the Beirut explosion255.
7.2.2 Efficiency of alternative methods of programme delivery
During the period of the evaluation (2019-2020), UNICEF in the three countries used
different modalities for delivering services as well as for implementing prevention activities
which lead to behaviour change; however partial information was available to assess the
efficiency of these different methods. In terms of service provision, the three modalities
used are through government-run facilities (in the three countries), through implementing
partners (Jordan and Lebanon, and to a lesser extent Egypt) and through direct service
provision by UNICEF (Jordan). Data256 was unavailable to assess the difference in
efficiency of the three modalities. Similarly, a variety of partners are implementing
prevention activities. In schools, awareness-raising is carried out mostly by Ministry of
Education staff. Within communities (both host and refugee), social and behavioural
change is promoted through NGOs and UNICEF is directly implementing social media
campaigns in the three countries to promote both awareness and a change in attitudes
and practices257.
The ET identified several steps that UNICEF in the three countries implemented to
improve the efficiency of programme delivery. Following are the measures introduced to
improve cost-efficiency:
• Moving from implementing through INGOs to partnering with national NGOs thus
reducing costs. UNICEF-Jordan is fully implementing its EVAC activities with national
partners and UNICEF-Lebanon has decreased substantially the number of INGOS
through which it is implementing EVAC interventions. This decision has led to more
efficient service delivery methods and will likely also contribute to the sustainability of
these activities258,259
• Delivering online training due to COVID-19 has proven to be more cost-efficient.
The three COs have delivered online training due to the COVID-19 pandemic and have
253 Jor-UNICEF-02
254 Jor-UNICEF-03
255 Leb-UNICEF-07
256 In order to carry out such an assessment, information regarding budget allocated and number of
beneficiaries reached would be needed.
257 Through Qudwa in Lebanon, prevention messages are planned to be implemented through a wide variety of
partners in the future.
258 Jor-UNICEF-07
259 Leb-Gov-01
39
found that it is an efficient way to reach a large number of people. The three COs are
considering continuing these online courses even post-COVID-19260.
• Use of mobile units. In Lebanon, the use of mobile units to deliver GBV services to
refugees in remote areas have increased the reach and efficiency of these services.
• Cost sharing model with the Government. In Jordan, UNICEF has succeeded in
-sharing
agreement with reputable NGOs (90 percent of Makani Centers in host communities
are owned by NGOs) and the MoSD, whereby UNICEF pays for the staff salaries and
activities and the MoSD covers the rent261; also contributing to the sustainability of
services.
• Reduction in operating expenses. UNICEF-Jordan has installed solar panels in
Makani centers which have both an environmental impact and improve cost-efficiency
at the same time262.
• Shifting to direct implementation in the refugee camps. In Jordan, UNICEF shifted
its approach three years ago, by directly implementing activities through Syrian
volunteers within their own communities, as opposed to continuing to fund partner
aims to cut back on cost while also empowering
the local community263.
• Addressing financial bottlenecks. As a result of the financial crisis in Lebanon which
rendered transferring funds to MoSA, UNICEF partnered with an NGO in order to
address the challenge and avoid delays in programme implementation264.
• Integration with other UNICEF sections. For example, in Lebanon, a joint CP and
Gender training offered to implementing partners resulted in a higher number of
referrals after the Beirut explosion265.
• Sharing of EVAC-related information and experience across the three countries.
Cross-country sharing of information and tools have reduced the cost of production
of new tools. For example, UNICEF-Lebanon used BPP messages developed in Egypt
and adapted them to the Lebanese context266 IMS which
could be later introduced to all the countries in the region267. UNICEF-Jordan used the
guidance to deliver remote services developed by UNICEF-Lebanon and which was
also shared globally.
7.2.3 Factors that limit efficiency of programme delivery
Notwithstanding the above mentioned cost-efficient measure, the evaluation identified
several issues that limit the efficiency of EVAC interventions by either increasing the cost
and/or decreasing the number of people reached.
• Implementation delays due to COVID-19. The three countries had to undergo
lockdown periods (especially Jordan and Lebanon) which resulted in delaying several
activities. In addition, there were some initiatives that were completely halted in 2020,
260 Jor-UNICEF-10
261 Jor-UNICEF-07
262 Jor-UNICEF-07
263 Jor-UNICEF-11
264 Leb-Gov-01
265 Leb-UNICEF-03
266 Leb-UNICEF-05
267 Jor-UNICEF-01
40
such as the rolling out of GBV with MEHE in Lebanon. In Egypt, new initiatives planned
with other UN agencies were also postponed due to COVID-19268.
• Social distancing procedures due to COVID-19 have reduced efficiency. The social
distancing procedures limit the number of people who can be present at the same
time in one room. This has led to a decrease in number of participants/session, thus
decreasing the cost-efficiency of in-person training/awareness-raising activities
during the pandemic and a greater difficulty for COs to reach their planned targets.
• Unrest prevented people at risk of violence from accessing services. In Lebanon,
the GBV programme faced challenges in the implementation during the last quarter
of 2019. The civil unrest, instable security situation and the road blockages hindered
the access of women and adolescent girls to the safe spaces across the country, and
partially interrupted some GBV activities (e.g., GBV risk mitigation and community
initiatives) and affected the target number reached269.
• Delays in issuance of ministerial clearances. In Lebanon, the internal political
challenges within MoSA delayed the timely issuance of clearances to allow some GBV
partners to continue service provision in Social Development Centre (SDCs); this
affected the target number reached. UNICEF followed up closely with MoSA to ensure
the issuing of the clearances and, with partners, promoted the mobile approach to
reach women and girls during the time (though at a smaller scale)270. Similarly, there
were delays in Jordan due to Ministry of Planning and International Cooperation
(MoPIC) approvals.
• Short-term planning and contracts. Due to the funding of EVAC interventions
through a humanitarian programme, contracting of implementing partners is done on
an annual basis and UNICEF is unable to plan or issue contracts on a multi-year basis,
leading to delays in implementation, especially at the beginning of each contract
cycle271. This is particularly felt by the Palestinian programme in UNICEF-Lebanon
which can issue only very short term contracts272,273 In Jordan, the CO noted that
although it adopted and launched plans of actions and standard operation
procedures, putting them into action has been largely donor dependent, which was
challenging due to short-term and unpredictable funding affecting programmes and
staff274.
• Internal UNICEF administrative procedures. UNICEF processes regarding human
resources recruitment and procurement cause delays and impact the efficiency of
EVAC as noted by several programme staff275.
• Internal coordination inefficiencies within CP. Due to the wide-reaching scope of
the CP programme
between the different specializations under the programme. As expressed by one staff
memb , is impacting the complementarity
of programming within the CP sector. The lack of integration between the different
staff members/specializations is contributing to gaps in service provision276 and gives
the impression of a disjointed approach to partners at the national level277.
268 Egy-UNICEF-02, Egy-UNICEF-03
269 SitRep Annual 2019
270 Sit Rep Annual 2019
271 Leb-NGO-07, Leb-NGO-01, Egy-NGO-02
272 Leb-UNICEF-09
273 For example, .
274 Jordan RAM 2020
275 Leb-UNICEF-01 ,Jor-UNICEF-01, Jor-UNICEF-05
276 Jor-UNICEF-10, Leb-UNICEF-03
277 Jor-UNICEF-10
41
• Inefficient procurement. UNICEF-Jordan provided MoSD with 13 cars which were
not used because the Ministry did not have the sufficient number of drivers278.
• Limited availability of national professional contractors. In Jordan, the limited
specialized expertise in the country meant that requests for proposals (RFPs) had to
be re-issued several times and delayed some work279.
• Lack of trust which results in lower numbers of beneficiaries: In Jordan, the Family
Protection Department (FPD) is under the police. During interviews, it was noted that
trust in the police system is questionable and could potentially be preventing people
from accessing services, particularly within the refugee camps280. Furthermore, some
actors raised the issue of trust in relation to what can be done if the perpetrator of
violence is a government/police force employee281.
• Lack of trust between NGOs and government which results in duplication of
systems (see Box 2). In both Jordan and Lebanon, the lack of trust between
implementing partners and government has led to the duplication and/overlapping of
systems (CPIMS and FVTS in Jordan; RIMS and CPIMS in Lebanon). Though the
different systems are not identical, the existence of various information management
systems is an inefficient use of resources.
278 Jor-Gov-02
279 Jordan RAM 2020, Jor-UNICEF-01
280 Jor-UNICEF-08
281 Jor-UNICEF-02
42
Box 2. How lack of trust decreases efficiency
In both Jordan and Lebanon, several stakeholders (UNICEF staff, Implementing
Partners and government) noted how lack of trust impacts efficiency282. In Jordan,
two monitoring systems have been established the CPIMS (hosted by IMC) and the
FVTS (developed by UNICEF and hosted by NCFA) albeit they are not identical.
However, UNICEF is supporting both because humanitarian partners do not trust the
government managed FVTS. In addition, there is resistance on the part of government
employees to enter information in the FVTS since they are afraid they would be held
accountable given that the system would allow to track the number, type and
timeliness of social services being provided. Similarly, in Lebanon, UNICEF is
supporting the roll out of the CPIMS (which would be accessible also by MoSA).
However, several implementing partners have not signed up to it because they do not
trust MoSA. The roll out is taking time to complete though, in the long-run, the decision
of placing it within MoSA would ensure greater coordination and sustainability. In both
countries, challenges related to lack of trust by implementing partners remain
regarding the use a government-managed information system.
Source: KIIs.
• Limited leveraging of public/private funding. With the exception of UNICEF-Egypt
(see section 7.4.4) which succeeded in partnering the private sector to implement
awareness-raising campaigns, the COs have not been able to tap into public funding
(e.g., linking EVAC with World Bank-financed social protection programmes) and/or
mobilizing resources from private companies.
• Duplication of service delivery and of capacity building. Several NGOs in Lebanon
reported that there is duplication of services provided, notwithstanding the existing
coordination mechanisms283. Furthermore, both in the three countries, stakeholders
pointed out that there is also duplication in capacity building and training activities for
systems strengthening and the professionalization of the social workface since
different donors are funding these activities and several UN agencies/NGOs are
implementing them284. Finally, there are overlaps between the different case
management monitoring systems which are being set up in the different countries
(see Box 3).
282 UNICEF-Jor-02, Leb-UNICEF-04, Leb-NGO-08, Leb-NGO-06
283 Leb-NGO-09, Leb-NGO-08, Leb-NGO-07
284 Jor-UNICEF-02, Egy-NGO-02
43
Box 3. Diversity of information management systems leading to inefficiencies in
service provision the case of Jordan
• There is currently more than one information management system to track
VAC/GBV cases in Jordan. These include the CPIMS+/PRIMERO (developed by
UNICEF, IMC and UNHCR) and used by INGOs/NGOs working in the
humanitarian setting, the GBVIMS (developed by UNFPA, UNICEF and UNHCR)
and used by six NGOs which provide service delivery to survivors of GBV and the
National Family Violence Tracking System (developed by UNICEF and NCFA) and
used by the FPD and ministries. UNICEF also has its own system named Bayanati
which registers profiles of children, youth and parents accessing Makani service.
• Challenges related to the operations of the FVTS have been previously
documented in research studies; namely the Economic Policy Research Institute
(2018) evaluation of the UNICEF-supported specialized child protection case
management response in Jordan 2013-2017.
• Findings revealed that the FVTS system is optimal when it works, yet at this
stage, it is only currently piloted in one hospital and it is still not working properly.
• There is a lack of staff dedicated to overseeing the use and monitoring of the
FVTS among governmental entities, and periodic data collection and reporting is
not being conducted.
• Currently, the FVTS includes cases in Amman and only engages some partners,
so it does not capture the overall picture.
• The reliability of the CPIMS during the COVID-19 outbreak is also questionable,
because social workers did not have access to beneficiaries; as such
underreporting may be an issue.
• UNICEF cannot (at this stage) discontinue the use of the CPIMS, it is working on
unifying a case management system for all people in Jordan. Yet the FVTS is still
in the developing phase.
• UNICEF recognizes that running two systems is not cost efficient and is
advocating for one system as investing in two is neither cost efficient nor does it
provide comprehensive information regarding child protection.
The aforementioned points provide a detailed description of the system in Jordan.
Nevertheless, similar challenges exist in Egypt, where UNICEF is supporting the roll-out
of the CPIMS under the NCCM and is also working with MoSS to set up its own case
management system. UNICEF-Egypt is cognizant of the importance to make the two
systems interoperable and complimentary in order to improve both their efficiency and
effectiveness285.
285 Egy-UNICEF-08, Egy-Gov-01
44
Table 8. Summary of internal and external factors that increase or decrease efficiency
Internal External
• Strong internal coordination • Capacity of IPs
across UNICEF sectors
• Costing of social services
• More efficient Implementing
• Budget expenditure review
Increase modalities (through national
NGOs, online, mobile units)
• Reduction in operating expenses
• Sharing of experiences
• UNICEF procedures • Delays due to COVID-19
• Weak internal coordination within • Social distancing reduces numbers
the CP sector
• Financial crisis in Lebanon
• Inefficient procurement
• Unrest reduces access
• Short-term nature of humanitarian
Decrease • Delays in government approvals
planning
• Short-term nature of humanitarian
• Duplication of service delivery and
planning
capacity building
• Limited national expertise
• Lack of trust
7.3 Effectiveness
Key findings:
F16. Overall, the three countries were able to achieve the expected results in 2019.
In 2020, and partly due to the COVID-19 pandemic, not all the planned results
were met.
F17.
changes at the different social levels outlined in the Global EVAC ToC.
Children/adolescents and caregivers have gained greater awareness of VAC
institutional level, UNICEF supported the development of SOPs, CMRs, the
rolling out of the CPIMS/FVTS and capacity building of government staff. At the
level of legal and political frameworks, the changes included the development
of an EVAC strategy in Egypt, a Child Protection and sectoral strategies in
Lebanon, and amendments to laws in Jordan. Limited evidence exists that
changes occurred at the society/community and social norms levels.
F18. Several factors contributed or hindered progress towards achieving the
expected results. These include (i) the existence of processes that increase
commitment, ownership and buy-in, integration of EVAC into other sectors, and
mechanisms that provide incentives and ensure accountability; (ii) the capacity
levels of all stakeholders (UNICEF, IPs and government); and (iii) external
factors, including the crises, funding and existence of multiple Helplines.
F19. From the information made available, the Evaluation Team concluded that
UNICEF COs would be able to monitor results disaggregated by gender,
45
nationality, age, disability, geographic area, but it is not clear (i) to what extent
this is being done, and (ii) to what extent this can be done across all
interventions, i.e., some intervention results may be disaggregated by gender
but not by nationality, some may be disaggregated by age, and others by
disability or geographic location.
F20. Though there are several M&E reports that provide information regarding EVAC
interventions, the ET was unable to determine the extent to which they are being
used to effectively measure progress in achieving planned results and to guide
programme implementation.
F21. At the national level, the two surveys that may be used as baselines as well as
for monitoring outcome level indicators are the DHS/MICS which is supported
by UNICEF and the WHO School-Based Student Health Survey.
F22.
F23. The evaluation identified five unplanned effects of the EVAC interventions in the
countries under study. Two had unintended positive consequences: (i) wide
acceptance of receiving psychosocial support remotely and (ii) greater ease in
involving men through online means. Three had unintended negative impacts
and they include (i) overwhelming the Child Helpline as a result of a successful
social media campaign in Egypt; (ii) several repercussions due to target setting
in Lebanon; and (iii) resentment due to targeting only teachers in the
programme in Jordan.
F24. The ET identified two initiatives that would merit deeper analysis and an
assessment how they could develop impact at the national, regional and
possibly global level. They are: (i) delivering prevention and response services
to caretakers remotely post COVID-19; and (ii) addressing EVAC by partnering
with faith-based organizations (FBOs), which is a necessary approach to
achieve change in societal norms in the region. In addition, case management
would merit an in-depth assessment which would analyse in-take, referral, case
resolution, coordination and the roll out of the CPIMS.
F25. UNICEF in the three countries has coordinated with different government
institutions, UN agencies, NGOs and the private sector which has contributed
to achieving the expected results. However, there is a missed opportunity for
greater coordination and collaboration with UN Women, especially to carry out
high-level advocacy as well as to better integrate VAC and VAW interventions.
F26. The extent of internal coordination and complementarity varies between one
sector and another, with the greatest integration taking place between the Child
Protection and Education sectors within UNICEF.
7.3.1 Achievement of expected results
Overall, the three countries were able to achieve the expected results in 2019. In 2020,
and partly due to the COVID-19 pandemic, not all the planned results were met. Annex
18 includes the detailed information on planned and achieved results for 2019 and 2020.
Table 9 below provides the self-assess
targets for select CP activities286. As to be expected given the multiple crises that Lebanon
went through in 2020, UNICEF-Lebanon is the CO that was the least able to achieve its
planned targets, followed by Jordan which had long periods of lockdown due to COVID-
19. UNICEF-Egypt was able to improve its delivery rate in 2020.
286 As noted earlier, EVAC activities are often integrated into broader CP interventions. The ET selected the
indicators that it considered the most related to EVAC
46
Table 9. Self-rating by COs of key EVAC-related indicators287
Egypt Jordan Lebanon
2019 % 2020 % 2019 % 2020 % 2019 % 2020 %
9 50 13 76 4 33 6 32 14 54 11 30
7 39 3 18 5 42 11 58 9 35 17 46
2 11 1 6 3 25 2 10 3 11 9 24
Source: RAM Reports 2020
The data from the SitReps of 2019 show a slightly different picture (see Table 10). Though
it is difficult to compare the information for 2019 (which covers 12 months) with that of
2020 (which covers 9 months), the Table below reveals that the three countries were
unable to achieve the same results in 2020 as in 2019.
Table 10. Percentage Achieved Results vs Planned Targets
2019 2020
% % % % % %
Achieved Female Male Achieved Female Male
vs vs.
Planned Planned
Egypt
# children, adolescents and 201% n/a n/a 32% n/a n/a
youth participating in
structured, sustained PSS,
life skills and CP
programmes
# women and men 145% n/a n/a 65% n/a n/a
participating in positive
parenting programmes
# children, adolescents and 114% n/a n/a 45% n/a n/a
youth benefitting from multi
sectoral case management
Jordan
# girls and boys participating 139% 54% 46% 105% 54% 46%
in structured, sustained child
protection or psychosocial
support programmes
# girls and boys who are 75% 42% 58% 47% 47% 53%
receiving specialized child
protection services
# women and men 109% 87% 13% 87% 79% 10%
participating in PSS or
287 This table includes the self-rating provided in the RAM by the COs. It is important to note that there are
inconsistencies with how the ratings were determined.
47
2019 2020
% % % % % %
Achieved Female Male Achieved Female Male
vs vs.
Planned Planned
parenting education
programmes
# women and men trained 111% 65% 35% 64% 63% 20%
on child protection
Lebanon
# of girls and boys receiving 129% 50% 50% 40% 49% 51%
specialized/ focused PSS
# of boys and girls assisted 122% 40% 60% 67% 49% 51%
through child protection
case management and
specialized services
# women and girls 85% 94% 6% 64% 97% 3%
accessing mobile and safe
spaces
Source: SitReps 2019 (Annual), 2020 (September 2020)
According to Table 10 above, UNICEF-Egypt does not report on the basis of sex-
disaggregation reporting. In Jordan, whereas more girls participate in child
protection support programmes; more boys receive specialized support. In terms of
caregivers, women are significantly more reached than men through PSS, better
parenting and child protection programmes. In Lebanon, an equal number of girls and
boys are reached through specialized PSS interventions; however more boys benefit from
specialized child protection case management.
Finally, another source of monitoring data is the regional Strategic Monitoring Questions
(SMQ) Report (see Table 11) which provides information on two EVAC-related indicators.
However, the information includes only the number of people reached (not those that
were planned) and the data is not gender-disaggregated.
48
Table 11. Violence Against Children Indicators (2019)288
Egypt Jorda Lebano
n n
3.3.a # of mothers, fathers and caregivers reached 21,729 48,895 31,319
through parenting as core prevention and response
interventions addressing violence against children
through UNICEF-supported programme
3.3.b # of girls and boys who have experienced violence 28,731 7,287 5,389
reached by health, social work or justice/law enforcement
services as core prevention and response interventions
addressing violence against children through UNICEF-
supported programmes
Source: UNICEF (2020). Middle East and North Africa Strategic Plan 2018-2021 Goal Area 3
SMQ, Summary Analysis, October 2020
7.3.2 Generation of changes at the different social levels outlined in the
EVAC ToC
changes at the different social levels outlined in the Global EVAC ToC:
children/adolescents, caregivers, institutions, legal and policy. However, limited evidence
exists that changes occurred at the society/community and social norms levels. Equally,
it is important to note the following when assessing EVAC activities outcomes: (i) EVAC
outcome-level changes require a long period of time to take effect; (ii) outcome level
monitoring is not taking place on an annual basis in the three countries; (iii) VAC
mandate; and (iv) the double health and associated economic crises of 2020 have had an
impact on achievements with several stakeholders indicating that the multiple crises
However, the ET
was unable to assess in-depth programme effectiveness for three reasons: (i) the limited
number of external stakeholders that the ET met with; (ii) the inability to meet direct
beneficiaries; and (iii) the scarcity of outcome level reporting. This also limited the ability
to triangulate information.
At the individual level of children and adolescents289, most stakeholders reported that
there is a greater awareness among children/adolescents of their rights and, as a result,
more children are seeking help290. In addition, some stakeholders noted that there is
decrease in incidence of violence which was also reflected in UNICEF reports.
• Greater awareness. In Jordan, UNICEF reported that 30 percent of older girls who
are Makani beneficiaries know where to seek support if they experience violence291.
Among the participating children, the percentage of children who believe they have
the right to be protected from violence increased from 86 to 91 percent292.
288 Data for 2020 was unavailable.
289
triangulated and there may be a potential bias
290 Jor-UNICEF-07, Leb-UNICEF-04, Leb-UNICEF-06, Leb-NGO-08
291 RAM Combined Outputs Jordan
292 Since the ET was unable to carry out field visits or to meet with beneficiaries, this information was not
triangulated and there may be a potential bias
49
• Increased number of children seeking help. There is an increase in the number of
children/adolescents asking for help and/or calling the Helplines. Table 12 provides
the number of cases received in 2019 and 2020 through Himaya a Lebanese NGO
and shows a 16 percent increase between the two years. A similar analysis was
unavailable for other government or NGO-run helplines. However, stakeholders noted
an increase in children using the Helplines in Egypt and Jordan293.
Table 12. Number and percentage of cases assessed per reception pathway (2019-
2020)
Percentage
Total Total
change
cases Percent cases Percent
(2019-
New Cases (Lebanon) 2019 2020
2020)
100.00
1,984 100.00% 2,293 % 16
e-helpline 9 0.45% 21 0.92% 133
In person 167 8.42% 132 5.76% -21
Himaya email 1,526 76.92% 1,683 73.40% 10
Reception
Pathway Hotline 270 13.61% 422 18.40% 56
Social Media via 12 0.60% 35 1.53% 192
Communications
Department
Source: Himaya, February 2021
• Decrease in experience of violence. In Jordan, the percentage of children who
reported experiencing violence decreased from 24 to 14 per cent294. Furthermore, a
survey which tracked violence295 on a longitudinal basis revealed that in 2009 the
incidence of verbal violence in schools was 45 per cent and physical violence was 40
per cent, dropping down to 15 per cent and 8 percent respectively between 2018 and
2019296. Similarly, several IPs in Lebanon noted that they have noticed a decrease in
physical violence297.
293 Egy-Gov-01, Egy-UNICEF-02, Egy-UNICEF-05, Jor-NGO-01
294 RAM Combined outputs Jordan
295 UNICEF (n.d.). UNICEF and Ministry of Education- Monthly online survey. The monthly online survey system
is a child and user-friendly digital platform hosted by MoE to monitor verbal, physical, sexual violence, bullying
violence.
296
297 Leb-UNICEF-15
50
Box 4. Awareness, calls to helplines and incidence of violence
Greater awareness of both VAC as well as the existence of helplines might lead to
an increase in number of calls received. However, an increase in number of calls
does not necessarily mean that the incidence of violence has actually increased.
Furthermore, the increase in 2020 might be related to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Similarly, an analysis of the increase in calls by sex, age, or nationality (or any other
demographic data) does not necessarily indicate that the specific group is
experiencing greater VAC, it could also be a result of greater awareness among the
targeted demographic group.
• Resolution of cases. Case management reports were unavailable to assess the
extent to which case closures were taking place in the three countries. According to
UNICEF-Lebanon, 40-50 percent of cases received were successfully closed
(baseline is 30 percent)298.
• Empowerment. In Lebanon, the percentage of girls and women accessing GBV
services who report feeling empowered ranged from 91 percent (2019) to 100 percent
(2020)299.
• A Most Significant Change study in Lebanon found that there are improvements in
terms of knowledge (68 percent), attitudes (60 percent) and behaviour/skills (70
percent)300. However, the study does not provide information as to whether these
around 38 percent of both children and caregivers reported improved communication
and relationships.
At the level of mothers, fathers and other caregivers301, the biggest change was in
improved knowledge regarding EVAC. Information regarding changes in attitudes and/or
practices is mixed.
knowledge and understanding of positive parenting from a religious perspective was
reported in Assiut302. In Jordan, in both 2019 and 2020, more than 95 percent of targeted
parents through the BPP self-reported an improvement in knowledge and skills on
positive parenting practices303. For parents, the Programme has contributed to
heightened awareness of VAC and its implications for children. Also, has given
erstanding of complaint mechanisms. In Makani centers, staff
noticed ur and a decrease in reported violence304. Staff have
also noted that recidivism rate is very low305. Similarly, in Lebanon, several NGOs have
observed a decrease in violence306. Furthermore, the Qudwa Strategy has developed a
caretaker toolbox to encourage positive and responsive caregiving. However, insufficient
information was available to assess the extent it has been utilized to generate any
changes at the level of caregivers.
298 Leb-UNICEF-04
299 RAM Report 2020
300 UNICEF Lebanon (2020). Most Significant Change (MSC) - Presentation of Findings-Lessons Learned &
Way Forward, December 2020
301 Since the ET was unable to carry out field visits or to meet with caregivers, this information was not
triangulated and there may be a potential bias
302 RAM 2020
303 RAM 2020
304 Jor-Gov-02
305 Jor-UNICEF-07
306 Leb-NGO-02, Leb-NGO-01, Leb-NGO-08
51
The evaluation also reported that the greatest impact of was on increased
awareness, knowledge and skills and parental involvement in schools307. For
teachers, the Programme has introduced them to new and more constructive ways of
managing students and delinquent behaviours. However, according to UNICEF staff
based on field visits - a sizeable portion have not changed their practices and still engage
in physical violence308. Stakeholders in both Jordan and Egypt pointed out that without
accountability mechanisms that are enforced, it will be difficult to achieve the change in
behaviour required.
In the last two years, the changes at the social/community level were mostly
anecdotal. Several media campaigns were implemented in Jordan and, especially, in
Egypt which generated impressive numbers of views and engagement. However, the ET
was unable to assess the changes that took place in society as a result of these
campaigns309. Community-level activities created both an increased knowledge regarding
VAC as well as greater acknowledgment that VAC is taking place in the society.
• Increased knowledge/awareness within the communities. In Egypt, in a pre- and
post-assessment, 88 percent of those surveyed demonstrated increased knowledge
in relation to VAC and harmful practices attributable to their interactions with religious
leaders exposed to the capacity building programme supported by UNICEF310.
• Wider acceptance of the existence of VAC. In Egypt, field interviews were held with
trained religious leaders, many of them reported a positive shift in the public attitude
towards the discussed issues311. In Jordan, according to the Campaign
evaluation, there was a visible transformation from the state of
to an
a problem that merits immediate and comprehensive solutions312. The demand to
expand the coverage from schools to homes and neighborhoods was another
reflection of impact. At the same time, UNICEF staff in Jordan noted
that Makani centers provide services to a limited number of people in the host
communities and that UNICEF did not focus sufficiently on community engagement
and in involving community leaders313. UNICEF has a much bigger footprint in refugee
camps where it is easier to involve a greater number of stakeholders314.
At the systems and institutional level, UNICEF supported several significant changes in
the last two years, including the development of SOPs, CMRs, the rolling out of the
CPIMS/FVTS and capacity building of government staff.
• Strengthening institutional structures. UNICEF in Egypt has supported the
establishment of CPCs in the governorates it is targeting and built the capacity of their
members. In Jordan, UNICEF has provided assistance to the Makani centers to
provide integrated services at the local level. UNICEF, in Lebanon, in the period under
evaluation has placed greater emphasis to working with municipalities than to
delivering services through the Social Development Centers due to due to
307
308 Jor-UNICEF-06
309 In Egypt, the assessment which was shared with the Evaluation Team was done in 2017 (Bayan Research
and Consultancy. 2017. Final Report: Assessing Awladna Campaign Outreach, Presented to: UNICEF Egypt by
Byan Research and Consultancy, April 2017)
310 UNICEF Egypt Partnership with Faith Based Organizations (FBOs) Programme Overview, Cairo, August
2019
311 UNICEF Egypt Partnership with Faith Based Organizations (FBOs) Programme Overview, Cairo, August
2019
312 Jor-Gov-02
313 Jor-UNICEF-02
314 Jor-UNICEF-08
52
administrative and financial procedural bottlenecks315. There may be an opportunity
for UNICEF in the
assessment done by the Italian cooperation316.
• Improvement in processes for EVAC. In Egypt, a review of the national case
management Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs) was finalized and an annex on
emergency procedures was drafted in light of COVID-19. Together with NCFA and
MoE, UNICEF in Jordan developed national SOPs for GBV and child protection. These
aim to guide GBV and child protection cases within the education system317. It also
launched the national protocol for Clinical Management of Rape (CMR)318.
Furthermore, in Lebanon, UNICEF has started developing the CP and GBV guidelines
for the health sector, and guidance and SOPs related to justice for children. In the
three countries, work on strengthening the child protection case management
systems continued. In Jordan, as mentioned earlier, UNICEF is strengthening a
national system to track family violence. The systems in the three countries are still
work-in progress and need further strengthening and greater buy-in from all actors
involved in EVAC.
• Increase in government staff capacities and awareness. Several UNICEF staff in
Jordan and Lebanon noted that there has been a noticeable shift in capacities and
way of working in MoSA/MoSD and MEHE319. In the three countries, both UNICEF
and IP staff, noted more referrals taking place between different government
institutions (e.g., prosecutors/police referring children to social workers320) and from
government agencies to IPs. As a result of this increased capacity and enhanced
awareness regarding VAC MoE in Jordan asked that PSS activities be included in
Darsak, an e-learning portal321. Similarly, in Egypt, due to the work UNICEF undertook
E requested that EVAC
be integrated into Education 2.0, the national education reform programme322. Finally,
during COVID-19 lockdown, in Jordan, FPD demonstrated its enhanced capacities
since it was one of the few institutions that remained fully operational323.
At the level of legal and political frameworks, the changes included the development of
an EVAC strategy in Egypt, a Child Protection and sectoral strategies in Lebanon, and
amendments to laws in Jordan.
In Egypt, the EVAC National Strategic Framework was endorsed and a National Action
plan was developed. UNICEF continued to advocate and provided technical support for
secondary legislation decrees to operationalize the Child Law which resulted in a legal
provision on the case management system being introduced in the by-laws324. In order to
address gaps in existing legislation, UNICEF in Jordan supported the NCFA and key
which are currently being
reviewed by the Legal Bureau within the Jordanian Parliament. UNICEF also supported a
costing study of two the draft laws; a mandatory step for relevant ministry endorsement325.
315 RAM 2020
316 Leb-Gov-01
317 RAM 2020
318 UNICEF (2020). 2019 End of Year Results Summary Narrative Jordan
319 Jor-UNICEF-05, Leb-UNICEF-06
320 Egy-NGO-02, Leb-NGO-07, Leb-NGO-04
321 Jor-UNICEF-10, Egy-UNICEF-10
322 Egy-UN-01
323 Jor-UNICEF-08
324 UNICEF (2020).Government of Egypt UNICEF Country Programme 2018-2022, MoFA-UNICEF
Egypt Annual Review Meeting
325 UNICEF (2020). Jordan RAM Combined Outcomes, Outputs and End Year Summary Narratives Report
53
currently justified as a traditional practice under Article 62 of the Penal Code. In Lebanon,
a significant milestone was reached with the launch of the Ministry of Social Affairs (MoSA)
Strategic Plan for Child Protection and Gender-based Violence which provides a roadmap
for -national levels326. UNICEF and MoSA also
finalized the Social and Behavioural Change Plan, called Qudwa327. UNICEF supported
MEHE in developing its Child Protection Policy in Schools and has rolled-out of the CP
policy in approximately one-third of public schools through training and development of
tools, using a whole-of-school approach. In addition, UNICEF is developing the Clinical
Management of Rape (CMR) strategy in collaboration with the MoPH and UNFPA.
UNICEF-Lebanon continued to collaborate with the Parliamentary Committee on Women
and Children and advocate for child-friendly laws.
Given the limited scope of the evaluation which covers the period 2019-2020, the ET did
not find any evidence of changes to social norms and gender inequalities. Nevertheless,
the Qudwa Strategy in Lebanon includes research on social norms as well as
recommendations on how to promote positive change. It remains to be seen whether the
Strategy when implemented will be able to achieve these changes. Similarly, the
Dawwie programme in Egypt, by partnering with Faith-Based Organizations, is tackling
both social norms and addressing
tannamor bullying) into the lexicon of both formal
documents as well as in the colloquial language as a result of the massive social media
campaign which UNICEF conducted in Egypt. Creating a word that is widely used to
describe one form of violence is the first step towards addressing social norms.
However, various stakeholders consider that not enough emphasis is being placed on
changing the mindsets since violence is bound by social norms and religious beliefs328
rendering the issue very sensitive329. They noted that there is a large divide between what
UNICEF would define as VAC and what is culturally acceptable as
upbringing330.
7.3.3 Factors that contribute or hinder progress
Several factors contribute or hinder progress towards achieving the expected results.
These include (i) the existence of processes that increase commitment, ownership and
buy-in, integration of EVAC into other sectors; and mechanisms that provide incentives
and ensure accountability; (ii) the capacity levels of all stakeholders (UNICEF, IPs and
government); and (iii) external factors, including the crises, funding and existence of
multiple Helplines.
Processes that contribute to achieving results:
• High-level political will and leadership. High-level commitment sends a strong signal
regarding the importance of EVAC. For example, in Jordan the NCFA is chaired by
Queen Rania Al Abdulla and a number of ministries signed the road map on how
violence could be addressed331. Similarly, in Egypt, the most successful CPCs are in
the governorates with a high-level commitment from the Governor himself332.
Notwithstanding the high-level political commitment, UNICEF in the three countries,
still faces challenges in securing broad "buy in". This is particularly true when VAC is
326 Sit Rep mid 2020
327 Sit Rep mid 2020
328 Egy-UNICEF-10 and Combined RAM outputs
329 Jor-UNICEF-06 and Jor-UNICEF-07
330 Jor-UNICEF-08
331 Jor-UNICEF-02
332 Egy-Government-01
54
violence programming is not seen as a priority333
and, as a consequence, insufficient national budgets are allocated to address EVAC
effectively.
• Ownership through participatory planning. Several stakeholders noted the
importance of involving and consulting with key stakeholders at the start of the
planning stage to ensure ownership and commitment during the implementation
phase. In Jordan, for example, UNICEF staff noted that engaging with MoE in joint
conceptualization and planning was important to guarantee ownership and
institutionalization of interventions334. In addition, UNICEF staff in Jordan realized the
importance of involving refugees in camps to improve their buy-in. With time, staff
had noted the decrease in beneficiary involvement and the need to implement
innovative practices since the awareness-raising sessions had become repetitive335.
Similarly, in Lebanon, some stakeholders noted that the municipal plans that are being
developed do not involve, at the planning stage, all concerned stakeholders,
especially the CSOs that are active within the municipality336.
• Innovative processes to achieve greater buy-in. In Jordan, UNICEF initially
laws. However, often the parliamentarians would not attend these meetings337. In
order to move forward, UNICEF-Jordan organized a retreat which increased the level
of commitment and, as a result of the productive meetings, the laws were drafted338.
In Jordan, UNICEF used a cascading method to transmit family-friendly messages in
k of volunteers
339. The CP staff in Amman sent
the messages to the Makani centers which they in their turn disseminated them
through their volunteer WhatsApp groups. In this way, the messages arrived from
someone familiar to the caregivers and not from an unknown source340. In Lebanon,
-to-peer awareness-
judges in order to get their buy-in.
• Integrating EVAC into other sectors. UNICEF, in Egypt, is exploring ways to integrate
EVAC into the Social Protection programme by assessing the VAC risks of families
participating in the Takafol wa Karama programme. In Makani centers, the experience
of multi-sectoral service provision highlights the importance of linking EVAC with
other sectors. Children were sent to the Makani Centers for educational classes and
EVAC was integrated into those services. UNICEF staff concluded that the messages
-
341.
Similarly, in Lebanon, linking EVAC with adolescent vocational training increases
effectiveness342. In contrast, some stakeholders pointed to the ineffectiveness of
addressing EVAC in isolation. According to the evaluation, some viewed the
Programme as a waste of resources and time, pointing to the inadequacy of the
333 Jor-Gov-02
334 Jor-UNICEF-06, Egy-UNICEF-08, Egy-Donor-02
335 Jor-UNICEF-11
336 Leb-NGO-06
337 UNICEF (2020). Jordan RAM Combined Outcomes, Outputs and End Year Summary Narratives Report
338 Jor-UNICEF-01
339 Jor-UNICEF-11
340 Jor-UNICEF-08
341 Jor-UNICEF-07, Jor-UNICEF-011
342 Leb-UNICEF-03, Leb-NGO-07
55
existing school infrastructure, the overworking of teachers, and the need to address
EVAC as part of a system-wide approach343.
• Using accountability mechanisms and management supervision. The three
countries are envisaging several ways to ensure accountability and link it to
standards and accreditation which would be an incentive linked to a career
pathway344; however, these mechanisms are still not in place. In Jordan, the MoE
considers CP criteria when awarding the Queen Rania Award for Excellence in
Education for select teachers and counselors345. In Jordan, a clause has been
violence however, it is easier to apply to teachers engaged in supplementary
education than those who are within the public service as permanent civil service
staff.346
professional standards and accreditation which would be an incentive linked to a
career pathway.347 For example, in Lebanon, it is mandatory for newly-appointed
teachers in public schools to attend a CP training. The importance of an accountability
system is corroborated with information and data from UNRWA in Jordan. UNRWA
schools have lower levels of VAC because of the existence of clear codes of conduct,
perpetrators go punished and this acts as a deterrent348. The evaluation also
reported that a reduction in VAC in UNRWA run schools is marginally higher and
correlates with the use of better accountability mechanisms and management
supervision; training of teachers; and staff availability including other elements349.
• Focusing on specific messages and targeting of schools with high VAC rates. In
Jordan, the Tarbiyah programme targets schools with high levels of violence.
According to the evaluation, the results for targeted schools under Tarbiyah
schools (including all UNRWA-managed schools) are better than regular non-Tarbiyah
schools and recommended that the model should be scaled up to include other poorly
performing schools. Furthermore, the results indicated that the approach is more
effective with younger children. Also, according to some stakeholders350, by focusing
was more effective in making a dent to address this type of violence than covering
different forms of violence which would have diluted both the efforts and message351.
• Using Arabic language in meetings and documents. In Jordan, UN agencies use
English language as their main means of communication. However, many government
and NGO representatives speak only Arabic which limited their participation in
coordination meetings. With the provision of translation and interpretation, there was
an increase in the participation in government actors352. A similar point was made in
Lebanon where NGOs noted that the workplan developed for the municipality in
Tripoli was written in English which limits its effectiveness and decreases the sense
343 vironment Program
344 Jor-UNICEF-06, Egy-UNICEF-02, Egy-UN-01, Leb-UNICEF-07
345 Jor-UNICEF-03
346 Jor-UNICEF-06
347 Jor-UNICEF-06
348 Jor-UN-03
349
350 This is a personal opinion, there was no study undertaken to confirm this. Furthermore, even if it may be
more effective to implement an entire multi-year programme focusing only on physical violence, it may be more
efficient if the programme would also tackle simultaneously other types of violence
351 Jor-UNICEF-01
352 Jor-UN-03
56
of ownership353. This point is particularly relevant as UNICEF expands its EVAC
interventions at the decentralized level.
• Recognizing cultural sensitivities. Within the region, social stigma and a culture of
silence are barriers to addressing sexual violence. Raising awareness and prevention
programming on sexual abuse is extremely taboo, particularly within conservative
communities. In Jordan, UNICEF conducted several advocacy meetings with the
Ministry of Awqaf in order to obtain their approval to include questions on sexual
violence in the monthly survey354. The MoE refused to display awareness
raising posters on sexual harassment within schools355. Furthermore, other social
stigmas exist related to reporting violence to the FPD356, particularly within a tribal
society. In Egypt, UNICEF staff noted the importance of putting in place measures to
protect medical doctors from perpetrators of violence should they be reported.
Capacities of stakeholders that affect results:
• capacities. Due to UNICEF administrative processes,
are limited when it comes to funding local CSOs which require higher overhead costs
to administer. This is particularly relevant to Lebanon where service delivery relies on
present, leaving other areas not completely covered357.
• Number of government staff working on EVAC-related issues. In Jordan, the
evaluation reported that VAC rates in schools were directly linked to the number of
counselors in the school (increase in number of counselors resulted in reduced rates
of VAC)358. Similarly, in Lebanon, MEHE increased the number of roving counsellors
from 20 to 50; however, their number is still insufficient to cover the 1,200 public
schools. The case is significantly better when it comes to the second-shift schools
which are attended by Syrian refugees, where there is a counsellor for each school
who is able to deliver a weekly class on psychosocial support359. In Egypt, government
hiring freeze severely limits social workers from providing needed social services.
• Training and capacity building. UNICEF Jordan and Lebanon used different methods
to build the capacity of teachers. In Jordan, the programme used the cascading
model for training delivery. The evaluation considered that this approach
limited the opportunity for 'all' teachers to benefit from the training, hence it was not
360. It concluded that the cascaded training did not
deliver the required quality nor was the quality of cascaded training monitored and
-of- to train and build capacity was
followed361; however, there was no available information on its cost-effectiveness in
general, and on the differences if any between the first and second shift schools362.
In Egypt, multi-stakeholder training, bringing together representatives from different
ministries and civil society was found to be more effective since it provided an
opportunity for staff of different entities to get to know each other and build trust363.
353 Leb-NGO-06
354 Jor-UNICEF-03
355 Jor-UNICEF-06
356 Jor-UNICEF-05
357 Leb-UNICEF-01
358
359 Leb-UNICEF-07
360
361 Leb-NGO-03
362 First shift are majority Lebanese students; second shift are Syrian students.
363 Egy-NGO-01
57
• Establishing strong working relationships at different levels of MoSA. According to
UNICEF-Lebanon, the good working relations between different CP staff and several
MoSA officials in different divisions and at different technical/managerial levels have
contributed to smooth and effective implementation of work even when there are
changes in the government and/or senior management364.
• High turnover of counterpart staff. Both UNICEF Egypt and Jordan pointed out that
the high turnover of government staff FPD in Jordan, judges and prosecutors and
NCCM in Egypt had an impact on effectiveness since it meant that UNICEF had to
invest time in re-establishing relationships as well as building the capacities of the
new staff365. UNICEF-Egypt is advocating for lengthening the rotation period of judges
and prosecutors for a few years in order to ensure better implementation of EVAC
activities. In addition, the Child Protection Chief position in Jordan was vacant for
External factors that hinder the achievement of planned results:
• Existence of multiple helpline services in Jordan and Lebanon: There are several
helplines that are managed by different NGOs in the two countries. In addition, there
are governmental ones (e.g., 911 Hotline in Jordan, and the MoSA and MEHE
Helplines in Lebanon). IP partners reported informal collaboration in Lebanon and a
certain degree of harmonization since they are using the SOPs developed by UNICEF
and in some instances, refer cases to each other366. In Jordan, NGOs noted that
helplines are working independently of one other and there are no SOPs to harmonize
the provision of services and ensure their quality367.
• Multiple successive crises affected planned results. As mentioned earlier, multiple
the crises that Lebanon has gone through, have
efficiency, but have also had an impact on its effectiveness (e.g., inability for girls and
women to reach GBV services). Since then, in order to respond to the changing
context, needs, and priorities, UNICEF-Lebanon had to shift its efforts to providing
more PSS services at the expense of other types of activities (e.g., awareness-raising
and prevention). It also refocused its CP interventions, by increasing its support to
municipalities and decreasing that provided to SDCs368.
• Earmarking of funds. Humanitarian funding tends to be strictly earmarked which
limits the flexible use of funding to respond to needs and to build long-term
sustainability. This was noted in the 2019 SitRep369.
7.3.4 Monitoring of progress
From the information made available, the Evaluation Team concluded that UNICEF COs
would be able to monitor results disaggregated by gender, nationality, age, disability,
geographic area, but it is not clear (i) to what extent this is being done and (ii) to what
extent this can be done across all interventions, i.e., some intervention results may be
disaggregated by gender but not by nationality, some may be disaggregated by age, and
others by disability or geographic location. For example, the CPIMS template allows for
the information to be disaggregated by gender, nationality and, in the case of Lebanon,
also disability (see Annex 19)370. The Helpline data which was shared with the Evaluation
364 Leb-UNICEF-06
365 Jor-UNICEF-01, Jor-UNICEF-08, Egy-UNICEF-02, Egy-UNICEF-08, Egy-UNICEF-05, Egy-Gov-01
366 This happens if (i) the NGO is not operational in the geographic area; (ii) it is a case of GBV; or (iii) it does
not have the capacity to handle the case
367Jor-NGO-01
368 Leb-UNICEF-04
369 UNICEF Sit Rep 2019
370 As mentioned earlier, CPIMS reports were not shared with the Evaluation Team
58
Team provides information disaggregated by gender, age, nationality and geographic
location. However, data shared with the ET did not include referral nor case closure
information, as a result, the ET was unable to determine effectiveness of these Helplines.
The SitReps include results disaggregated by gender (for Jordan and Lebanon) and by
nationality (for Jordan only). The RAM reports do not provide any disaggregation in tabular
form; however, some results are disaggregated by gender in the narrative.
Though there are several M&E reports that provide information regarding EVAC
interventions, not all were made available to the ET (e.g., CPMIS and GBVIMS). As a
result, the ET was unable to determine the extent to which they are being used to
effectively measure progress in achieving planned results and to guide programme
implementation. These include UNICEF reports (e.g. COAR, RAM and SitReps) as well as
CPIMS re
additional monitoring reports specific to one country (e.g., the FVTS, Bayanati reports,
and the monthly online survey in select schools in Jordan). These different tools to monitor
activities can be divided into the following categories (i) internal to UNICEF (e.g. RAM,
COAR, SitReps, Bayanati), (ii) specific to one organization (e.g., NGO Helpline data,
orts and Child
Helpline in Egypt), or (iv) multi-
CPIMS, FVTS, GBVIMS). Finally, the purpose of the different reports varies, ranging from
accountability to external donors, to internal management systems, to monitoring of
implementing partners and improving coordination among different stakeholders.
In addition to these reports, there are several monitoring activities undertaken by the three
countries. For example, UNICEF carries out pre- and post-assessments of its SBCC
activities which capture change in knowledge. UNICEF-Egypt monitors the reach,
engagement, views and engagement rate of all their social media campaigns (see Annex
17 UNICEF-
supported Government-
which could be an intermediate way of monitoring results given that changes at the
outcome level take time to achieve and are not monitored on a yearly basis371. However,
it is unclear how these process indicators are measured. In Jordan, and due to COVID-
19 restrictions, JRF does follow up calls to understand whether their beneficiaries were
satisfied with the services they received372. Finally, UNICEF-Lebanon has started using
storytelling in order to monitor changes in a qualitative way (see Box 5). It has also
committed to invest substantive resources for research and to carry out a baseline, mid-
term and impact assessment of the Qudwa Strategy.
Box 5. Use of Storytelling to Monitor Most Significant Change (MSC)
UNICEF-Lebanon has introduced a participatory methodology to monitor results using
storytellers. More than 900 storytellers (independent and employees of implementing partners)
collected information using the Most Significant Change (MSC) technique, the storytellers were
able to assess changes in knowledge, attitudes and behaviour. However, the information
shared with the Evaluation Team included information (nationality, gender, age) regarding the
storytellers and not the respondents. Care should also be taken not to introduce a bias based
on the gender and nationality of the storytellers (91 percent women and 77 percent Syrian
refugees). They should reflect the same ratio as the beneficiaries reached.
At the national level, the two surveys that may be used as baselines as well as for
monitoring outcome level indicators are the Demographic and Health Survey
371 Egy-UNICEF-01
372 Jor-NGO-01
59
(DHS)/Multiple Indicator Cluster Survey (MICS) which are supported by UNICEF and the
WHO School-Based Student Health Survey. The only periodic source of information on
violence against children is the child discipline module added to the most recent Jordan
Population and Family Health Survey (2017-2018)373. This module is also planned to be
included in the upcoming MICS for Egypt374 and Lebanon (planned in 2021). In addition,
WHO also conducts Global School-based Student Health Survey which includes VAC
indicators (see Annex 16). However, data generation is inconsistent and out of date, with
the most recent survey for Jordan dating 2007 and the one for Egypt going back to 2011.
The survey in Lebanon is the most recent and was done in 2017 and includes information
that is disaggregated by public and private schools.
Government data policies pose a challenge regarding the public availability of official
statistics regarding VAC. In Egypt, and as already noted in another evaluation, restrictive
policy on data-collection and information sharing hinders effective monitoring and, as a
result, the development of evidence-based approaches375. To address this challenge,
UNICEF is working with the Central Agency for Public Mobilization (CAPMAS) to include
VAC in the Family Health Survey376. Furthermore, UNICEF supported the establishment of
the National Observatory within the NCCM to consolidate and analyze information on
violence against children; and to maintain a repository of knowledge, best practices,
innovations and lessons learned, and ensure their dissemination. Similarly, to increase
country ownership and use of official data and statistics, UNICEF in Jordan is
collaborating with the Department of Statistics to generate data on VAC377.
annual monitoring of two of the four
Globally,
UNICEF has identified four indicators to monitor EVAC378. Table 13 below provides the
source of information for each indicator in the three countries. It is expected that with the
planned revision of the Global Strategy that the global indicators could also be modified.
The Country Offices have requested technical assistance to ensure that their M&E
systems capture the indicators that may be introduced in the updated Global Strategic
Plan379.
Table 13
Global Indicator Egypt Jordan Lebanon
Percentage of girls and In DHS (2014) however DHS (2017- Will be
boys who have ever no sex-disaggregation 2018)380 monitored
experienced any sexual and children only 15-19 through
violence and sought years
373 Jor-UNICEF-01
374 Egypt introduced a module on Domestic Violence in its latest DHS (2014) which focuses on adolescents (15
years and older) and women but not children.
375 Mid-term Evaluation of the EU funded programme "PAGODA Delegation Agreement for Expanding
Access to Education and Protection for at Risk Children in Egypt" (ENI/2015/ 371-652), FINAL REPORT,
Prepared by
Peter Merckx and Mohamed Ragheb, December 2019
376 Egy-UNICEF-01
377 Jor-UNICEF-01
378 The key indicators related to EVAC in the Strategic Plan are the following: (1) Percentage of girls and boys
who have ever experienced any sexual violence and sought help from a professional (SDG 16.2.3); (2)
Percentage of adults who think that physical punishment is necessary to raise/educate children (SDG 16.2.1); (3)
Number of mothers, fathers and caregivers reached through parenting programmes; and (4) Number of girls and
boys who have experienced violence reached by health, social work or justice/law enforcement services
379 Egy-UNICEF-01
380 Interestingly, the DHS (2017-2018) in Jordan also covered the issue of violence initiated by women against
husbands
60
Global Indicator Egypt Jordan Lebanon
help from a professional MICS (2021
(SDG 16.2.3) planned)
Percentage of adults UNICEF and NCCM DHS (2017- Ad hoc KAP
who think that physical 2015, Violence against 2018)383 survey
punishment is Children in Egypt. A (2017)
necessary to Quantitative Survey and UNICEF (2019).
raise/educate children Qualitative Study in Cairo, Changing Norms Will be
(SDG 16.2.1) Alexandria and Assiut381 and Behaviours monitored
to End Physical through
UNICEF (2016). The Violence Against MICS (2021
Extent of Violence Children in planned)
Practices for Child Jordan (2019-
Discipline in Egypt382 2021)384
Number of mothers, RAM385 RAM RAM
fathers and caregivers
reached through
parenting programmes
Number of girls and RAM386 RAM and
boys who have CPIMS
experienced violence RAM and data
reached by health, CPIMS387 data
social work or FVTS388
justice/law enforcement
services
Furthermore, the three countries are reporting on an additional indicator which is aligned
-2021: number of women and girls accessing
-2021 3.a.6)
and in addition, UNICEF-Lebanon monitors the percentage of girls and women accessing
Plan 2018-2021 3.a.3).
7.3.5 Unplanned effects of EVAC interventions
The evaluation identified five unplanned effects of the EVAC interventions in the
countries under study. Two had unintended positive consequences: (i) wide
acceptance of receiving psychosocial support remotely and (ii) greater ease in
381 The qualitative research confirmed that physical punishment is still seen as a totally legitimate form of
discipline by many parents, teachers, religious leaders and even by children themselves.
382 58 per cent of parents think that physical punishment is unnecessary.
383 Fourteen percent of respondents believe that a child needs physical punishment in order to be raised or
educated properly from: Department of Statistics (2019). Jordan Population and Family Health Survey 2017-18
384 Literature review conducted for UNICEF confirms this prevailing attitude with the latest available information
as per the Jordan Households Status Report showing that nearly two-thirds of the households (62%) believe
that teachers have the right to physically punish children
385
so it is not possible to monitor exactly this indicators
386 ith other indicators
so it is not possible to monitor exactly this indicators
387 CPIMS reports on all children who have received case management services (reached by social work). As
for health and justice/law the system provides the number of cases referred to those services not necessarily
received the service.
388 Data from the FVTS is not currently available but will be available soon as per correspondence with UNICEF
staff on Feb. 24th 2020.
61
involving men through online means. Three had unintended negative impacts and they
include (i) overwhelming the Child Helpline as a result of a successful social media
campaign in Egypt; (ii) several repercussions due to target setting in Lebanon; and (iii)
resentment due to targeting only teachers in the programme in Jordan.
7.3.5.1 Unintended positive consequences
acceptance by caretakers to receive psychosocial services remotely which were
introduced during the COVID-19 lockdown period. Prior to the COVID-19 pandemic,
there was a perception that people would seek PSS and BPP services only in person
and face-to-face. However, the experience during lockdown demonstrated that
delivering psychosocial support to adults (not children) can work well when delivered
through remote means. Given this high-level of acceptance, both UNICEF and several IPs
are planning to continue the provision of remote services post COVID-19. However, using
remote means is more effective with adults than children, since there are fewer risks
associated related to access, privacy and protection389. Furthermore, there was a concern
that the quality of services may diminish when delivered remotely. According to UNICEF-
Jordan, UNICEF staff monitored the performance of guidance counselors and heads of
departments involved in the programme and were impressed by their level of
engagement390.
In Lebanon, a greater number of male caregivers were reached - a positive unintended
effect as a result of delivering outreach services remotely due to COVID-19. In a
survey of UNICEF implementing partners391, respondents indicated that while they still
reached more female than male caregivers in absolute terms they noticed that it was
relatively easier to reach male caregivers when delivering the messages remotely and
online, since the fathers were at home during the lockdown and had control over the
mobile phone392. This aspect would require further analysis which could
potentially lead to developing targeted messages and specific means to better reach male
caregivers online.
7.3.5.2 Unintended negative consequences
A successful social media campaign resulted in overwhelming the Child Helpline in
Egypt. A two-week social media campaign, which raised awareness about the need for
child protection and promoted the Child Helpline, was viewed by more than five million
people. As a result, the Helpline witnessed a 760 percent surge in calls and was unable
to cope with the substantial increase393. A UNICEF assessment of the social media
campaign found that callers complained that the lines were always busy or that no one
answered the calls. A few reported that when the calls were answered, they were told that
the operator would get back to them shortly but they never did394. This underlines the
importance of integrating awareness-raising campaigns with the availability of protection
services and ensuring that there is sufficient capacity to respond to the demand that is
generated through communications activities.
Target setting in Lebanon is having several negative consequences. In Lebanon,
UNICEF negotiates budgets with its implementing partners based on a pre-determined
389 Jor-NGO-01
390 Jor-Gov-04
391 UNICEF-Lebanon (2020). Impact of COVID19 on CP Programming 2020, PowerPoint Presentation
392 Leb-UNICEF-05, Leb-UNICEF-07
393 Egy-UNICEF-09
394 UNICEF (2020). Campaign Report Safer Internet Day Cyberbullying, Feb 2020 Cairo Office
62
cost per case and on planned target of beneficiaries by nationality395. Several
implementing partners noted that this has led to several unintended consequences
including the following: (i) IPs have mentioned that the pressure to reach the planned
target is sometimes impacting the quality of services delivered; (ii) an IP noted that, in
order to adhere to humanitarian principles and serve anyone who is in need, they have
accepted Lebanese cases even though they had fulfilled their set target number of
Lebanese, and in that case they do not include the Lebanese cases in their reporting396;
(iii) several IPs have mentioned that such targeting by nationality is impacting social
cohesion (since most refugees are in areas with high level of vulnerability of the host
community) as well as generating tension between the NGOs and host communities397;
(iv) creating a bias towards targeting refugees in camps (rather than those outside camps
or host communities) because they are easier to reach, thus achieving the target numbers
without difficulty; and (v) establishing targets by nationality instead of need goes against
the principles of some NGOs who provide services based solely on needs. UNICEF CO
staff confirmed that UNICEF does not expect its implementing partners to adhere to any
ratio of refugees to host communities served but that all services (prevention and
response) should be based on need. In order to avoid potential harm, this issue would
need to be discussed among the different stakeholders to reach clarity and a unified way
of targeting based solely on need.
Finally, in Jordan, the evaluation revealed that - by targeting teachers to address
violence in schools the campaign created resentment among some teachers. According
to the evaluation, a number of teachers demonstrated resentment towards the
programme stemming from a common feeling that teachers were being targeted to an
unfair degree and to the exclusion of other causes of violence398. Though this was
addressed by UNICEF following the evaluation by expanding the targeting to the
community level as well as rolling out SOPs that would streamline how VAC is dealt with
inside the schools. This points to the i
messaging and the greater effectiveness of using positive modelling messages to
specifically address attitudes and behaviours.
7.3.6 Initiatives with potential to develop impact
The ET identified two initiatives that would merit a deeper analysis of their potential
to develop impact at the national, regional and, possibly, global level. They are: (i)
delivering through remote means prevention and response services; and (ii)
addressing EVAC by leveraging the power and influence that religious leaders and
partnering with FBOs which is a necessary approach to achieve change in societal
norms in the region.
• Delivering EVAC services to caregivers remotely. As previously mentioned, the three
countries have delivered several EVAC (prevention and response) services due to
COVID-19 lockdowns and social distancing restrictions. Given the acceptance of
receiving such services and due to their cost-efficiency, the three countries are
considering to continue such remote service delivery, in combination with face-to-
face sessions, even post COVID-19. It will be useful not only for the three countries
but also to the entire region as well as possibly at the global level to assess and
395 The IPs in Lebanon are under the impression that of persons reached 60% have to be Syrian and 40%
Lebanese (they noted that in the past the ratio was 70% Syrian and 30% Lebanese)
396 The result is both an under-reporting of cases managed as well as an under-reporting of EVAC in host
communities.
397 This risk may be even further exacerbated given the increasing economic hardships experienced by the
host communities.
398 Jor-Gov-04
63
document what worked, the elements of success/failure and how such services can
be improved and compliment in-person service delivery.
• Addressing EVAC by partnering with FBOs. Given the importance that religious
authorities and organizations play in shaping social norms and values in the MENA
region, the three countries in this study, but also the other countries in the region,
would benefit from learning more from UNICEF-Egypt. Its experience in working on
EVAC with Muslim and Christian organizations, the involvement of religious leaders at
the community level, and the dissemination of various communication tools to raise
awareness regarding VAC would be valuable to several other countries (see Figure 1).
Similarly, and in an effort to address social-religious factors and to respond to local
realities, UNICEF-Jordan has developed a practical manual399 which includes tips on
violence- hokom sharii
hadeeth400. The guide will be used for training that will be provided to male and female
religious educators, and so far, 700 female religious educators have been trained as
religious educators401. This initiative is still in its early stages and could also be
included in any future analysis on the role of religion in EVAC.
Figure 1. A 360-degree strategy for leveraging the power and influence of religious
leaders to address EVAC the case of Egypt
Source: UNICEF Egypt Partnership with Faith Based Organizations (FBOs) Programme Overview,
Cairo, August 2019
Finally, there are several initiatives being implemented by NGOs (not all supported by
UNICEF) which could be interesting to map in the three countries to identify both potential
new implementing partners as well as interventions that could be integrated into UNICEF
EVAC activities. For example, International Medical Corps (IMC), assigned severe
protection cases to social workers and worked with para-social workers to follow up on
less serious ones. In addition, there are prospects to include university students to both
boost the capacity of service delivery, reduce the caseload per social worker, as well as
to provide opportunities for students to develop their expertise with on-the-job
training/internships402. Such initiatives might be particularly relevant to the Egyptian
context where there is a freeze on hiring social workers. In Lebanon, Abaad is partnering
with NGOs who work with persons with moderate to severe disabilities, in order to raise
awareness regarding GBV and to put in place a referral system for such cases. Finally,
399 UNICEF (2020). Jordan RAM Combined Outcomes, Outputs and End Year Summary Narratives Report
400 Legal Rulings and Prophetic Hadeeth
401 Jor-Gov-01
402 Jor-UNICEF-03, Jor-UNICEF-05
64
there are a few NGOs (in Lebanon) who work on Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, Transgender and
Intersex (LGBTI) issues. There may be opportunities to partner with them to address the
specific cases of violence related to LGBTI adolescents.
7.3.7 Coordination and complementarity
7.3.7.1 External coordination
UNICEF in the three countries has coordinated with different external stakeholders -
including government institutions, UN agencies, NGOs and the private sector - which
has contributed to achieving the expected results.
• Coordination with government institutions. In the three countries, UNICEF has
worked closely with the higher bodies responsible for Child Rights (NCCM in Egypt,
NCFA in Jordan and the HCC in Lebanon) to develop Child Protection Strategies and
EVAC interventions. Furthermore, UNICEF has established close working relations
with the Ministries of Education in the three countries as well as with the Ministries of
Health, Social Affairs/Development, Justice and Interior to integrate EVAC into their
respective mandates. Finally, and at the decentralized level, UNICEF-Lebanon is
working with a select number of municipalities and UNICEF-Egypt is supporting four
governorates to establish and build the capacities of CPCs.
• Sectoral coordination with UN agencies. UNICEF Child Protection staff participate
regularly in the Protection Sector Coordination meetings and co-chair the Child
Protection Sub-Working Group (CP SWG)403. In Lebanon, UNICEF also leads the Case
Management Task Force as well as the PSS Committee404 and participates in the
SGBV Task Force. In Jordan, a comprehensive evaluation of the UNICEF supported
specialized child protection case management response reported that the CP SWG
identified six thematic areas on which to focus405 all of which have contributed to
strengthening systems of response particularly in regard to standards, procedures
and tools, ultimately strengthening inter-agency SOPs (both with governmental and
non-governmental partners)406. However, the same report also mentioned that the
representation of governmental actors in the CP SWG meetings could be further
initiatives with national systems. The same observation was made by UNICEF staff in
Lebanon regarding the lack of participation of government actors in similar
meetings407. The reasons for limited government representation in these coordination
meetings were twofold: (i) the language used is English; and (ii) government staff feel
that the purpose of the meetings is to coordinate humanitarian efforts targeting Syrian
refugees and not to discuss support to the national systems408,409.
• On a bilateral basis, UNICEF also works closely with different UN agencies. With
UNHCR, on case management, and UNFPA, on GBV-related issues, the development
403 UNICEF (2019). Syria Crisis Humanitarian Situation Report.
404 Leb-UNICEF-05
405 Economic Policy Research Institute (2018). Comprehensive Evaluation of the UNICEF supported specialized
child protection case management response in Jordan 2013-2017: Final Report.
These areas included 1) improving coordination and information sharing, 2) data collection and inter-agency
case management systems, 3) child protection funding, 4) mainstreaming of child protection into other sectors,
4) support the roll-out of Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs), 5) capacity building of child protection
partners, and 6) child protection mainstreaming and advocacy.
406 Economic Policy Research Institute (2018). Comprehensive Evaluation of the UNICEF supported specialized
child protection case management response in Jordan 2013-2017: Final Report
407 Leb-UNICEF-01
408 Sit Rep 2019
409 NCFA (2018). Policies and Guiding Principles for the Prevention of and Response to Violence in Jordan
(Gender-Based Violence, Family Violence, and Child Protection)
65
of the national protocol for Clinical Management of Rape (CMR)410, supporting shelters
(in Jordan)411, and providing adolescent girls-friendly health services in Public Health
Centers (in Lebanon)412. Furthermore, UNICEF is collaborating with UNRWA in both
Jordan and Lebanon to deliver EVAC activities targeting Palestinian refugees413.
Collaboration with UN Women is not as well-developed. In Jordan, UNICEF and UN
Women implemented jointly a GBV programme which ended due to lack of funding
and, in Lebanon, the two agencies co-delivered a Preventing Sexual Exploitation and
Abuse (PSEA) training414. However, there was no evidence of a strategic partnership
collaboration with WHO around operationalizing the INSPIRE Framework.
• NGOs as implementing partners. In addition to the participation of NGOs in the
coordination meetings mentioned above, UNICEF implements several EVAC activities
through NGOs which range from prevention to response and capacity building. The
CP Programme in Lebanon is the one that has the strongest working relations with
NGOs since it relies heavily on them for the delivery of the EVAC programme.
• Partnership with the private sector. Though in Lebanon, the MoSA strategy
stablishing a partnership between the Ministry and the private sector
within the framework of the provision of integrated services 415, there was no evidence
of involvement of the private sector in Lebanon. After the Beirut blast in August 2020,
UNICEF tried to establish new partnerships (e.g. yoga and sport clubs) to reach the
people affected by the explosion, however these efforts were limited. UNICEF-Egypt
has successfully partnered with the private sector (i) to amplify on an ad hoc basis
EVAC messages through setting up booths in supermarkets (e.g., Carrefour)416,
placing advertisement in movie theaters (e.g., Vox cinema) as well as (ii) to implement
social media campaigns with big tech companies (e.g., Google, Twitter, Instagram
and TikTok) (see Section 7.4.4)417.
7.3.7.2 Internal coordination
The extent of internal coordination and complementarity varies between one sector
and another, with the greatest integration taking place between the Child Protection
and Education sectors within UNICEF418. Across the three countries, EVAC has been
integrated into the Education Sector programmes. Currently, the CP Sectors are
expanding the work with the Health Sector and mainstreaming EVAC in public health
centres and developing CMR protocols and strategies.
When it comes to the other sections, the level of coordination varies. In Lebanon, the CP
section worked very closely with other sections (especially C4D) to develop the Qudwa
Strategy. In Egypt, the experience of the social media campaign (see Section 7.3.5),
points to the need for greater coordination. In addition, there was no evidence of any joint
work with the Youth or WASH sections in the period 2019-2020. There are also
opportunities to integrate EVAC into the Social Protection programmes in both Egypt and
410 RAM Reports and Leb-UNICEF-01, Leb-UN-03, Leb-UN-04
411 Jor-UNICEF-01
412 Leb-UNICEF-01
413 Leb-UN-01 and Jor-UN-03
414 Leb-UNICEF-01 and Leb-UNICEF-15
415 MoSA (2020). Strategic Plan of the Ministry of Social Affairs on the Protection of Women and Children,
2020-2026
416 Egy-PS-01
417 Egy-UNICEF-09
418 In organizing this evaluation, the three CP Sectors took different approaches. The EVAC focal point in Egypt
organized a meeting between the ET and the other UNICEF sectors; CP staff in Jordan organized meetings
between the ET and the Education and Youth Sector staff, and CP staff in Lebanon suggested that the ET meet
only with CP Sector staff
66
Lebanon - which the CO in Egypt is exploring; however there was no evidence of similar
considerations in UNCEF-
activities are mostly taking place at the decentralized level - through Makani centers in
Jordan and the UNICEF field offices in Lebanon.
As a result, a large number of UNICEF staff in the three countries, while recognizing
that there is greater integration than in the past among the different sections, pointed
out that there is a need for greater coordination and integration within the CP sector
as well as between the CP sector and other UNICEF sections419. Box 6 provides an
example of how a Youth programme in Jordan may be having positive unintended
consequences on EVAC and GBV.
Box 6. How a Youth Sector Programme may be having a positive impact on EVAC
and GBV
In Jordan, the Social Enterprise Programme implemented by the Youth Sector,
provides young mothers with economic support. Based on anecdotal records, the
women reported that the programme was also able to change gender norms and
household role division, with women taking on more responsibilities outside of the
home. For women victims of violence (and their children witnesses to family violence)
participation in the programme and financial income also impacted power dynamics
within the household and helped put a stop to the violence they were experiencing ,
thus, reflecting the importance of income generating/livelihood programming on
lowering the incidence of GBV and VAC.
7.4 Sustainability
Key Findings:
F27. Existence of national legal frameworks in Egypt which has a National Child Law
contributes to long-term sustainability. However, Lebanon still does not have a
unified national framework to address EVAC.
F28. Due to the institutional setup which limits their leverage, the NCCM, NCFA and
HCC are limited in their abilities to ensure multisectoral coordination.
F29. In terms of financial sustainability, the ET identified two national strategies (Egypt
and Jordan) that were costed and none which has been included in the national
budget.
F30. The lack of outcome level data did not allow the evaluation to assess the extent
of changes in attitudes and behaviour and even less their sustainability.
F31. Sustainability of direct interventions varies among the three countries and is a
function of several factors, including institutional arrangements, continuity of
funding, and sufficient human and technical capacities.
419 Jor-UNICEF-05, Leb-UNICEF-12, Leb-UNICEF-11, Leb-UNICEF-08, Leb-UNICEF-02, Leb-UNICEF-01,
Egy-UNICEF-02, Egy-UNICEF-03, Egy-NGO-01, Egy-NGO-02, Egy-UN-02, Egy-UN-03, EG-UNICEF-08 and
Egy-Donor-02
67
F32. UNICEF Jordan and Lebanon have endeavored to link their emergency response
with a longer-term development approach. However, heavy reliance on
humanitarian funding jeopardises the scalability and replicability of interventions.
F33. The ET identified four initiatives that could be replicable and/or scalable: (i)
partnering with the private sector in Egypt; (ii) conducting monthly online surveys
in Jordan; (iii) provision of integrated services at the community level in Jordan;
and, potentially, (iv) mainstreaming EVAC within municipalities in Lebanon.
7.4.1 Sustainability at the legislative/institutional level
Juvenile Laws; and Lebanon does not have a unified national framework to address
EVAC. In the last two years, through the EU-funded project, UNICEF supported the
operationalization of the Child Law and the provisions of the Constitution related to the
protection of children. Specifically, through advocacy with MoSS, a ministerial decree
was issued stipulating the establishment of the CPIMS under the social care sector,
-laws420. UNICEF-
Jordan, through successful advocacy, was able to support the amendments of the Child
421. It plans to continue its advocacy efforts to amend Article 62
of the Penal Code, which is used as legal defense since it permits some form of corporal
punishment by parents or guardians, in the home. In Lebanon, in 2014, Law 293 was
passed criminalising family violence and the Juvenile Law 422 was also amended. In
2017, Article 522 of the penal code was repealed. It is important to note however that in
Lebanon family and personal status laws are regulated by religious courts and that a
unified national framework does not exist422. UNICEF-Lebanon continues to work with the
Parliamentary Committee to ensure that child-friendly laws are drafted and passed423.
The NCCM, NCFA and HCC are limited in their abilities to ensure multisectoral
coordination. In Jordan, the NCFA is an umbrella body that coordinates and facilitates
efforts of entities working on Child Protection. However, NCFA staff acknowledged it does
not have any authority over ministries or other public institutions to enforce
implementation of EVAC activities424. Both the NCCM, in Egypt, and the HCC, in Lebanon,
are councils that are within a specific ministry (Health in Egypt and Social Affairs in
Lebanon)425; which restricts their power to coordinate across ministries426. As a result,
separate coordinating bodies have been established for each CP/EVAC programme. For
example, in Jordan, to ensure national ownership of the movement to end VAC, a Social
Norms and Behavioural was established under the Family Protection Team, with
representation from 14 relevant ministries and organizations427. In Egypt, the Dawwie
Initiative, established a cross-sectoral partnership which includes the NCCM, NCW
several ministries, Al-Azhar and the Coptic Church. The Qudwa Strategy in Lebanon
though it envisaged to establish a multisectoral Advisory Board still has yet to do so.
At the decentralized level, UNICEF-Egypt has supported the establishment of multi-
sectoral Child Protection Committees (CPCs) at the governorate and district levels. The
420 RAM 2020
421 Jor-UNICEF-01
422 UNICEF (n.d.) Qudwa Social and Behavioural Change Communications Plan to Prevent Violence against
Children & Women, Child Marriage and Child Labour
423 Leb-UNICEF-15
424 Jor-UNICEF-02, Jor-Gov-01
425 Leb-UNICEF-01, Leb-UNICEF-04
426 Jor-UNICEF-02
427 Sit Rep 2019
68
CPCs fall under the administrative responsibility of the Ministry of Local Development
(MoLD) and technically under the NCCM.
The ET identified two national strategies that were costed and none which has been
included in the national budget. In Egypt, the National EVAC strategy has been costed
and UNICEF has supported an analysis of the social workforce through a profiling study
which included a costed proposal for an accreditation scheme for the social workforce428.
In 2020, UNICEF-Jordan conducted a costing study and prepared an investment case for
the Child Rights and Juvenile Laws to use for carrying out evidence-based advocacy429.
In Lebanon, the MoSA budget analysis has been delayed. Nevertheless, Qudwa though
not a comprehensive EVAC strategy but rather one that focuses on prevention - has been
costed. However, the current multiple crises preclude any discussion with MoSA
-national level
is the municipality of Tripoli which has - with the assistance of UNICEF inserted in the
municipal budget a line item to address child protection in the city.
7.4.2 Sustainability of changes in attitudes and behaviour
The evaluation was unable to assess the extent of changes in attitudes and behaviour
and, even less, their sustainability since outcome level data was unavailable. The next
Jordan MICS may be able to shed some light since it will allow to measure changes based
on the previous MICS (2017). However, as noted earlier, two key elements which
contribute to sustainability in changes in attitudes and behaviours are establishing
accountability mechanisms and enforcing them as well as a deeper change in societal
norms.
7.4.3 Sustainability of direct interventions
128. Sustainability of direct interventions varies among the three countries and is a function
of several factors, including institutional arrangements, continuity of funding, and
sufficient human and technical capacities.
• Institutional arrangement for service delivery. EVAC interventions in Egypt are fully
embedded in government institutions which would potentially allow for a higher
degree of sustainability of service provision. In contrast, in Lebanon, most service
provision as well as the Helplines are managed by NGOs which while effective
might not be sustainable in the long run. In Jordan, significant efforts have been put
to institutionalize the Makani services within MoSD, the Better Parenting Programme
(BPP) through the adoption of a plan of action led by four ministries430, and the
programme within the MoE.
• Humanitarian-development nexus. In Jordan and Lebanon, UNICEF is trying to find
a mixed approach between emergency response and development. While in the past,
at the start of the Syrian crisis, the focus was on emergency response, more recently,
greater emphasis is being placed on systems strengthening, capacity building and
prevention programmes (e.g., Qudwa Strategy).
• Continuity of funding. As mentioned above, since none of the EVAC strategies even
if they have been costed have been included in national budgets, the sustainability
of all the activities is contingent on the availability of donor funding. The Helplines in
Lebanon run by NGOs who are completely dependent on external financing and, in
Jordan, JRF has pointed that this is one of the main challenges they face in terms of
expansion of services to the national level and the development of SOPs, is the
428 RAM 2020, Egy-UNICEF-05, Egy-Gov-01, Egy-Donor-02
429 RAM 2020
430 UNICEF (2019). Jordan Child Protection End Year RAM
69
availability of funding431. Furthermore, in Jordan and Lebanon, UNICEF relies heavily
on humanitarian funding for implementing its EVAC programmes, thus continuity of
donor funding especially at the current levels may not be assured.
• Sufficient technical human and technical capacities. UNICEF has supported several
It has developed SOPs and
Codes of Conduct. In Egypt, in 2020, social workforce accreditation scheme and its
training packages were finalized with MoSS432. However, the challenge in Egypt is that
there is a hiring freeze and there is an insufficient number of social workers.
Furthermore, the workforce is ageing. In Jordan, and according to UNICEF staff,
though several Training of Trainers (ToT) have been delivered, there has been no
follow up and, therefore, there is no information as to whether the capacities have
been increased and internalized. Stakeholders reported that the capacity of staff
working within the governmental sector was enhanced as a result of UNICEF's
ongoing capacity building efforts; most notably in areas pertaining to a unified
understanding of terms433 and concepts such as the "best interest of the child" and
improving technical skills related to case management434. Finally, according to the
Strategic Monitoring done by UNICEF, none of the three countries have a well-
developed quality assurance system in place for social service435; however, Jordan is
the only one that improved its score in 2019 (from 4 to 5); Egypt and Lebanon
remaining static (at 10 and 7, respectively)436. UNICEF in Egypt and Jordan is
considering a variety of actions targeting parents and caregivers which would
contribute to the sustainability of positive caregiving initiatives (see Box 7).
Box 7. Path to sustainability and scaling up for positive parenting
In Egypt, UNICEF is considering the following actions437:
• Positive parenting training mandatory for MoSS social workers, National
Nursery Programme Facilitators, and Community Health Workers (MoHP and
NCCM) and incorporated in the accreditation system.
• Completed positive parenting training included as a conditionality in the cash
transfer programme.
In Jordan, there are also examples of linking existing health, educational and civil
services in Jordan with parental counselling (e.g., when a couple registers for
marriage or birth of a child, or when parents enrol a child in school or take for
vaccination to a health facility)438.
431 Jor-NGO-01
432 RAM 2020
433 Jor-Gov-06 and Jor-Gov-04 Ima
434 Jor-Gov-05 and Jor-UNICEF-05
435 A rank of 13 or above is considered well-developed.
436 UNICEF (2020). Middle East and North Africa Strategic Plan 2018-2021 Goal Area 3 SMQ, Summary
Analysis, October 2020
437 UNICEF-Egypt (2021). Positive Parenting. PowerPoint Presentation, 14 February 2021
438 UNICEF (2018). Changing Norms and Behaviours to End Physical Violence Against Children in Jordan 2019
2021
70
7.4.4 Replicability and/or scalability of EVAC interventions
129. The ET identified four initiatives that could be replicable and/or scalable: (i)
partnering with the private sector in Egypt; (ii) conducting monthly online surveys in
Jordan; (iii) provision of integrated services at the community level in Jordan; and,
potentially, (iv) mainstreaming EVAC within municipalities in Lebanon. Due to several
limitations described in the Methodology section, the ET was unable to meet with
Furthermore, outcome level information was mostly unavailable. As a
result, the initiatives described below would merit further assessment to determine the
extent they could be scalable and/or replicable. The examples from Jordan are fully
aligned with national policies. Furthermore, EVAC programmes in Jordan and Lebanon
are financed through the humanitarian funding which may limit their scalability if funding
decreases (the case of Jordan; Lebanon has not experienced a drop in humanitarian
resources).
Partnering with the private sector to implement innovative and relevant SBCC
campaigns. UNICEF-Egypt has partnered with the private sector in two ways: (i)
amplifying messages in an ad hoc way (e.g., ads in cinemas, leaflets, dissemination
booths in supermarkets); and (ii) designing social media campaigns that are innovative
and targeted with Instagram (online harassment targeting girls and women), Twitter
(safer internet), TikTok (verbal abuse) and Google (online game on bullying).
Furthermore, UNICEF-Egypt implements targeted promotion of messages to reach a
wider and more diversified public. It pays Facebook to boost target audiences and
allows UNICEF to reach groups that do not follow UNICEF Facebook page (currently,
it has around 30 target audiences). It also has a dedicated community manager to
animate the discussions with
UNICEF is planning to utilize Talkwalker as a social media analytics tool to monitor
trends439. This experience could be replicable in other countries in the region. UNICEF-
Egypt has offered to lead such a regional initiative since it has established successful
partnerships with big tech companies which other COs could leverage440.
Monthly online surveys to monitor long-term trends in high-risk schools. In Jordan, the
Tarbiyah programme has developed a promising feature - monthly surveys filled out
directly by students441 to detect and report violence within schools442 - which can both be
scaled and replicated. The data collected is disaggregated by different indicators based
on types of violence, settings of violence, school location, MoE directorates,
443. These surveys have been
institutionalized within the MoE and are currently being used for national monitoring of
data and are utilized by the Safe School Councils to promote violence free environments.
The survey has also been updated to include data on sexual violence, bullying and
domestic violence in homes and communities444. They have been designed to be
developmentally appropriate catering to two specific age groups and are offered in audio
versions to assist students with learning challenges445. The online survey system was
rolled out in 2020 yet has not been utilized by students due to suspension of in-person
learning as a result of COVID-19446. Thus, the effectiveness of the online survey system is
439 UNICEF-Egypt had experimented with another sentiment analysis tool which was not useful given that
different languages are used simultaneously in posts (classical Arabic, Egyptian colloquial Arabic and English)
440 Egy-UNICEF-09
441 Jor-UNICEF-06
442
443 UNICEF (n.d.) UNICEF and Ministry of Education- Monthly Online Survey
444
445 UNICEF (n.d.) UNICEF and Ministry of Education- Monthly Online Survey.
446 Initially, the surveys were filled by teachers on behalf of students and there was no way to obtain direct and
confidential input from the students.
71
yet to be determined. Once it is, it can be scaled to cover non-formal education and
refugee camps447 and be replicated in other countries.
Provision of integrated services at the community level. The Makani Center model is
one that could be scaled up in Jordan given that it now targets 120,000 children in a
country of 2.3 million448. As mentioned in previous sections, integrating EVAC messages
with other services (vocational training, education, early childhood development, etc.)
increases the effectiveness of the intervention. UNICEF-Jordan, in the past was assisting
more centers, however for efficiency purposes, it reduced the number of supported
centers to focus on the most vulnerable areas. Should funding be available, it is a model
that could be expanded to the national level449.
Mainstreaming EVAC within municipalities. Building on the joint research that UNICEF
and UN Habitat undertook in 2018 and which resulted in a series of neighbourhood
profiles for some of the most disadvantaged areas in Lebanon450, UNICEF is piloting work
at the decentralized level with municipalities. The timing was also chosen because
municipalities have recently received additional financial resources due to COVID-19451.
Criteria for selecting municipalities include: (i) level of vulnerability based on household
survey; (ii) existence of several sectors to better integrate services; and (iii)
willingness/interest of municipality to cooperate. According to UNICEF-Lebanon,
integration of EVAC into other sectors (e.g., child labour, education) is key because EVAC
According to government
officials, to increase municipal commitment and buy-in, the initial focus should be on
training of municipal staff on how to integrate EVAC and CP into municipal projects they
are reviewing and funding452. However, working at the municipal level comes with several
challenges, including insufficient financial recourses, inexistent or weak local
development committees, and heavy reliance on the elected members of Municipal
Councils which jeopardizes long-term sustainability453. Lessons learned from the
experience in Lebanon could be replicated in other countries, especially since UNICEF-
Jordan has identified the need to work at the governorate level454 through the
Consultative455 and Executive456 Councils.
447 Jor-UNICEF-08
448 Jor-UNICEF-07
449 Jor-UNICEF-07
450 UN-Habitat and UNICEF Lebanon (2018). El-Qobbeh Neighbourhood Profile 2018, Beirut: UN-Habitat
Lebanon; UN-Habitat and UNICEF Lebanon (2018). Jabal Mohsen Neighbourhood Profile 2018, Beirut: UN-
Habitat Lebanon; UN-Habitat and UNICEF Lebanon (2018). Tabbaneh Neighbourhood Profile 2018, Beirut: UN-
Habitat Lebanon
451 Leb-UNICEF-02
452 Leb-Gov-01
453 Leb-UNICEF-02
454 Jor-UNICEF-01
455 Al majlis al istishari
456 Al majlis al tanfithi
72
7.5 Gender
Key Findings:
F34. There is inconclusive evidence on the extent to which UNICEF COs are using
gender considerations in the design of EVAC response and prevention activities.
F35. According to several UNICEF staff in the three countries, there is a need to align
the different needs and challenges in reaching girls, boys, women and men.
F36. At the implementation level, the three COs are supporting several initiatives which
have a strong gender dimension at different levels, however there is room for
enhanced gender mainstreaming by (i) targeting male caregivers, (ii) supporting
with UN Women, and (v) linking gender-related EVAC interventions with other
sectors.
F37. Sex-disaggregated data is being collected through the different case
management information systems as well as through the Helplines though this is
not captured in the formal reports.
7.5.1 Integration of gender in design of EVAC interventions
There is inconclusive evidence on the extent to which UNICEF COs are consistently
using gender considerations in the design of EVAC response and prevention activities.
In Egypt though the only CO to cite the International Men and Gender Equality Survey
(IMAGES) survey conducted by UN Women and Promundo there is no clear evidence
as to how this information was incorporated into EVAC programme design457. In addition,
a study on evidence-based parenting interven
and decision-making dynamics, particularly in relation to the acceptance of violence
towards women and girls. The study also provided specific programming strategies458
and interviews with staff revealed UNICEF Egypt has incorporated these gender-specific
recommendations within its parenting programming to target the root causes of VAC459.
Yet no data was sourced on whether this is an approach used in the design of all EVAC
initiatives. In Jordan, though programme documents sometimes mention gender
assessments carried out either by UNICEF or by other agencies, it is unclear how
information is being utilized to mainstream gender into the design of EVAC programmes.
conducted in 2012 for United States Agency for International Development (USAID) which
highlights several attitudinal and behavioural reasons for physical violence against
children. However, there is no evidence that a more up-to-date gender analysis was
conducted by UNICEF or another organization which has guided the design of EVAC
initiatives. The evaluation of the programme shed important lights on gender in
regard to violence in schools. Several findings related to gender were identified (e.g., rates
of physical violence were significantly lower in girl schools compared to boys schools
particularly in lower grades460) and, as such, the targeted selection of schools for
457 Egypt RAM Combined Outputs, Outcomes and End of Year Narratives report 2019
458 El-Zanaty, Fatma; El-Ghazaly, Noha; and El-Sheikh, Aliaa. 2020. Formative research and development of an
evidence based Positive Parenting Intervention in Egypt 2019. Cairo, Egypt: UNICEF, Ministry of Social
Solidarity, and El-Zanaty & Associates
459 Egy-UNICEF-10
460
73
additional interventions took place based on these gendered findings. Also, the
programme considered gender in many of its activities such as the involvement of female
preachers as a successful mobilization strategy for girls and mothers. However, gender
differences were not taken into account when designing messaging in boys versus girls
schools, but rather depended on interventions designed by school-based committees
based on individual school needs. At the same time, several stakeholders interviewed
reported that gender considerations are not being looked at in detail and that often, the
needs of boys are overlooked due to the strong focus on the girl child461.
Finally, in Lebanon, a 2017 IRC study found the need for adapting both the way outreach
is done and the content of the awareness-raising sessions for better targeting male
caregivers462. However, there was no evidence as to whether these recommendations
brought any changes in programme design. More recently, in Lebanon, UNICEF - as part
of the GBV task force -supported an impact assessment on the GBV situation in April and
pandemic and the risks of GBV during lockdown. The analysis also explored the extent
of the challenges faced by women and girls in accessing GBV services and the
accessibility of key non-GBV services during lockdown463. Nevertheless, no information
was available as to how this assessment was used to inform design.
One clear example of integrating gender considerations Qudwa
Strategy. The design of activities was based on a comprehensive social norms research
which was undertaken prior to developing the strategy464. Qudwa relies on evidence-
based research on VAC to address social norms and drivers that perpetuate harmful
practices through cross-programmatic interventions.465 More specifically, as part of
programme u d a
segmentation process ensued, whereby the plan took into consideration the different
gender implications and media consumption considerations for each group. The plan was
r
considerations in the messaging framework466. Additionally, Lebanon has substantial
information on the root causes and social norms surrounding VAC and VAW, reflecting
variance across genders and nationalities, as well as a set of recommendations which
pave the way for future intervention design from a gender lens, such as the integration of
- 467.
According to several UNICEF staff in the three countries, there is a need to align the
and challenges in reaching girls, boys, women and men468.
7.5.2 Integration of gender in implementation of EVAC interventions
At the implementation level, the three COs are supporting several initiatives which have a
strong gender dimension at different levels, however there is room for enhanced gender
461 Jor-UNICEF-05, Jor-UNICEF-9, Jor-Gov-02
462 IRC (2017). Improving Parenting and Mental Health Outcomes of Syrian Refugees in Lebanon: A Mixed
Methods Study, Presentation May 2017
463 Sit Rep mid-2020.
464 UNICEF (n.d.). Underneath the Surface: Understanding the root causes of violence against children and
women in Lebanon.
465 UNICEF (2019). Lebanon RAM Combined Outcomes Outputs and End Year Summary Narratives Report
466 UNICEF (n.d.) Qudwa Social and Behavioural Change Communications Plan to Prevent Violence against
Children & Women, Child Marriage and Child Labour
467 UNICEF (2019). Underneath the Surface: Understand the root causes of violence against children and
women in Lebanon
468 Jor-UNICEF-06, Leb-UNICEF-15, Leb-UNICEF-01
74
mainstreaming by (i) targeting male caregivers, (ii) supporting boy victims of violence, (iii)
enhancing UNI
gender-related EVAC interventions with other sectors.
• Safe spaces for women and girls. UNICEF in Jordan and Lebanon has supported
safe spaces for women and girls. However, several stakeholders pointed to the need
to safe spaces for boys too, since there are no such facilities and they are noting that
boys albeit at lower numbers than girls are in need for such protection services469.
• SBCC to empower girls. In Egypt, the National Girls' Empowerment Initiative,
Dawwie, aims to promote behaviours related to self-efficacy and management,
acceptance of diversity, and communication skills that will contribute to reducing the
acceptance of harmful practices. In order to achieve this objective, UNICEF is working
with both girls and boys to achieve changes at the societal level.
• Sexual violence against boys. Cultures of shame and silence within the region
perpetuate cycles of sexual violence against boys. In Jordan, stakeholders revealed
that not enough attention is being devoted to address the stigma and the incidence
of sexual violence against boys470. Similarly, UNICEF IPs in Lebanon stressed the
need to have safe spaces for boys, victims of GBV. Furthermore, there are gaps in the
existing legal frameworks to address sexual violence against boys.471
• Adolescents: UNICEF-Lebanon is the only CO where specific EVAC activities
targeting adolescent girls were identified. According to the 2019 Annual Report, cross
sectoral efforts led the CP and Youth Programmes to implement a dual-approach to
addressing GBV among adolescent girls through protection support and vocational
skills training472. Furthermore, UNICEF in Lebanon is planning to render public health
centers adolescent-friendly in order to encourage teenagers, especially girls, to seek
services, including those related to VAC.
• Caregivers. As mentioned earlier, UNICEF has reached significantly more female than
male caregivers in the three countries. Furthermore, it was noted that it was much
easier to target men in camps then in host communities, since they are unemployed
and often present and free to participate in awareness-raising sessions. Furthermore,
the presence of a male facilitator and serving refreshments also encouraged men to
join such events473. This means that it is likely that the total number of male caregivers
reached, especially in Jordan and Lebanon, is skewed towards male refugees in camp
settings. Therefore, even if there are some improvements in number of men reached474
from one year to another, it is important to monitor whether the increase in numbers
is spread evenly across the different communities (host, refugees in/outside camp
settings) or whether this increase is only in the sub-group of male caregivers in refugee
camps. There are several examples of approaches being used to increase male
participation which could be further assessed, documented and shared (see Box 8).
• Use of religious leaders to deliver full programmes for fathers after working
hours
469 Jor-UNICEF-03, Leb-NGO-09, Leb-UNICEF-08
470 Jor-UN-02
471 Jor-UN-03
472 UNICEF (2019). Lebanon COAR Report Analysis.
473 Jor-UNICEF-07
474 Jor-UNICEF-01
75
• Partnering with Amman municipality to target its employees (garbage
collectors)
• Through MoE, targeting male teachers as parents
• Change in approach by linking prevention/BPP messages to issues of interest
to men (e.g., managing household and financial aspects)
• Engaging male Early Childhood development (ECD) caregivers; particularly
within camp settings where male participation/retention is less of a challenge
• Integrate EVAC within income-generating programmes; particularly for wage
laborers
• Shorter sessions
• Online sessions
Source: KII
• C4D though a gender lens. In Egypt, Social and Behavioural Change has been
tackled through a gender lens through Dawwie using innovative programming tackling
gender inequality as a root cause of harmful societal practices, thus contributing to
establishing the foundations of a long-term gender norms transformation and creating
generations475. The programme
reached 33,732 girls, 12,968 boys and 4,877 parents in 2019476. Gender
mainstreaming and equality
strategic framework on Changing Norms and Social Behaviours to End Physical
Violence Against Children. The strategy included important findings on the
relationship between gender and the physical punishment of children/ bullying/school
violence and social norms477. In Jordan, the programme was mindful to consider
gender in many of its activities such as the involvement of female preachers as a
successful mobilization strategy for girls and mothers478. As aforementioned, the
Qudwa ; however, it is too
early to assess the extent to which it will actually mainstream gender during
implementation.
• Linkages between VAC and VAW. Global evidence reveals that violence against
children (VAC) and violence against women (VAW) are very much interlinked and share
479. The review of data
within the three countries revealed that some interventions have taken this overlap
into consideration. In Lebanon, Mo
and Children applies a holistic approach while focusing on both prevention and
intervention services to address the issues of VAC and VAW480. In Jordan, a joint
programme implemented through the expertise of UNFPA, UNICEF and UN Women
entitled -being provided
comprehensive support services to Syrian refugees and vulnerable women in host
communities; survivors of sexual and gender-based violence481. The programme was
475 UNICEF (2019). Egypt COAR Report Summary Narrative
476 Ibid; Gender-disaggregated data was unavailable for 2020.
477 UNICEF (2018). Changing Norms and Behaviours to End Physical Violence Against Children in Jordan.
478 Ibid
479 UNFPA and UNICEF (2018). Making the Connection: Intimate partner violence and violence against children
in Eastern Europe and Central Asia
480 Republic of Lebanon Ministry of Social Affairs (2020). Strategic Plan of the Ministry of Social Affairs on the
Protection of Women and Children
481 UNFPA (n.d.). Hemayati: Promoting Women's and Girls' Health and Well-being. Online available at:
https://www.unfpa.org/pcm/hemayati-promoting-womens-and-girls-health-and-well-being
76
2019 evaluation study of the programme revealed some important findings; the
programme contributed to the enhancement and harmonization of institutionalized
services within the MoSD and the JWU particularly in the adoption of survivor-based
case management services482. However, the programme was discontinued due to
lack of funding483. In Egypt, several strides have been made which address VAW such
as the launch of the National Strategy for the Empowerment of Egyptian Women 2030,
yet there was a lack of data on the cross interventions on a national level between
VAW and VAC484. However, at the operational level, there are several challenges in
linking VAW and VAC which include the following; (i) lack of awareness and common
understanding between the linkages between GBV and VAC among certain actors485;
(ii) differences in definitions between UN agencies/NGOs and national legal definitions
which affects the way SOPs are developed486; and (iii) fragmented coordination487 (CP
sub-working group chaired by UNICEF and GBV by UNFPA) and separate case
management systems (CPIMS and GBVIMS) which do not share information due to
confidentiality issues488 and inconsistent data/case management depending on who
489.
• Linking financial support to combatting GBV/VAC. UNICEF staff noted the
importance of linking GBV survivors with social protection systems in order to
incentivize them to seek protection. Otherwise, the risk is - that if they leave the
abusive situation - they would lose their means of economic survival (not to mention
the risk of losing custody of children)490. UNCEF-Lebanon has successfully advocated
491.
• . UNICEF-Egypt has
established a partnership with the National Council for Women (NCW) to enhance
advocacy for ending violence against children in general492. NCW is a member of the
multi-stakeholder which oversees Dawwie. In Jordan, the Jordanian National
Commission for Women is a member of the National Team for Family Protection493
and continuous efforts are made to strengthen national systems (standards,
protocols, SOPs) to combat both CP and GBV at a national level494.
• Partnerships with other UN agencies. UNICEF, in the three countries, is working
closely with UNFPA on GBV-related issues, including setting up safe spaces and the
drafting of the national protocol for Clinical Management of Rape (CMR). Partnership
with UN Women is not as strong for several reasons: (i) the mandate of UN Women
focuses on women older than 18 years old; and (ii) UN Women does not attend the
Protection sector and sub-working groups coordination meetings. UNICEF-Lebanon
is planning to institutionalize its collaboration with UN Women by doing a joint
proposal for mobilizing resources. It also collaborated with UN Women to deliver
482 UNFPA, UNICEF, UN Women (2019). Evaluation of the join programme Hemayati: Promoting women and
girls health and well-
483 Jor-UN-01
484 National Council for Women (2017). National Strategy for the Empowerment of Egyptian Women 2030. This
excludes the joint work done with UNFPA on FGM
485 Jor-UNICEF-10 and Leb-UNICEF-01, Leb-NGO-08
486
487 Jor-UNICEF-08, Jor-UNICEF-09
488 UNICEF Jordan is currently advocating for the unification of the CPIMS and GBVIMS under the FVTS
489 Jor-UN-01
490 Jor-UNICEF-07
491 Leb-UNICEF-01, Leb-UNICEF-07
492 Egypt RAM 2020
493 NCFA (2016). The National Framework for Family Protection Against Violence
494 Jor-UNICEF-02 and Jor-UNICEF-03
77
495. However, there
remains unexplored opportunities to collaborate with UNFPA and UN Women and to
as not
part of the coalition that advocated for the recently passed law on sexual harassment
in Lebanon).
• Development of training modules on gender. In the three countries, UNICEF has
incorporated gender modules (perceptions, roles, attitudes, identity stereotypes) in
the training of Ministry of Education staff496. However, in Egypt and Jordan, since the
approach used is a training of trainers, it is difficult for UNICEF to assess the extent
to which the trainers are passing the gender messages to the trainees497.
• Capacity building of implementing partners. UNICEF-Lebanon given its heavy
reliance on delivering services through implementing partners - has invested in the
capacity building of CSOs on issues related to both Child Protection and GBV498. In
2020, UNICEF-Lebanon trained more than 600 UNICEF personnel and partners on
GBV risk mitigation and referrals for survivors. Finally, the three COs have rolled out
the Prevention of Sexual Exploitation and Abuse (PSEA) training to several of their
partner organizations499.
• Capacities of UNICEF COs
Lebanon CO designed a Gender Integration Guide that aims to provide mechanisms
on the integration of gender across programming500. One important recommendation
is to hold the Section Chiefs accountable for mainstreaming gender into the sectoral
(PER)501. At the time of the evaluation, UNICEF-Egypt wa
exer
into its programmes.
7.5.3 Integration of gender in M&E of EVAC interventions
Sex-disaggregated data is being collected through the different case management
information systems as well as through the Helplines though it is not captured in the
formal reports. Based on partial information502, it seems that the CPIMS in the three
countries is collecting sex-disaggregated data (see Annex 19 IMS
template). Similarly, the different Helplines that were assessed as part of this evaluation
(Child Helpline in Egypt, JRF Helpline in Jordan and Himaya in Lebanon) are also
collecting gender disaggregated data, though the Child Helpline in Egypt requires some
improvement503. The evaluation did not look at the other helplines run by different NGOs
in Jordan and Lebanon nor the government-managed ones in Lebanon or Jordan. Based
on this partial information, it seems that UNICEF COs have gender-disaggregated data
for several outputs, however they are neither monitoring nor reporting on gender
indicators.
495 Leb-UNICEF-01, and Leb-UNICEF-15
496 Leb-UNICEF-03
497 Jor-UNICEF-06
498 Ibid
499 Egypt, Jordan and Lebanon RAM 2020
500 UNICEF (2018). Gender Integration Guide. UNICEF Lebanon Country Office
501 Leb-UNICEF-03, and UNICEF (2020). Gender Programmatic Toolkit. Lebanon Country Office, Preliminary
Results, November 2020
502 Due to lack of information-sharing protocols, UNICEF COs were unable to share actual CPIMS data.
503 Data for 2020 in Egypt was unavailable. Data for 2019 had disaggregated the gender data into five
categories: female, male, females, males and others.
78
There is room for improvement in terms of gender-disaggregated monitoring of EVAC
activities in the formal reports. Though the narratives of the Country Office Annual
Report (COAR) and RAM reports provide gender-disaggregated information for some of
the outputs, the monitoring information presented in tabular form is not gender-
disaggregated in all three countries. This renders the monitoring exercise challenging
because it is not possible for the reader to assess the results based on gender differences.
In contrast, the SitRep reports of both Jordan and Lebanon provide gender-
disaggregated data (see Annex 20); however, this information is missing in the Egypt
SitRep report.
79
8. Conclusions
Conclusion 1 (based on Findings 1, 2, 3, 5, 6 and 7
line with national child protection and EVAC strategies and are relevant to the context in
the three countries, given the high level of VAC.
Conclusion 2 (based on Finding 4).
and allows its partners in each country
coordinate with all stakeholders. While UNICEF COs have responded to the multiple
crises in the last year, the e
while addressing emergency situations. UNICEF in Egypt has developed an EVAC ToC;
however, Jordan does not have an EVAC-specific ToC and Lebanon has an outdated one.
Conclusion 3 (based on Findings 9 and 10). UNICEF has successfully adapted its
interventions to the changing context and needs due to multiple crises in the three
countries. However, there is room for increasing the relevance of activities for specific
target groups (e.g., adolescents, children who attend private schools, male caretakers,
etc.).
Conclusion 4 (based on Findings 11, 12 and 13). UNCEF has received substantial
resources to respond to the Syria crisis in the three countries which has provided an
opportunity to strengthen EVAC national systems. However, insufficient information was
available to assess the ability of UNICEF to carry out cost-monitoring of its activities or to
analyze the efficiency of UNICEF funding, particularly regarding awareness raising and
prevention efforts.
Conclusion 5 (based on Findings 14 and 15). Although UNICEF is taking concrete steps
to improve efficiency across programme delivery, particularly in areas related to reducing
operational costs, enhancing cross sectoral collaboration and strengthening service
delivery of national NGOs, duplication of services/programming, use of multiple data
tracking systems decrease the efficiency of the systems. A significant opportunity exists
which is not being utilized fully for sharing experiences and resources among the three
countries.
Conclusion 6 (based Findings 16 and 17). Overall, the three countries were able to
achieve their planned results in 2019 and were affected by the COVID-19 pandemic in
2020 which slowed down implementation. UNICEF-Lebanon experienced additional
crises that had an impact on its results. Nevertheless, there is some evidence that UNICEF
in the three countries has contributed to changes at the different levels of society, most
significantly at the level of children and their caregivers.
Conclusion 7 (based on Findings 19, 20, 21 and 22). While several prevention activities
are designed using evidence-based approaches, response interventions are less
grounded on evidence-based methods. There are multiple reports and approaches that
could be used to assess progress. However, there was little evidence that UNICEF COs
have capitalized on these reports to inform programme implementation and monitor their
effectiveness in reducing violence (or the risk factors associated with violence).
Conclusion 8 (based on Findings 25 and 26). UNICEF is coordinating with several external
stakeholders through the CP Sub-Working Group coordination meetings and/or through
80
technical task forces. In addition, the COs have a strong collaboration with several NGOs
(especially, Lebanon) and the private sector (in particular, Egypt). Nevertheless, there are
unexplored opportunities to strengthen external collaboration with UN Women, WHO and
the private sector. Internally, UNICEF CP Sector coordinates mostly with the Education
and C4D Sectors and there is unused potential to do joint programming with the Youth,
Health and Social Protection Sectors.
Conclusion 9 (based on Findings 27 and 28). There are elements of sustainability in place
(e.g., legal frameworks, varying degrees of multi-sectoral coordination and political
commitment), however there are still several issues that need to be addressed in order to
ensure long-term sustainability (e.g., inclusion of EVAC costs in national budgets and
strengthening multi-sectoral coordination). Furthermore, and more importantly than a
costing exercise, there is a need to develop a detailed financing strategy which would
present the business case for EVAC and would include an assessment of the cost of
inaction. None of the EVAC programmes, with the exception of the Programme504,
have developed an articulated exit or sustainability strategy.
Conclusion 10 (based on Findings 30 and 31). Insufficient information is available to
assess the sustainability of changes in attitudes and behaviours. Without creating such
deep-seated changes in society as a whole and shifting social norms, the long-term
sustainability of EVAC intervention will not be assured. Sustainability of direct
interventions varies among the three countries and depends on several factors, including
institutional, financial, technical and human capacities, and effective case management
systems.
Conclusion 11 (based on Findings F12 and 32). UNICEF Jordan and Lebanon have
endeavored to link emergency response with a longer-term development approach, by
implementing both response and prevention activities and supporting systems
strengthening. However, heavy reliance on humanitarian funding jeopardises the
scalability and replicability of interventions.
Conclusion 12 (based on Findings 33, 34, 35 and 36). Several UNICEF EVAC
interventions have integrated gender considerations in their design and implementation.
However, there are gaps in gender mainstreaming at the three levels of
assessments/design, implementation and, especially M&E.
Conclusion 13 (based on Findings 13 and 29). UNICEF, especially in Jordan and
Lebanon, has opportunistically used the humanitarian funding received due to the Syria
crisis to implement EVAC interventions targeting both refugees and host communities as
well as to build national capacities. This was an occasion to generate awareness
regarding EVAC and raise visibility to demonstrate the proof of concept
are no indications as to how the three COs are strategically
and to integrate it into the national systems in order to make it sustainable.
504 To Excel Consulting (2018). Consultancy Service Project: Development of a 3 year Strategic Framework and
-
UNICEF-01 and Jor-UNICEF-03.
81
9. Recommendations
Recommendation 1. Continue to build Responsibility: COs
on and strengthen existing EVAC Priority: Medium to High
programming at the country level Timeframe: Medium term
Conclusions: 2, 3 and 8
• Develop a multi-sectoral strategy for integrating EVAC along the life-cycle and link it to
social protection interventions (in Egypt and Lebanon)
• Enhance integration within CP Sector (e.g., better parenting, case management, GBV)
and with other UNICEF Sectors (Youth, Health, Social Protection)
• Develop an updated EVAC ToC (in Jordan and Lebanon) to guide EVAC interventions in
a strategic way, even when short-term response to immediate crises may warrant some
adaptations; share the ToC with government and IPs
• Continue supporting the strengthening of national systems at the national and
decentralized levels by building capacities of front-line staff working on EVAC
• Review the case management/response services in order to ensure that capacities to
respond and provide services meet demand generated by SBCC campaigns
•
Recommendation 2. Implement credible Responsibility: COs, with support from
and consistent monitoring and reporting MENARO
of EVAC interventions (programmatic Priority: High
and financial) Timeframe: Short to Medium term
Conclusions: 4, 6, 7, 10 and 11
• Put in place systems to carry out both cost-monitoring and outcome monitoring of
interventions per IP in order to improve efficiency and assess effectiveness
• Apply in a consistent manner (across indicators and countries) the self-rating in RAM
reports
• Include SADD in RAM reports (tabular form) to ensure ease in monitoring, consistency
from year to year and capture differences between children and adolescents and gender
• Include disability disaggregated indicators by integrating the Washington Group
Questions into existing data collection systems
• Define measurable behavioural targets and monitor SBCC and social media campaigns
in a consistent way
• Assess the impact of promising EVAC interventions and share information/lessons
learned at the regional level
• Build capacity of M&E staff for identifying and measuring appropriate indicators,
collecting and analyzing data, and improving RAM reports (self-ratings and data
disaggregation)
• Avoid target setting by nationality to address needs in order to minimize unintended
consequences (Lebanon)
82
Recommendation 3. Further develop Responsibility: COs
Priority: High
contribute to long-term sustainability Timeframe: Short to Medium term
Conclusions: 4, 5, 9, 10 and 12
(i) Support and strengthen multi-sectoral coordination mechanisms at the national
level (NCCM, NCFA and HCC) in order to deliver through and with other partners
(ii) Develop an EVAC financial strategy and continue advocacy efforts for inclusion of
EVAC into national budgets and expand partnerships to Ministries of Planning and
Finance; while showcasing social cost of inaction regarding VAC
(iii) Initiate discussions and collaborate in co-design with governmental counterparts
to manage expectations and integrate exit strategies within programme planning
(iv) Advocate for the inclusion of EVAC criteria into accreditation processes and ensure
the integration of EVAC modules and SOPs into the formal training of social
workers, teachers and public health staff
(v) Expand partnerships with community-based organizations to ensure sustainability
and better coverage of service provision; Require UNICEF IPs to partner with CSOs
(especially in Lebanon)
(vi) In Egypt, continue roll-out of the CPIMS ensuring complementarity and inter-
FVTS and integrate the CPIMS and GBVIMS into it; In Lebanon, expand number of
IPs using the CPIMS and build trust among the different partners in order to
institutionalize the case management system in the three countries
(vii) Develop, implement, and monitor programmes that address social norms and
cultural attitudes in order to ensure long-term change
Recommendation 4. Strengthen Responsibility: COs with support from
gender mainstreaming throughout MENARO
EVAC programming Priority: High
Timeframe: Short-term; ongoing
Conclusions: 3, 7, 11
• Ensure that formative research includes gender aspects and provides operational
recommendations on how to include gender into programme design and
implementation
• Address gender issues in EVAC programme implementation, especially for
increasing participation of male caregivers; providing GBV support to boys; and
clarifying the differences between VAC and GBV
• Strengthen partnerships with UN Women and NGOs who work on gender issues to
carry out joint advocacy efforts; Partner with National Women Councils and
leverage their high profile to advocate for GBV and VAC-related legislation, policies,
etc.
• Strengthen programmatic linkages between family violence and VAC
• Monitor systematically gender-disaggregated indicators in order to assess
progress (Egypt)
• Build the capacity of UNICEF, government and IP staff on gender-responsive/
transformative programming
• on gender
mainstreaming
• Organize a workshop to disseminate and discuss the ways to operationalize in each
Gender Dimensions of Violence
Against Children and Adolescents
83
• With technical support from MENARO, carry out a deep dive to assess the
opportunities for improving gender mainstreaming in EVAC programming.
Formulate a gender action plan and monitor progress on an annual basis
Recommendation 5. Establish a multi- Responsibility: MENARO, with support
country community of practice for from COs
sharing experiences, tools, and Priority: Medium
lessons learnt Timeframe: Medium term
Conclusions: 4, 7, 10, 11 and 12
• Develop an e-library which includes key documents (e.g., SOPs, Codes of Conduct,
Strategies, COVID-19 response approaches, digital tools, etc.) which can be
accessed by all countries in the region
• Organize on a quarterly basis and based on CO interest, technical seminars to share
experiences and lessons learned (e.g., partnering with the private sector, working
with FBOs, case management systems, online violence, etc.)
• Provide technical guidance on designing innovative M&E for SBCC interventions,
in particular to capture changes in attitudes and practices
• Provide technical support to develop new indicators based on the revised Global
Strategic Plan
• 505 for integrating EVAC into sectoral interventions
(education, health, social protection) which can be used for both high-level
advocacy as well as for mobilizing resources
• Consider carrying out a deeper assessment of some of the promising interventions
identified by this evaluation
505 Or the cost of inaction and how it affects the achievement of the education, health and social protection
outcomes.
84
Annexes
Annex 1. ToRs of the Evaluation ............................................................. 1
Annex 2. EVAC Theory of Change ........................................................ 17
Annex 3. References ............................................................................. 18
Annex 4. Stakeholder Analysis ............................................................. 27
Annex 5. Mapping of EVAC Interventions in the Three Countries ......... 29
Annex 6. Evaluation Matrix ................................................................... 46
Annex 7. Proposed Modifications to EQs ............................................. 56
Annex 8. KII Interview Protocol ............................................................. 58
Annex 9. Evaluation sub-questions per type of stakeholder ................. 60
Annex 10. List of People Interviewed .................................................... 64
Annex 11. Steering Committee Terms of Reference ............................. 67
Annex 12. Research Ethics Approval .................................................... 68
Annex 13. Alignment of UNICEF EVAC Interventions with SDGs 5 and 16
............................................................................................................. 89
Initiatives with the INSPIRE
Framework ............................................................................................ 93
Violence Against Children Programme Guidance: Seven Strategies .. 101
Annex 16: Global School-Based Student Health Survey .................... 113
Annex 17. UNICEF Egypt External Communications EVAC Campaigns
2020 ................................................................................................... 115
Annex 18. Select RAM Indicators 2019-2020 ..................................... 117
Annex 19. Case Management Indicators in Lebanon ......................... 128
Annex 20. Planned Targets and Results Achieved (SitReps) .............. 131
85
Annex 1. ToRs of the Evaluation
TERMS OF REFERENCE FOR SERVICE CONTRACTING
Assignment: Evaluation MENARO Eliminate Violence Against Children.
Reporting to: Evaluation Advisor, MENARO.
Terms of Reference ‐ Multi Country Formative and Summative
Evaluation of Elimination of Violence against Children in Egypt,
Jordan and Lebanon
Background
Global Background
1. The United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child, which forms the basis of
The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development established in 2015 has reaffirmed a
global commitment to protecting children from all forms of violence by including specific
Eliminate
; SDG 5.3
Eliminate all harmful practices such as child, early and forced marriage, and all female
genital mutilation End abuse, exploitation, trafficking and all forms of
violence and torture against children
Role of UNICEF
2. The 2006 nce Against Children
(VAC) prompted the 2008 UNICEF Global Child Protection Strategy. The Global
Protection Strategy signalled a shift from issue‐based programming to child protection
systems strengthening and emphasized the importance and necessity of shifting social
norms towards eliminating violence. A 2015 UNICEF global evaluation of violence
against children programming revealed a number of areas for agency improvement,
Preventing and responding to Violence Against Children and
Ad .
3. Ending violence against children is a priority identified in Strategic Plan 2018‐
2021
especially the most vulnerable and those affected by humanitarian situations, are
protected from all forms of violence, exploitation, abuse and harmful practices
St ‐ecological approach to focus on
systems strengthening, social and behavioural change, and high‐level engagement. In
2018, UNICEF produced programme guidance on Preventing and Responding to
Violence Against Children and Adolescents (still in draft) and an INSPIRE Indicator
Guidance and Results Framework on how to define and measure change in EVAC, the
latter produced in partnership with the World Health Organization. The Programme
Guidance details seven priority areas for UNICEF initiatives addressing violence against
1
children and includes a measurement framework with detailed outcomes, outputs and
indicators for each priority area.
4. According to the Violence Against Children Programme Guidance, efforts to address
violence against children are those that ensure high‐level government engagement in
EVAC efforts, strengthen existing national systems to improve response to violence
against children, build the evidence base on violence against children, strengthen
legislative frameworks to EVAC, engage in multisectoral approaches to EVAC (particularly
in the justice, health, and education systems), build caregiver capacity to improve
prevention and response efforts to violence against children, and increase public
financing of child protection efforts. Broadly speaking, these priority areas indicate a
two‐pronged strategy towards EVAC: (a) the strategy seeks to improve the prevention
and response capacity of the caregivers and organizations that interact with children on
a daily basis while (b) improving the higher level legal and governmental protection
systems that serve as safety nets when additional institutional support is needed.
5. UNICEF has conducted two global evaluations of its efforts to EVAC and to improve its
Protecting Children from
Violence
policies could be improved across the agency. Relatedly, the evaluation highlighted the
need for better research and data collection on violence against children across the
Strengthening Child Protection
Systems icularly
programming. The evaluation also found that despite a number of strategic partnerships
on child protection system strengthening globally, there is no comprehensive global
platform for pooling efforts and resources to strengthen child protection systems. The
evaluation therefore highlighted the importance of regional office‐led research and
convenings on the topic.
6. The Latin America and Caribbean Regional Office undertook a regional EVAC evaluation
in 2019 that served a similar purpose as the one intended for the present evaluation.
UNICEF headquarters is currently developing a research report on protection programme
scale‐up strategies. The INSPIRE Working Group, of which UNICEF is a member, is also
researching scale‐up strategies for child protection programmes.
Regional background
7. In addition to the two global reports on EVAC (referenced in point 5 above), UNICEF also
published a regional analysis of Violent Discipline in the Middle East and North Africa
Region (MENA) (January 2019). This report found the following:
• Globally, close to 300 million (three in four) children ages two to four
experience violent discipline by their caregivers on a regular basis;
• In 12 countries surveyed in the MENA region, 84 per cent of children ages two
to four experience violent discipline; and
• Of the children surveyed in the MENA study, 80 per cent had experienced
psychological aggression, 70 per cent had experienced physical discipline and 31
per cent had experienced severe punishment
2
8. Two UNFPA‐UNICEF joint evaluations, one on female genital mutilation and on child
marriage, have also covered these aspects of violence against children in various
countries in the MENA region.
9. In the MENA region, UNICEF has developed EVAC programmes, action plans, and
interventions. In Egypt, Jordan, and Lebanon UNICEF programmes use public advocacy
and media campaigns, parenting programmes, and other initiatives to prevent and
respond to violence in schools. UNICEF Palestine and UNICEF Libya have developed a
wide range of EVAC action plans and community interventions. UNICEF Iran has
developed parenting programming while UNICEF in Morocco, the United Arab Emirates,
and Kingdom of Saudi Arabia have launched efforts to generate evidence, strengthen
child protection services, prevent and respond to VAC, and address child safety online.
10.
EVAC theory of change. The form that this support takes varies from country to country
depending upon national institutional and financial capacity, local context, and other
factors. Examining the extent to which regional governments are acting in accordance
ortant way of understanding
how UNICEF can best fulfil its goal of supporting national initiatives to EVAC. A few
country cases are presented below, and additional cases can be found in annex A.
Egypt
11. The Arab Republic of Egypt has many of the same challenges as other MENA countries
in terms of EVAC, with the addition of commonly practiced female genital mutilation /
circumcision. The legal provisions in place to protect children from violence are the 2014
Egyptian Constitution, the Convention on the Rights of the Child, the African Charter on
the Rights and Welfare of the Child, and the Egyptian Child Law. A 2015 UNICEF study
iveness
nationally, and a 2014 Demographic Health survey showed that 93 per cent of children
under 14 years of age have been exposed to violent discipline in Egypt.
12. The National Council for Childhood and Motherhood under the Ministry of State for
Family and Population have been working to strengthen the Child Protection
Committees, case management, and social response through various initiatives,
including creating a national child helpline. There is also a national task force on EVAC
that the National Council for Childhood and Motherhood created with UNICEF which has
helped develop an EVAC National Framework. There are also other partnerships that
shape the national response to violence against children, including media partnerships
for awareness raising campaigns and an ongoing collaboration between the Ministry of
Motherhood to rehabilitate children in conflict with the law.
13. UNICEF collaborates closely with the Government of Egypt under the auspices of a
national social protection framework. Under this framework, UNICEF provides technical
assistance to state institutions in an effort to strengthen national capacity. This
collaboration has led to a cross‐sectoral country programme that includes linkages to
important state and local resources needed to address VAC.
14.
interventions on the most vulnerable areas of the country, defined as those with the
3
highest poverty and inequality statistics, as well as areas that present the best
opportuniti
pervasive activity in Egypt, and these programmes serve as the entry point to addressing
violence against children in the home, school, and wider community. These programmes
also help parents and the general public understand the impact of violence against
children and other practices that harm children, such as female genital mutilation /
circumcision and early marriage.
15. UNICEF focuses on protecting all children in Egypt, but particularly adolescents and girls,
from violence. UNICEF Egypt has three main foci: (a) improving service provider capacity
in targeted locations, (b) changing social attitudes about violence against children, and
(c) improving national capacity to legislate, plan, monitor and budget for child protection
and response. Key partners in these efforts are line ministries, United Nations agencies,
NGOs, academia and the media. The Egypt demographic health survey is an important
source of data on progress towards these goals. The 2015 Mid Term Review revealed
that social norms‐informed interventions, particularly those focused on positive
parenting, are critical to EVAC in Egypt. The Mid Term Review emphasized that
empowering and training local stakeholders, such as religious leaders and medical
professionals, is critical to EVAC in Egypt.
Jordan
16. ‐2022 Country Programme Document for Jordan, as of
2012, 89 per cent of children aged 2‐14 in the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan reported
having experienced violent discipline, with 20 per cent reporting having experienced
severe physical punishment. The CPD also noted that 11 per cent of children in public
schools reported having experienced physical violence at the hands of teachers during
the 2015/2016 school year. In an attempt to address such widespread violence against
children, parliament endorsed a revised domestic violence law that includes foster
children in the legal definition of family, improves settlement procedures, and improves
linkages between sharia and non‐sharia courts in child custody arrangements.
17.
while (b) providing integrated child protection services nationally and locally. Key
partners in these efforts are the Public Security Directorate as well as the Ministries of
Social Development, Education, Health, Justice and Awqaf Islamic Affairs and Holy
Places. These efforts are complimented by a communication for development strategy
aimed at shifting attitudes on violence against children.
18. In an effort to reach the most vulnerable children, the Jordan Country Office has shifted
to a vulnerability‐based approach that focuses on vulnerability indicators rather other
status indicators (e.g. refugee versus nonrefugee status) for rights holder targeting and
service provision. This vulnerability approach focuses on social cohesion across the
lifecycle and on helping the Government of Jordan establish a national social protection
system. Data on child diversion from formal judicial proceedings and experiences of
physical punishment in Jordan is available from the Ministry of Social Development and
a UNICEF knowledge, attitudes and practices study.
Lebanon
19. riority is building the capacity of government and
non‐government actors relevant to child protection while also working to change social
4
norms related to EVAC. Challenges in responding to violence against children in Lebanon
include a paucity of timely and equitable prevention and response measures for survivors
of violence, social norms that stigmatize reporting domestic abuse, insufficient services
to address the scale of violence against children incidents, and insufficient political
commitment and financial resources to address violence against children. The influx of
Syrian refugees in Lebanon has compounded these challenges, introduced additional
challenges related to violence against children, and exacerbated the service gap for
refugees and vulnerable Lebanese communities seeking services to address violence
against children. Issues that have emerged in Lebanon as a result of this social and
demographic change include increased child trafficking, early marriage and child
involvement in armed violence.
20. There have been a number of legislative developments in Lebanon that affect the child
National Strategy to Protect Children from Violence and the 2014 adoption of law 293 for
the protection of women and other family members from domestic violence. Despite
these legal protections, many citizens remain unaware of their rights and many key
stakeholders do not enforce these measures.
21. UNICEF Lebanon addresses EVAC by focusing on three domains: (a) improving
legislative enforcement and governmental coordination on violence against children
prevention and response services, (b) improving services available to those affected by
violence against children and (c) improving the capacity of the most vulnerable to
promote practices that EVAC. In order to achieve these goals, UNICEF is also working
to access better data on violence against children in the country. Key partners in this
three‐pronged work include United Nations agencies (UNHCR, ILO, UNFPA, WHO), line
ministries (Justice, Social Affairs, and Education and Higher Education), NGOs, academia
and the Higher Childhood Council. UNICEF gives financial support to the Higher Council
for Childhood so that it can implement its multi‐year efforts to address child involvement
in armed violence in Lebanon.
22. In order to improve governmental coordination, UNICEF is working to develop and
implement a national inter‐sectoral case management and referral mechanisms with clear
line ministry accountability. Important aspects of this work include efforts to integrate
to develop psychosocial support curricula for schoolteachers and counsellors who can
refer cases to ministries and NGOs as needed. In terms of service provision, UNICEF
often works through Ministry of Social Affairs, Social Development Centres to provide its
child protection prevention and response packages in the most vulnerable and hard to
reach areas of the country. This way of working has been scaled up in recent years. The
response package includes legal, medical, mental health and psychosocial support
services, temporary shelter, and family support services for at‐risk children and child
survivors of severe violence. In order to prevent VAC in vulnerable communities, UNICEF
has also rolled out various communication for development initiatives in conjunction with
the Ministry of Social Affairs.
23. UNICEF Lebanon has been tracking its progress on EVAC using the monitoring and
evaluation criteria detailed in the Child Protection Results and Resources Framework.
UNICEF conducted a knowledge attitudes practices survey in 2016‐2017, a nationwide
baseline assessment on early childhood development indicators in 2017 and an in‐depth
Mid‐Term Review and multi indicator cluster survey in 2018. In 2020, UNICEF will
5
conduct another knowledge attitudes practices survey and another multi indicator cluster
survey.
Theory of change
24. The UNICEF global 2017 Theory of Change for EVAC takes a socio‐ecological approach
to addressing violence against children and posits that multisectoral and cooperative
approaches will achieve maximal impact. The theory of change therefore stipulates that
changes must occur at the societal, community, household, family, peer, and individual
levels in order to EVAC.
25.
which falls broadly into two categories. The first category is made up of initiatives to
improve the extent to which children are protected from violence. The second category
is made up of initiatives to improve the effectiveness of responses to violence against
children. Achieving both of these goals through multisectoral interventions then sets the
scene for ending violence against children entirely. The outputs of successful EVAC
Strengthening country‐level child
protection systems for EVAC Strengthening country protection for children in
contact with the law
26. The global theory of change has been tailored to reflect the situation in particular
countries. Descriptions of the approach are available in the UNICEF country offices
programme documents and strategic notes. When available, it is appropriate to evaluate
of change on EVAC.
27. An important assumption that this theory of change makes is that the data necessary to
judge the prevalence of violence against children and effectiveness of EVAC initiatives
are available at the country level. The theory of change makes the assumption that
national governments in the region have the political will, institutional capacity and
financial ability to put significant effort into EVAC initiatives. Many countries in the MENA
region are engaged in prolonged armed conflicts and refugee crises, both of which may
6
Source: UNICEF Preventing and Responding to Violence Against Children and Adolescents Theory of Change 2017
Purpose and Objectives
Purpose
28. 28. The purpose of this formative and summative evaluation is to provide impartial and
independent evidence that will inform collective action to EVAC. This evaluation will be
the first of a series of events intended to take stock of and improve MENA contribution
-level
government approaches to EVAC in the region and community‐based organization
initiatives that are strategically positioned to reach collective action, to influence
government or that they will have a national scale in an effort to highlight promising
practices and bring them to scale.
Objective
29. The objective of the formative and summative evaluation is to produce an independent
and useful evaluation report that can guide future action. The evaluation will provide
accountability to UNICEF, donors, governments, communities, private sector partners,
and rights‐holders as to whether UNICEF s implementation of EVAC programming in the
MENA region is fit for its overall purpose of supporting national initiatives to EVAC.
30. More specifically, the objectives of the evaluation are to:
7
• Examine a sample of existing government and community‐based EVAC
initiatives as defined above in the region, with a focus on promising / emerging
practices and what is transferable, scalable, or in need of evaluation.
• Assess the relevance, effectiveness, efficiency and sustainability of high‐level,
government efforts to address VAC in the region
• Determine the extent to which EVAC programming in the region is focused on
improving i) the extent to which children are protected from violence in the region,
and ii) responses to VAC incidents in the region, as outlined in the UNICEF EVAC ToC
• Understand the bottlenecks in EVAC data generation and service delivery,
with an eye toward how UNICEF can support national government efforts to address
these bottlenecks
Intended Use
31. This formative and summative evaluation is intended to examine the extent of high‐level,
national government efforts to implement data / research‐informed EVAC programming.
This exercise is a starting point for the UNICEF regional office to analyze how it can best
support national efforts to EVAC in the region, identify opportunities for evidence
generation, and implement strategy and programme improvements at the regional level.
The evaluation is the first in a series of research and strategy exercises that will take place
in the UNICEF regional office over the short term as UNICEF refines its regional EVAC
strategy.
32. The information will also be used during a network meeting on child protection to improve
the regional understanding of best practices and to inform coordination initiatives. The
meeting will cover the results of this evaluation as well as findings from recent systematic
reviews about strategies to prevent and respond to EVAC. One focus of this meeting will
be a discussion of the evidence about the intersections between EVAC and violence
against women in the region, with the goal of identifying possible opportunities for
collaboration across these domains.
Scope
33. The evaluation will assess high level strategies applied and key results in Egypt, Jordan
and Lebanon, to EVAC, with a focus on how government‐led initiatives do or do not fall
comply with the UNICEF EVAC theory of change. The countries were selected because
UNICEF has partnered closely with the national government in these countries to deliver
a wide variety of EVAC programmes. The evaluation will specifically address gender
considerations in all of these contexts and ways in which UNICEF has or could support
these government‐led initiatives. The evaluation will cover all activities planned and / or
implemented during the last 18 months that either protect children from violence directly
or develop improved responses for when violence against children occurs506. The
analysis will focus individually on each country previously mentioned and will evaluate
of change and the national EVAC strategy as detailed in individual countrie
documents. The sector actions that will be included in this evaluation will be limited to
actions that have an explicit aim to end physical or emotional violence against children
or mitigate its consequences are included.
506 This will include initiatives planned earlier but still implemented during the past 18 months
8
34. While the focus is on national frameworks and the understanding that national
frameworks are the agreed tool that the international community will support, the
INSPIRE framework will be referenced during the evaluation.
35. The evaluation will include an additional section highlighting similarities and differences
initiatives have been both similar and different from one another. As many countries are
simultaneously running development and humanitarian interventions concurrently, these
The management, monitoring and reporting systems that each country uses for EVAC
initiatives should also be discussed. In cases where these systems are not in place, the
evaluation report should clearly state this.
36. 36. The evaluation aims to identify both intended and unintended effects of national and
regional efforts to EVAC. The evaluation document is planned to feed into the next round
of national and regional strategic planning on EVAC programming.
Evaluability
37. The overall UNICEF EVAC theory of change will be one of the basis for this evaluation, in
combination with the documentation of approaches in each of the counties documented
in the country programme documents and strategic notes. The 2015 evaluation of
UN and the 2018 UNICEF evaluation of global child
protection strategies will be instructive for consultants to further refine the theory of
change, as will the 2019 Latin America and Caribbean Regional Office regional VAC
evaluation.
38. Monitoring data and previous evaluations are available for some, but not all, countries.
The consultant(s) will need to determine the availability of such data by clearly
communicating with the relevant country offices. Useful existing data sources include
UNICEF multiple indicator cluster surveys, knowledge attitudes and practices surveys,
documents, UNICEF and government programme monitoring data.
39. In Egypt, the demographic and health survey is an important source of information on
EVAC, as is the 2015 UNICEF midterm review. Lebanon also conducted a baseline early
childhood development assessment, and a midterm review in 2017. Other UN agencies
and working groups, including UN Women, UNFPA, WHO and the INSPIRE working
group are expected to contribute additional data on EVAC and violence against women
in these countries that could inform the present evaluation.
40. At this point there is an assumption that access to government strategies and plans is
possible and therefore the relevance in terms of alignment of the EVAC programme with
the country strategic frameworks will be possible.
41. Other UNICEF reports that provide insight into EVAC globally and regionally include
Hidden in Plain Sight
(2019).
42. It is worth noting that violence in general, and against girls in particular, often goes
unreported because families attempt to resolve issues privately to preserve the child and
9
gathering and
analysis.
Evaluation questions:
43. The key questions for this evaluation were formulated based on the OECD DAC
evaluation criteria. The evaluation criteria of coherence and impact were excluded to
keep the evaluation focused and manageable507. A gender criteria is included in order to
make gender‐disaggregated considerations more clearly presented in the final
evaluation. The evaluation aims to answer the following questions:
Relevance
•
theory of change, INSPIRE aligned with good and best practices and with each other?
•
context and challenges facing both male and female rights holders in the country?
Efficiency
• To what extent do high level national government EVAC initiatives use resources in a
way that allows for cost monitoring and maximizes utility per dollar of investment?
• To what extent did governmental actors consider alternative methods of programme
delivery and successfully identify the most effective delivery method in each of these
countries?
Effectiveness
• To what extent were national capacities to EVAC build, particularly in terms of violence
against the most marginalized children?
• Who and how many people did these initiatives reach (disaggregated by geographic
location, gender, and other relevant demographic considerations)?
• To what extent are national EVAC initiatives in the MENA region scalable nationally,
internationally and regionally?
• Which of the initiatives show a good potential to develop impact and could be
identified for a deeper analysis or evaluation at a later stage?
Sustainability
• To what extent are achievements on the legislation, attitudes, and direct interventions
sustainable?
Gender
• To what extent are governments taking gender into consideration in EVAC initiative
design and monitoring?
Stakeholders
44. The following parties will be users of this evaluation:
• UNICEF MENA regional office
• UNICEF MENA country offices
• UNICEF donors
507 In addition the coherence in a multi country evaluation would be extremely complex. Given the data available it will be very difficult to
establish impact on issues that are challenging to measure at a national level and near impossible to attribute or to even conduct a
contribution analysis.
10
• MENA governments in countries where UNICEF has offices
• Other United Nations agency country offices in the MENA region
• Other UNICEF regional offices
• INSPIRE Working Group
45. The following are additional stakeholders who will not be users of the evaluation:
• Communities in which UNICEF works
• Private sector partners
• Rights‐holders
Methodology
46. This section provides the preliminary direction of the methodology. The methodology is
based on UNEG norms and standards, including UNEG guidance on integrating human
rights and gender into evaluation. It will be further elaborated during the inception phase
in the annexes of the inception report, which will include the research instruments and
evaluation matrix.
47. Cross‐cutting themes on program scalability and lessons learned should be incorporated
into the evaluation design. The evaluation methods will include a mix of qualitative and
quantitative data collection and analysis techniques. The methodology acknowledges
the challenges of data collection during COVID 19 and the workload of UNICEF and
dary data that will be analyzed in
greater detail and triangulated between different data sources. Primary data collection
will be kept to a minimum. The evaluation will scan existing initiatives and also assess
them in terms of the potential to have impact at scale and identify some that might be
ready to be evaluated in more detail at a later stage. During the inception phase the
consultant team will develop criteria on which initiatives would be included in the
exercise.
48. The methodology will apply a mixed methods approach with following lines of inquiries:
(a) analyzing existing surveys for findings with regards to EVAC, (b) use UNICEF
headquarters analytical tools for surveys, (c) review UNICEF regional and country specific
strategy documents and programme evaluations to gain insight into programme /
initiative design, (d) analyze the government strategic framework and legal framework in
the countries, (e) analyze UNICEF and partner monitoring data on EVAC, (f) conduct key
informant interviews with stakeholders508, and (g) program observation.
49. The evaluation will be as participatory as possible. Focus groups will be used to illustrate
specific points and to give flavor to the analysis. The methodology will be refined during
the inception phase and reviewed by the evaluation steering committee and ethical
review board. If the consultant(s) find it necessary, designing and administering
additional surveys can be proposed during the inception phase. Special attention will be
given to the disaggregation of data by gender and other relevant groups, including
refugees and displaced populations.
Limitations
50. The evaluation will focus in depth on a limited number of cases in an effort to keep the
evaluation manageable. While this evaluation design will help focus analysis, it will also
508 This will most likely be over the phone, skpye, zoom, or similar.
11
present challenges for the external validity of findings; while some findings are expected
to be widely generalizable, others are not.
51. There are significant barriers to accessing rights holders as interviewing children takes
special skills compounded by the COVID situation. It is expected, that service providers
and caregivers will provide sufficient information to draw conclusions.
Governance
52. The evaluation will be guided by a steering committee509 that will approve the terms of
reference of this evaluation and endorse the inception report. It may also guide the
evaluation should any unforeseen development occur. The regional evaluation advisor
will be the direct manager of the evaluation. The country offices of countries evaluated
will ensure that all relevant documentation is available to the consultant(s) and will
arrange meetings with relevant stakeholders (partners, UNICEF staff).
53. The team leader will coordinate the inputs of the team and be responsible for the quality
of the deliverables.
Deliverables
54. The contract will have the following deliverables: Inception Report, Presentation of
Preliminary Findings and Recommendations, Draft Report, Final Report and Response to
the Comments Matrix. In the table below the timeline is laid out.
Task Duration Tentative Deliverable Responsibility
timeline after
contract
signature
Kick off Two weeks
Inception report Two weeks Four weeks Report Consultants
Acceptance of inception Two weeks Evaluation
report manager/steering
committee
Field work Three Consultants
weeks
Presentation of One day Seven weeks Presentation Consultants
preliminary findings
Draft report Three Ten weeks Draft Report Consultants
weeks
Quality assurance One week Evaluation Manager
Commenting process Two weeks Evaluation Manager
coordinates
Final report / response to Two weeks 15 weeks Final Report Consultants
the comments
509 ToR of the steering committee available at request.
12
55. The Report will follow the UNICEF guidelines and be cognizant of relevant UNICEF and
UNEG guidelines for evaluation.
Team composition
56. The below sets out the tentative workload of the different specialists, as well as the
required skills for the different team members. Ideally the team is mixed in terms of
gender and cultural backgrounds. The number of days will change depending on the
proposal of the consultant company. The company might consider a different team
composition as long as the required skills are available to answer the evaluation
questions.
Team leader/Evaluation Specialist 45 days
Protection Specialist 25 days
Research Assistant 40 days
Team
leader/Evaluation economics, social science, etc.)
Specialist
Experience in leading evaluation teams in political environments
(at least 5)
Ability to conduct statistical analyses
Experience in managing evaluations in the United Nations
system
Good understanding of the child rights and EVAC agendas
Good understanding of integrating gender and human rights into
evaluations
Strong interpersonal skills
Ability to work with senior officials
Cultural sensitivity
Fluency in English, proficiency in Arabic preferred
Child Protection
Specialist studies, social science, etc.)
Experience in conducting field interviews on sensitive topics
Publication record on technical aspects relating to ending
violence against children
7 years of work in the child protection sector; including
programming support and policy advice to national
programmes
Good understanding of integrating gender and human rights into
interviewing practices
Strong interpersonal skills
Ability to work with senior officials
13
Cultural sensitivity
Fluency in English, proficiency in Arabic preferred
Research Assistant Experience in research methodologies
Understanding of child protection issues.
Fluency in Arabic and English
Payment
57. All interested institutions or group of consultants are requested to include in their
submission detailed costs including:
• Daily rate including hours per day
• Number of days required per deliverable and activity
• Additional Expenses (external and internal travel, field works, interpretation
and translation, flight, hotel, etc.) to be agreed prior to commencing project
• The consultants will be required to use their own computers, printers,
photocopier etc.
58. Payment is contingent on approval by the Evaluation Manager and will be made in three
instalments:
• 20 percent after the inception report
• 30 percent after the completion of the draft report
• 50 percent on completion of all deliverable to the satisfaction of UNICEF.
Payment Terms
59.
terms of payment are Net 30 days, after receipt of invoice and acceptance of work.
Payment will be effected by bank transfer in the currency of billing.
Location
60. The work will be home based, should travel and interaction be possible field work will be
added in the selected countries.
Official Travel
61. All travel arrangements, including insurance and visas, will be managed and paid by the
institution.
62. Therefore, expected travel costs must be included as a budget item in the financial
proposal.
ICT considerations
63. The evaluation team will require access to some of the UNICEF internal databases and
documents.
Evaluation Process of the Proposal
14
64. The assessment will be done based on the CVs of the proposed team members matching
the requirements, the availability and the price. Skills will need to be available in the
team. The distribution can vary between the profiles but overall the skills will have to be
matched. To pass the assessment the team members will have to have:
65. The team leader will have to have a relevant master's degree (evaluation, development
studies economics, social science, etc.), demonstrated experience in leading evaluation
teams in political environments (at least 5); of integrating gender and human rights into
evaluations, in conducting statistical analyses; in managing evaluations in the United
Nations system; in working with senior officials, cultural sensitivity, strong interpersonal
skills, demonstrated understanding of the child rights the EVAC agenda, and fluency in
English.
66. The child protection specialist will have to have a relevant master's degree (psychology,
evaluation, development studies, social science, etc.), demonstrated experience in
conducting field interviews on sensitive topics, Strong interpersonal skills, of integrating
gender and human rights into interviewing practices; working with senior officials; and
cultural sensitivity; publication record on technical aspects relating to ending violence
against children; seven years of work in the child protection sector; including
programming support and policy advice to national programmes; and fluency in English
67. The research assistant, will have to have demonstrated experience in research
methodologies; understanding of child protection issues; and fluency in Arabic and
English
PERFORMANCE INDICATORS FOR EVALUATION OF RESULTS
68. The performance of the company will be measured against UNEG norms and standard,
as well as the UNICEF evaluation guidance materials.
Unsatisfactory Performance
69. In case of unsatisfactory performance, the payment will be withheld until quality
deliverables are submitted. If the selected organization is unable to complete the
assignment, the contract will be terminated by notification letter sent 30 days prior to the
termination date. In the meantime, UNICEF will initiate another selection process to
identify appropriate candidate.
Conditions and Administrative Issues
70. The contractor will work on its own computer(s) and use its own office resources and
materials in the execution of this assignment. The contractor's fee shall therefore be
inclusive of all office administrative costs.
71. Granting access to UNICEF ICT resources for consultants/non‐staff is considered as
'exception,' and therefore shall only be granted upon authorization by the head of the
office on justification/need basis. This includes creation of a UNICEF email address, as
well as access to ICT equipment such as laptops and mobile devices.
72. All evaluation consultants must uphold the UNEG Code of Conduct for Evaluation in the
United Nations system. All persons engaged under a UNICEF service contract, either
directly through an individual contract, or indirectly through an institutional contract, shall
be subject to the United Nations Supplier Code of Conduct:
https://www.ungm.org/Public/CodeOfConduct
15
73. Please also see UNICEF's Standard Terms and Conditions attached.
74. Proposals with all supporting documents should be addressed to the procurement focal
person:
75. Please direct any enquiries to the project manager Robert Stryk (email: rstryk@unicef.org)
copying UNICEF Supply Manager Ms. Devika Kapur (email: dkapur@unicef.org) as well
as the procurement focal person.
76. Proposals with all supporting documents should be addressed to the official email
communication.
16
Annex 2. EVAC Theory of Change
17
Annex 3. References
GLOBAL RESOURCES
ECPAT International. (March, 2016). Power Impunity and Anonymity: Understanding the
Forces Driving the Demand for Sexual Exploitation of Children. Bangkok: ECPAT
International.
The United Nations. (1988). Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination
against Women. Treaty Series 1249: 13.
The United Nations. (1989).Convention on the Rights of the Child. Treaty Series, 1577, 3.
Tidey, C. (2018). Children Account for Nearly One-Third Of Identified Trafficking Victims
Globally.
UNESCO. (2019). Behind the Numbers: Ending school violence and bullying.
UNFPA Evaluation Office. (2018). Evaluation of UNFPA support to the prevention of, response
to and elimination of gender-based violence and harmful practices (2012-2017).
UNFPA and UNICEF (2018). Making the Connection: Intimate partner violence and violence
against children in Eastern Europe and Central Asia
UNICEF Innocenti Research Centre. (2012). Assessing the Code of Conduct for the
Protection of Children from Sexual Exploitation in Travel and Tourism: Discussion Paper.
UNICEF Innocenti Research Centre. (December, 2011). Child Safety Online: Global
Challenges and Strategies.
UNICEF. (2005). Investing in children: The UNICEF contribution to poverty reduction and the
Millennium Summit agenda. Economic and Social Council. United Nations.
UNICEF. (2010). Advocacy toolkit. A Guide to inf
lives.
UNICEF. (2010). UNICEF Strategic Priority Action Plan for Gender Equality: 2010-2012.
UNICEF. (2012). Protecting Children from Violence: A Synthesis of Evaluation Findings.
UNICEF. (2014). Eliminating discrimination against children and parents based on sexual
orientation and/ or gender identity.
UNICEF. (2014). Hidden in Plain Sight: A statistical analysis of violence against children.
UNICEF. (2014). Strategic Plan 2014-2017.
UNICEF. (2015). Evaluation report. Protecting children from violence: A comprehensive
.
UNICEF. (2015
strategies and programme performance.
UNICEF. (2017). A Familiar Face. Violence in the lives of children and adolescents.
UNICEF. (2017). Is Every Child Counted? Status of data for children in the SDGs. New York:
UNICEF.
UNICEF. (2017). Make the Digital World Safer for Children While Increasing Online Access
to Benefit the Most Disadvantaged.
UNICEF. (2017). Preventing and Responding to Violence Against Children and Adolescents
Theory of Change 2017.
18
UNICEF. (2017). Report on Communication for Development (C4D). Global Progress and
Country Level Highlights Across Programme Areas.
UNICEF. (2017). UNICEF Gender Action Plan, 2018-2021.
UNICEF. (2018). Child Protection Resource Pack. How to plan, monitor and evaluate child
protection programmes.
UNICEF. (2018). Humanitarian Action for Children 2018: Overview. New York: UNICEF.
UNICEF. (2018). Independent Panel Review of the UNICEF Response to Protection from
Sexual Exploitation and Abuse (PSEA).
UNICEF. (2018). Strategic Plan 2018-2021, Executive Summary.
UNICEF. (2018). UNICEF Strategic Plan, 2018-2021.
UNICEF. (2019). Guidelines to strengthen the social service workforce for child protection.
UNICEF. (2019). Technical guidance for communication for development programmes
addressing violence against children. Communication for Development (C4D). Working Paper
Series.
UNICEF. (July 2018). INSPIRE Indicator Guidance and Results Framework. Ending Violence
Against Children: How to define and measure change.
UNICEF. (n.d.). Gender Equality.
UNICEF, UNHCR and WFP (2021) Vulnerability Assessment of Syrian Refugees in Lebanon
UNODC. (2014). Global Report on Trafficking in Persons 2014.
REGIONAL RESOURCES
ECPAT. (2020). Regional Overview: Sexual exploitation of children in the Middle East and
North Africa.
Maestral International. (2018). Regional Mapping and Scoping Report of Parenting Support
Interventions in the Middle East and North Africa.
UNHCR. (2014).Protection of Refugee Children in the Middle East and North Africa.
UNICEF (2019). MENA Generation 2030.
UNICEF MENARO. (2019). Regional Office Annual Report.
UNICEF. (2016). Child Online Protection in the MENA Region.
UNICEF. (2017). Progress for Children with Equity in the MENA.
UNICEF. (2019). Violent Discipline in the Middle East and North Africa Region (MENA).
UNICEF. (2020). The Impact of COVID-19 on Children in the MENA.
UNICEF. (July, 2020). Ending Violence Against Children. MENARO Orientation on Child
Protection.
EGYPT
CAMPAS. (2018). Sustainable Development Goals Report.
19
CAMPAS. (2019). Sustainable Development Goals Report.
Carrefour, UNICEF & Ministry of Education. (2020). New Academic Year 2020-2021.
Back to School Flyers and Stores Distribution.
Child Rights Law. Law No. 126 of 2008, Amending Law No. 12 of 1996, Al Jariddah
Al-Rasmyiah, vol. 24 bis, 15 June 2008. Constitution of the Arab Republic of Egypt [Egypt],18
January 2014.
Egypt Mission Report. (2019). Preliminary mapping of services provided to Children on the
Move. Focus on crossborder considerations.
Egyptian Red Crescent. (2019). Psychosocial Rehabilitation for Vulnerable and at-risk
European Union. (2019). Mid-term Evaluation of the EU funded programme "PAGODA
Delegation Agreement for Expanding Access to Education and Protection for at Risk Children
in Egypt" (ENI/2015/ 371-652).
Firden, Carie and Saleh, Yasmine. (n.d.). Social Work in Sexual and Gender-Based Violence
Trainer Manual.
Forden, Carie. (2016). Assessment of Soft Skills Training Needs for Egyptian Social
Harrassmap and French Cultural Institution. (2019). Towards a safe environment: training for
trainers and Facilitators Curriculum to spread awareness against sexual violence against
children and disabled children.
Harrassmap. (2018). Sexual Assault Against Children. Annual Report.
Ministry of Health and Population (2018). Ending Violence Against Children: Plan for Action
for the National Strategic Framework, Egypt (2020-2030).
Ministry of Health and Population [Egypt], El-Zanaty and Associates [Egypt], and ICF
International. (2015). Egypt Demographic and Health Survey 2014. Cairo, Egypt and
Rockville, Maryland, USA: Ministry of Health and Population and ICF International.
Ministry of Social Solidarity and UNICEF. (2019). El-Zanaty, El-Ghazaly and El-Sheikh,
Formative Research and Development of an Evidence Based Positive Parenting Intervention
in Egypt.
Ministry of Social Solidarity. (2017). Advocacy Paper on Social Worker Workforce:
Strengthening Child Protection Systems in Egypt.
Ministry of Social Solidarity. (2019). Profiling of Social Workers Report Summary.
National Council for Women. (2017). National Strategy for the Empowerment of Egyptian
Women 2030.
NCCM and Ministry of Health and Population. (2018). Ending Violence Against Children in
Egypt National Strategic Framework.
NCCM and UNICEF. (2015). Violence against Children in Egypt Quantitative Survey and
Qualitative Study in Cairo, Alexandria and Assiut.
NCCM, IOM and UNHCR. (2018). Children on the Move Policy Brief.
NCCM, IOM and UNHCR. (n.d.). Information Note for Child Helpline Operators. Children on
the Move.
NCCM. (2018). Ending Violence Against Children in Egypt. National Strategic Framework.
Organization of African Unity (OAU). (1990) African Charter on the Rights and Welfare of the
Child, 11 July 1990, CAB/LEG/24.9/49.
20
Penal Code. Law No. 58 of 1937 (Penal Code), as amended by Law No. 95 of 2003, Vol.
25, Al Jariddah Al-Rasmyiah, 19 June 2003.
Terre Des Homme. (2019). Community based child protection for refugee and migrant
children, adolescents and youth, their families, and host communities Project. Final Report.
UN WOMEN. (2013). Study on Ways and Methods to Eliminate Sexual Harassment in Egypt.
UNICEF (2018-2022). Midterm review Egypt CO CPD.
UNICEF (2019). Egypt Annual Report.
UNICEF (2019). Egypt RAM Combined Outcomes Outputs and End Year Summary Narrative
Report.
UNICEF & Baseera. (December 2020). Real Time Monitoring of the situation of children and
vulnerable population arising from COVID-19 pandemic in Egypt. Results on education of
children, status of employment, Income and Expenditure and consumption of household
members.
UNICEF and Terre Des Homme. (2020).
migrants, and host communities, children, adolescents, youth and parents through child
t.
UNICEF, AlAzhar & Coptic Church. (2016). Peace, Love, Tolerance; key messages from Islam
and Christianity on protecting children from violence and harmful practices.
UNICEF. (2016 & 2017). Children in Conflict with the Law in Egypt, a survey on practices of
authorities in charge of applying a child-friendly criminal justice system (2016 2017).
UNICEF. (2017). Assessing Awaladna Campaign Outreach. Final Report.
UNICEF. (2017). Country Office Annual Report.
UNICEF. (2018). Children on the Move Strategy.
UNICEF. (2018). Creating a Protective Environment for Vulnerable Adolescents in
governorates with High Risks of Irregular Migration and Child Trafficking. Final Report.
UNICEF. (2018). Determinants of Violent Disciplinary Practices for Children in Egypt.
UNICEF. (2018). End of Year Results Summary Narrative Analysis.
UNICEF. (2018). Ending Violence Against Children in Egypt. National Strategic Framework.
UNICEF. (2019). Country Office Annual Report.
UNICEF. (2019). End of Year Results Summary Narrative.
UNICEF. (2019). Ending Violence Against Children: Awladna Social Media Campaign on Calm
not Harm Report.
UNICEF. (2019).
UNICEF. (2019). Strengthening Protection Systems in Egypt: Strengthening the Child
Protection Committees.
UNICEF. (2019). UNICEF Egypt Partnership with Faith Based Organizations (FBOs)
Programmer Overview.
UNICEF. (2020). Egypt RAM Combined Outcomes Outcome Outputs and End year Summary
Narrative Report
UNICEF. (2020). Ending Violence Against Children: Digital Media on Safer Internet Day
Cyberbullying Campaign Report.
UNICEF. (2020). External Communication 2020: Annual Report.
21
UNICEF. (2020). Media Code of Conduct for Children and Families in Egypt.
UNICEF. (2020). National Child Protection Framework in Egypt.
UNICEF. (2020). National Child Protection Information Management System: Brief. Note.
UNICEF. (n.d.). Costing of a Case Management System for Children at Risk in Egypt.
Executive Summary.
UNICEF. (n.d.). Ending Violence Against Children: Social Media Campaign on positive
parenting Report.
UNICEF. (n.d.). Ending Violence in Schools: A New Social Contract.
UNICEF. (n.d.). UNICEF support to Dawwie
Egypt.
United States Department of Labour. (2018). Findings on the Worst Forms of Child Labour.
UNPD. (2018-2022). United Nations Partnership Development Framework: United for
Sustainable Future.
WHO. (2007). Global School-based Student Health Survey Egypt 2007 Fact Sheet
WHO. (2011). Global School-based Student Health Survey Egypt 2011 Fact Sheet
WHO. (2011). Global School-based Student Health Survey Egypt 2011 Fact Sheet
Workers in Child Protection, UNICEF, Egypt, April 2016.
JORDAN
AAN Associates. (2017).
Program.
Department of Statistics in Jordan. (2017/2018).
Survey.
Economic Policy Research Institute (2018). Comprehensive Evaluation of the UNICEF
supported specialized child protection case management response in Jordan 2013-2017:
Final Report.
ECPAT. (2018). Sexual Exploitation of Children in Jordan Submission.
Jordan River Foundation. (2020). Analytical Report for the Family Support Line Data for the
Year 2020.
Jordan River Foundation. (2020). Promoting Online Safeguarding Practices Against Child
Online Sexual Exploitation and Cyber Bullying: A Community Based Campaign.
Ministry of Education (2018). Education Strategic Plan 2018-2022.
NCFA. (2005). National Strategy for Family Protection.
NCFA. (2016). NCFA updates the National Framework for Family Protection against Violence.
NCFA. (2018). Procedural Guide for the Management of Family Violence Cases: National
Standard Operating Procedures for the Prevention of and Response to Cases of Violence in
Jordan (Procedures for Dealing with Cases of Family Violence).
NCFCA. (2018). Policies and Guiding Principles for the Prevention of and Response to
Violence in Jordan (Gender-Based Violence, Family Violence, and Child Protection).
OHCHR. (2014). Committee on Rights of Child Examines Reports of Jordan on the
Convention, Children in Armed Conflict and the Sale of Children.
22
Tadamon publishes the results of a policy paper
through the COVID-19
Pandemic.
To Excel. (2018). Development of a 3-year Strategic Framework and Action Plan for
Program.
UNFPA (n.d.). Hemayati: Promoting Women's and Girls' Health and Well-being.
UNFPA, UNICEF, UN Women (2019). Evaluation of the join programme Hemayati: Promoting
women and girls health and well- .
UNICEF (2019) Child Protection End Year RAM.
UNICEF (2019). Syria Crisis Humanitarian Situation Report.
UNICEF (2020). -19.
UNICEF (n.d.). Better Parenting Program PowerPoint Presentation.
UNICEF (n.d.). Report of the Adaptation of the Better Parenting Programme 2019-2020 (draft
version.)
UNICEF (n.d). ToC (PowerPoint document).
UNICEF and GAGE (2019). GAGE Jordan Key Baseline Findings: Adolescent Capability and
Makani Impacts. GAGE and UNICEF Jordan Baseline Dissemination Workshop.
UNICEF and MOE. (2018). Protocol Between the Ministry of Planning and International
UNICEF. (2007). Violence against Children Study in Jordan.
UNICEF. (2016). Country Office Annual report.
UNICEF. (2017). Situation Analysis of Children in Jordan.
UNICEF. (2019-2021). Changing Norms and Behaviors to End Physical Violence Against
Children in Jordan.
UNICEF. (2019). Jordan Country Programme Document 2018-2022.
UNICEF. (2019). Mailing List Child Protection Sub-Working Group Jordan.
UNICEF. (2019). Makani Standards Operating Procedures.
UNICEF. (2019). Offline Template for 2019 RAM Outcome Reports.
UNICEF. (2020). Jordan- UNICEF Programme of Cooperation 2018-2022. 20202 Workplan.
UNICEF. (2020). Makani Centers Updated List.
UNICEF. (2020). Gendered Impacts of COVID-19. UNICEF Jordan Youth and Adolescent
Development.
UNICEF. (2020). Socio-Economic Assessment of Children and Youth in the time of COVID-
19 Jordan.
UNICEF. (n.d.) Tracking System for Family Violence Project.
UNICEF. (n.d.).
UNICEF. (n.d.).
UNICEF. (n.d.). s Helpline Brief.
23
LEBANON
COVID-19 MENA Consumer Sentiment Trackers
COVID-19 An Unprecedented Global Crisis with Widespread Implications.
Activity Information. (2020). Update of PSS Al Definition 2020 During COVID-19: Responding
to Beirut Blast.
Bcheraoui, C. E., Kouriye, H., & Adib, S. M. (2012). Physical and verbal/emotional abuse of
schoolchildren, Lebanon, 2009/Violence physique et psychologique/verbale sur des eleves
au Liban en 2009. Eastern Mediterranean Health Journal, 18(10).
Child protection in Emergencies Working Group. (2020). Lebanon PSS Committee, Guideline
for the Provision of Remote Psychosocial support (Arabic & English).
El Monla, B., Abu Shakra, M. (2015). The National Study on Child Sexual Abuse in Lebanon.
Himaya. (2020). Hotline Data Segregation for 2019 and 2020.
Himaya. (2020). Hotline Tracking Data for 2020.
ILO. (2015). Children Living and Working on the Streets in Lebanon: Profile and Magnitude.
Insan Association. (2014). Unprotected Childhood: The Experience of Lebanese and Non-
Lebanese Children in Abuse, Maltreatment & Discrimination in Lebanon.
Inter-Agency Coordination Lebanon. (2020). Special Considerations on the Separation of
Children and of Adults who rely on a caregiver, PRT Guidance during COVID 19 in Lebanon.
Inter-Agency CP Case Management Coaching Program. (2020). Emergency Response during
COVID-19.
Inter-Agency PSS Coordination (2020). Guidance for Remote PSS for Caregivers (Arabic).
Inter- Joint Assessment: Impact of COVID-19 on Women and Girls
in Lebanon, -19 An Unprecedented Global
Crisis with Widespread Implications
IRC. (2016). Families Make The Difference: Curriculum for Caregivers of Children Ages 6-11.
IRC. (2016). Families Make The Difference: Curriculum for Caregivers of Children Adolescent
Curriculum.
IRC. (2017). Improving Parenting and Mental Health Outcomes of Syrian Refugees in
Lebanon: A Mixed Methods Study.
Knowledge to Policy Center. (2018). Briefing Note: Strengthening Child Protection Practices
in Healthcare Institutions in Lebanon.
Law No. 293 of 7 May 2014 on the Protection of Women and Other Family Members from
Domestic Violence.
Ministry of Education and Higher Education. (n.d.). Policy for the protection of students in the
school environment.
MoSA. (2020). Strategic Plan of the Ministry of Social Affairs on the Protection of Women and
Children.
Oxford University. (2018). Pathways Linking War and Displacement to Parenting and
Child Adjustment: A Qualitative Study with Syrian Refugees in Lebanon.
Protection Sector. (2020). Inter-Agency Interim Guidance on the Resumption of Protection
(Including CP and GBV) Activities within Community Settings.
Save the Children, Lebanon. (2018). Bullying in Lebanon, Research Summary.
24
Sim A, Fazel M, Bowes L, Gardner F. (2018). Pathways linking war and displacement to
parenting and child adjustment: A qualitative study with Syrian refugees in Lebanon. Soc Sci
Med. 2018 Mar; 200:19-26. doi: 10.1016/j.socscimed.2018.01.009. Epub 2018 Jan 10. PMID:
29355827.
Sim, A. (2017). Improving Parenting and Mental Health Outcomes of Syrian Refugees in
Lebanon: A Mixed Methods Study.
UNICEF (2016). Country Programme Document Lebanon (2017-2020).
UNICEF (2018). Gender Integration Guide. UNICEF Lebanon Country Office.
UNICEF (2018). Mid-Term Review of the UNICEF Lebanon Country Programme Document
(2017-2020).
UNICEF (2019). Lebanon COAR Report Analysis.
UNICEF (2020). Beirut Explosions: News and Updates on UNICEF response to the explosions
that took place in Beirut.
UNICEF (n.d.) Qudwa Social and Behavioral Change Communications Plan to Prevent
Violence against Children & Women, Child Marriage and Child Labour.
UNICEF & Information International. (2018). EVAC Campaign Feedback Survey.
UNICEF & Ipsos. (2018). AD LAB Report, End Violence Against Children Campaign.
UNICEF, AUB, Ministry of Public Health. (2021). Adolescent Girls Access to Primary Health
Care Services in Lebanon: Barriers and Facilitating Factors.
UNICEF. (2013). MEHE Policy Review and Recommendations.
UNICEF. (2013). Protection Policies: Gender Equality and Gender Based Violence Risk
Mitigation in School Environments- DOPs Training at MEHE.
UNICEF. (2016). Lebanon Country Office Child Protection Strategy Note.
UNICEF. (2018). Country Office Annual Report.
UNICEF. (2018). End of Year Results Summary Narrative.
UNICEF. (2019). Country Office Annual Report.
UNICEF. (2019). Country Programme Full Approved Report. RAM Combined Outcomes,
Outputs and End of Year Summary Narratives Report.
UNICEF. (2019). Equity in Crisis Response- 2019: Reaching the Most Vulnerable Localities in
Lebanon.
UNICEF. (2019). GoL/ UNICEF Lebanon - Child Protection Programme Rolling Work Plan
2019-2020.
UNICEF. (2020). Child Protection Case Management Guidance Parental Support to Children
(Arabic & English).
UNICEF. (2020). Child Protection Case Management Guidance for Case Workers- Remote
Phones (Arabic & English).
UNICEF. (2020). Child Protection Case Management Guidance Overview- COVID-19 in
Lebanon (Arabic & English).
UNICEF. (2020). Child Protection Case Management Guidance. Parents Social Distancing
During COVID-19 (Arabic & English).
UNICEF. (2020). Draft National Strategy to Institutionalize Clinical Management of Sexual
Assault Within Public Health Facilities.
25
UNICEF. (2020). Gender Programmatic Review Toolkit. Lebanon Country Office Preliminary
Results.
UNICEF. (2020). GoL/ UNICEF Lebanon - Child Protection Programme Rolling Work Plan
2020-2021.
UNICEF. (2020). Most Significant Change (MSC) Presentation of Findings Lessons Learned
& Way Forward.
UNICEF. (2020). Underneath the Surface: Understanding the root causes of violence against
children and women in Lebanon.
UNICEF. (2020). UNICEF Lebanon External Communications EVAC Campaigns.
UNICEF. (n.d.). Achievements Mainstreaming Child Protection in Public Schools.
UNICEF. (n.d.). Case Management Indicators.
WHO. (2017). Global School-based Student Health Survey Lebanon 2017 Fact Sheet.
WHO. (2017). Global School-based Student Health Survey Lebanon 2017 Fact Sheet.
WHO. (2017). Global School-based Student Health Survey Lebanon 2017 Fact Sheet.
26
Annex 4. Stakeholder Analysis
Egypt Jordan Lebanon Regional
Level
UNICEF • UNICEF Country Office • UNICEF Country Office • UNICEF Country Office • UNICEF
Regional
Office
Government • National Council for Childhood • The National Council for Family • Ministry of Justice (MoJ)
and Motherhood NCCM Affairs • Ministry of Social Affairs
(under the Ministry of State for • Social Norms and Behavioural (MoSA)
Family and Population) Change National Committee • Ministry of Education and
• Ministry of Social Solidarity • Public Security Directorate Higher Education (MEHE)
(MoSS) • Ministry of Social Development • Ministry of Primary Health
• Ministry of • Ministry of Education (MPH)
Communications and • Ministry of Health • Higher Childhood Council
Information Technology (MCIT) • Ministry of Justice • Cities (e.g., Tripoli);
• Ministry of Health and • Awqaf Islamic Affairs and Holy municipalities (child-friendly)
Population Places
• Ministry of Education and • 20 Makani Centres supported
Technical Education (METE) by UNICEF
• Ministry of Justice (MoJ) • 19 Makani Centres supported
• by MoSD
• DCPSs (Alexandria and Cairo) • 51 Makani Centres supported
by NGOs
UN agencies • UNHCR • UNFPA • UNFPA
• WHO • WHO • WHO
• UN Women • UN Women • UN Women
• UNHCR • UNHCR
• ILO
27
Egypt Jordan Lebanon Regional
Level
Donors • EU • EU MADAD • EU Madad
• Netherlands • German Development Bank • DFID/UK
• USAID (KfW) • Canada
• Norway • Denmark
• DFID
• Netherlands
NGOs/FBOs • Terre des Hommes • Jordan River Foundation • Abaad
• Save the Children • International Medical Crops • Kafa
• Al-Azhar • Amel Association
• Coptic Church of Egypt • Social Workers Syndicate
• Egyptian Foundation for the Lebanon
Advancement of Childhood • IRC
Condition (EFACC) • DRC
• Insan
• Himaya
Private sector • Carrefour • To Excel consultancy firm
• Innovation Labs • iJordan
• Microsoft • Mindset
Media Nadine Nimri
Other • National Child Helpline 16000 https://www.unicef.org/media/667 http://www.atfalouna.gov.lb/topic
• HarassMap 91/file/LEAP-Report.pdf s/protection; www.himaya.org
28
Annex 5. Mapping of EVAC Interventions in the Three Countries
Country Name of Brief Description ToC Implementatio Type of VAC/VBG512 Venue (where Strategy Partners (name Budget (in
Office the Level n Period (see 4 types below) does the (UNICEF of Ministry, UN US$)
(CO)/Region activity- 511 (year year) VAC/GBV take VAC agency, NGO
al building (see 6 place)513 Framework or private
blocks510 levels - copied sector, media
below) below) etc.)
Regional National Social Services 3,4 Sept 2019 NA All settings Strengthen Country Level
Office plans to end Workforce whole Task Group
VAC Assessment for systems
Country Offices
MENA514
Ministries
NGOs
Parenting Regional Mapping 2 n.d All forms Home/Communi Enhance UNICEF MENA
programs and Scoping ty parent and Regional Office
Report of Parenting caregiver and (ECD);
Interventions515 support (C4D); (ADAP);
(CP).
Strengthen
whole
systems
510 Ending VAC in schools, Parenting programs, Case management, Child safety online, National plans to end VAC
511 The six levels are the following: at the micro Level: (1) Boys, Girls and Adolescents, (2) Parents, Mothers and other caregivers. At the meso level: (3) Society /
Communities, (4) Systems and institutions. At the macro Level: (5) Legal and political frameworks and (6) Coordinated multisectoral national action.
512 The four types of VAC are: (1) Sexual violence, (2) Physical violence, (3) Psychological violence, and (4) Neglect
513 Home, School, Institutions, Community / neighbourhood, and Virtual space/online
514 UNICEF (July, 2019. Multi-Country Review of the State of the Social Service Workforce in the Middle East and North Africa Region
515 UNICEF (July, 2020). Ending Violence Against Children MENARO Orientation on Child Protection
29
Country Name of Brief Description ToC Implementatio Type of VAC/VBG512 Venue (where Strategy Partners (name Budget (in
Office the Level n Period (see 4 types below) does the (UNICEF of Ministry, UN US$)
(CO)/Region activity- 511 (year year) VAC/GBV take VAC agency, NGO
al building (see 6 place)513 Framework or private
blocks510 levels - copied sector, media
below) below) etc.)
Egypt National Strengthening 4,6 2015-2022 All forms (TBC?) Institutions Strengthen UNICEF,
plans to end Child Protection whole Government
VAC Committees systems and Non-
(CPCs): backbone Government
of Egypt's child service
protection Engage in providers
mechanism multisector
through the al
establishment of approaches
direct links with to end VAC
Government and
non-government
service
providers.516
Egypt National The National 5,6 2019 All forms All settings Strengthen
plans to end Strategic whole
VAC Framework on systems
EVAC which was
developed in 2018
with the support of Engage in
UNICEF has been multisector
complemented by al
a National Plan of approaches
Action (PoA) in to end VAC
2019 that spells out
the roles and
responsibilities of
the different
counterparts and
identify the actions
to be undertaken
between 2019 and
516 IBF International Consulting: Mid-term Evaluation of the EU funded programme "PAGODA Delegation Agreement for Expanding Access to Education and Protection for at Risk Children in
Egypt, December 2019
30
Country Name of Brief Description ToC Implementatio Type of VAC/VBG512 Venue (where Strategy Partners (name Budget (in
Office the Level n Period (see 4 types below) does the (UNICEF of Ministry, UN US$)
(CO)/Region activity- 511 (year year) VAC/GBV take VAC agency, NGO
al building (see 6 place)513 Framework or private
blocks510 levels - copied sector, media
below) below) etc.)
2030 in order to
operationalize the
Strategic
Framework.517
Egypt National UNICEF has been 4,6 2018/2019 All forms violence (CP) All settings Strengthen NCCM and
plans to end engaging heavily in (TBC) whole national
VAC and advocacy systems institutions
Case processes to
Manageme develop the
nt National Engage in
Information multisector
Management al
System (IMS) for approaches
child protection, to to end VAC
help generate data
to support
activation of Child
Build the
Protection evidence
Committees base
(CPCs) and the
case management
system, reporting,
and evidence-
based
programming and
decision making.518
Egypt National Ministry of Health 4,6 2020 All forms violence (CP) Institutions Engage in MoHP
plans to end and Population multisector
CSOs
VAC (MoHP) in al
partnership with
517 IBF International Consulting: Mid-term Evaluation of the EU funded programme "PAGODA Delegation Agreement for Expanding Access to Education and Protection for at Risk Children in
Egypt, December 2019
518 IBF International Consulting: Mid-term Evaluation of the EU funded programme "PAGODA Delegation Agreement for Expanding Access to Education and Protection for at Risk Children in
Egypt, December 2019
31
Country Name of Brief Description ToC Implementatio Type of VAC/VBG512 Venue (where Strategy Partners (name Budget (in
Office the Level n Period (see 4 types below) does the (UNICEF of Ministry, UN US$)
(CO)/Region activity- 511 (year year) VAC/GBV take VAC agency, NGO
al building (see 6 place)513 Framework or private
blocks510 levels - copied sector, media
below) below) etc.)
UNICEF and civil approaches
society to end VAC
Case
organizations has
manageme
worked on
nt
mainstreaming CP Enhance
interventions in the parent and
health sector.519 caregiver
support
Egypt National UNICEF supported 4 2019 All forms violence (CP) Institutions Strengthen NA
plans to end the establishment whole
VAC of Child Protection systems
Units (CPU) in more
than half of the
CPCs in 16
governorates,
resulting in an
increased
availability of social
workers and overall
increased capacity
of the CP
system.520
Egypt National UNICEF 4 2019 All forms violence (CP) Institutions Enhance NCCM, UNICEF
plans to end contributed to parent and
VAC strengthening the caregiver
Child Help Line support
(CHL) through a
Case digital switchboard
manageme and call Strengthen
nt registration with a whole
data system that systems
519 Ending Violence Against Children: Plan for Action for the National Strategic Framework, Egypt (2020-2030)
520 UNICEF Egypt: Country Office Annual Report, 2019
32
Country Name of Brief Description ToC Implementatio Type of VAC/VBG512 Venue (where Strategy Partners (name Budget (in
Office the Level n Period (see 4 types below) does the (UNICEF of Ministry, UN US$)
(CO)/Region activity- 511 (year year) VAC/GBV take VAC agency, NGO
al building (see 6 place)513 Framework or private
blocks510 levels - copied sector, media
below) below) etc.)
captures the full
CM process, and
the monitoring
system; as well
strengthening
workers resulting in
a system able to
respond to a higher
number of calls.521
Egypt National 5 The execution All forms violence (CP) All settings Strengthen EU: Indirect EUR
plans to end period started (TBC)? legislative management. 35,550
VAC Access to on the 11th of frameworks million
UNICEF is the
Education and December
contracting
Protection for at 2015 and will
authority
Risk Children in end 84 months EU
after this date contributio
Programme:522 (7 years) n: EUR 29,4
The
million
beneficiaries:
The Ministry of
Supporting the
Education, the
Government in UNICEF
National
operationalizing contributio
Council for
the Child Law and n: EUR
Childhood and
the provisions of 6,150
Motherhood
the Constitution million
(NCCM) and the
related to the
Ministry of
protection of
International
children.
Cooperation.
521 UNICEF Egypt: Country Office Annual Report, 2019
522 IBF International Consulting: Mid-term Evaluation of the EU funded programme "PAGODA Delegation Agreement for Expanding Access to Education and Protection for at Risk Children in
Egypt, December 2019
33
Country Name of Brief Description ToC Implementatio Type of VAC/VBG512 Venue (where Strategy Partners (name Budget (in
Office the Level n Period (see 4 types below) does the (UNICEF of Ministry, UN US$)
(CO)/Region activity- 511 (year year) VAC/GBV take VAC agency, NGO
al building (see 6 place)513 Framework or private
blocks510 levels - copied sector, media
below) below) etc.)
Egypt Case UNICEF supports 4 2019 All forms violence (CP) Institutions Strengthen UNICEF,
manageme the Ministry of whole Ministry of
nt Social Solidarity systems Social Solidarity
(MoSS) in the
development of its
internal CM system
to regulate the
provision of child
protection services
and shift towards
child-centric and
out-come based
provision.523 524
Egypt Parenting The Launch of the 2 Sept 2020 ran Physical violence Home Enhance UNICEF,
programs Third Phase of for 6 weeks parent and NCCM, Ministry
Psychological/emotio
caregiver of Education
nal violence
Campaign to End support and Technical
Violence Against Education.
Children. The
multimedia Ensure high
campaign aims at level Funded by EU
raising the engagemen
awareness t
amongst parents
and caregivers
about positive
discipline.525
523 UNICEF Egypt: Country Office Annual Report, 2019
524 IBF International Consulting: Mid-term Evaluation of the EU funded programme "PAGODA Delegation Agreement for Expanding Access to Education and Protection for at Risk Children in
Egypt, December 2019
525 UNICEF Egypt press centre: https://www.unicef.org/egypt/press-releases/launch-third-phase-awladna-national-campaign-end-violence-against-children, accessed 11/12/2020
34
Country Name of Brief Description ToC Implementatio Type of VAC/VBG512 Venue (where Strategy Partners (name Budget (in
Office the Level n Period (see 4 types below) does the (UNICEF of Ministry, UN US$)
(CO)/Region activity- 511 (year year) VAC/GBV take VAC agency, NGO
al building (see 6 place)513 Framework or private
blocks510 levels - copied sector, media
below) below) etc.)
Egypt National Social workforce to 4 2019 All forms All settings Strengthen NA
plans to end support EVAC: whole
VAC Development of an systems
accreditation
scheme for social
workforce and a
capacity-building
package for the
accreditation
scheme.
Jordan National NCFA, UNICEF 5 Has been in Mainly physical Mainly at homes Strengthen UNICEF, NCFA
plans to end and other partner progress since violence legislative
VAC organizations at least 2014 frameworks
working on as per CRC
developing a Committee
comprehensive law Reports
on Child Rights, (TBC)527.
which is essential
in addressing the
issues of violence
against children in
homes and by
caregivers.526
526 UNICEF, NCFA: Changing Norms and Behaviors to End Physical Violence Against Children in Jordan, 2019-2021
527 Committee on the Rights of the Child (2014)
35
Country Name of Brief Description ToC Implementatio Type of VAC/VBG512 Venue (where Strategy Partners (name Budget (in
Office the Level n Period (see 4 types below) does the (UNICEF of Ministry, UN US$)
(CO)/Region activity- 511 (year year) VAC/GBV take VAC agency, NGO
al building (see 6 place)513 Framework or private
blocks510 levels - copied sector, media
below) below) etc.)
Jordan National National standard 6 2019 All forms All settings Ensure high National
Plans to operating level Council for
end VAC procedures (SOP) engagemen Family Affairs
for child protection t (NCFA),
and GBV were governmental
launched528 institutions,
Strengthen UNICEF,
whole UNFPA,
systems UNHCR, civil
society and the
international
Strengthen community
legislative
frameworks
Engage in
multisector
al
approaches
to end VAC
Jordan Parenting Better Parenting 2 Ongoing since All forms of violence Home Enhance UNICEF in
programs Program - that 1996 parent and partnership with
engages both caregiver 13
mothers and support nongovernment
fathers and al and
provides trainings governmental
on the knowledge, Engage in
organizations
skills and practices multisector
such as
needed to promote al
Ministries of
holistic approaches
Education,
to end VAC
Social
528 UNICEF (2019). RAM Outcome Reports
36
Country Name of Brief Description ToC Implementatio Type of VAC/VBG512 Venue (where Strategy Partners (name Budget (in
Office the Level n Period (see 4 types below) does the (UNICEF of Ministry, UN US$)
(CO)/Region activity- 511 (year year) VAC/GBV take VAC agency, NGO
al building (see 6 place)513 Framework or private
blocks510 levels - copied sector, media
below) below) etc.)
development of Development,
children.529 Health and
Awqaf. The
program is
implemented
through more
than 200
community
centers.
Jordan National Only periodic and 5 Initiated in Physical violence Home Build the UNICEF,
Plans to national source of 2018 (TBC). evidence Department of
end VAC information on base Statistics
violence against
children is the child
discipline module
added to the most
recent Jordan
Population and
Family Health
Survey, which is
supported by
UNICEF.530
Jordan Case The Family 4,6 2019 VAC and Domestic Institutions Strengthen Government
manageme Violence Tracking violence whole institutions such
nt system (FVTS) was systems as: MOSD,
developed and NCFA, FPD,
rolled out with MOE and MOH
UNICEF support.531 Engage in
multisector
al
529 UNICEF, NCFA: Changing Norms and Behaviors to End Physical Violence Against Children in Jordan, 2019-2021
530 UNICEF, NCFA: Changing Norms and Behaviors to End Physical Violence Against Children in Jordan, 2019-2021
531 UNICEF Jordan: Country Office Annual Report, 2019
37
Country Name of Brief Description ToC Implementatio Type of VAC/VBG512 Venue (where Strategy Partners (name Budget (in
Office the Level n Period (see 4 types below) does the (UNICEF of Ministry, UN US$)
(CO)/Region activity- 511 (year year) VAC/GBV take VAC agency, NGO
al building (see 6 place)513 Framework or private
blocks510 levels - copied sector, media
below) below) etc.)
approaches
to end VAC
Jordan National UNICEF took a 6 2019 Physical violence Home Ensure high
plans to end strategic decision level
School
VAC to approach engagemen
violence against t
children, including
in schools, through
a multi-layered Engage in
interventions multisector
package that al
included: a) approaches
Supporting the to end VAC
implementation of
the multi-sectoral
national plan for
social norms and
behavior
change.532
Jordan Ending VAC b) Supporting 1,2,4 2019 Physical violence School Strengthen UNICEF,
in schools MOE in the whole Ministry of
institutionalization systems Education,
UNRWA
(Together)
programme that
enhances a
protective school
environment, and
which was
implemented in
532 UNICEF Jordan: Country Office Annual Report, 2019
38
Country Name of Brief Description ToC Implementatio Type of VAC/VBG512 Venue (where Strategy Partners (name Budget (in
Office the Level n Period (see 4 types below) does the (UNICEF of Ministry, UN US$)
(CO)/Region activity- 511 (year year) VAC/GBV take VAC agency, NGO
al building (see 6 place)513 Framework or private
blocks510 levels - copied sector, media
below) below) etc.)
camps and host
communities.533
Jordan Ending VAC c) Enhancing the 1,2 2019 Physical violence Home Enhance
in schools capacity of 42,000 parent and
parents through caregiver
Makani centers534 School support
Parenting
d) Reaching 90,000
programs
children with child
protection related
awareness and
services535
Jordan Ending VAC Tarbiyah, a 1,4 2019 Physical violence School Ensure high UNICEF,
In schools behavioral change level Ministry of
initiative, was engagemen Education,
introduced in 2019 t UNRWA
schools in camps
with the highest
rates of violence.
536
Jordan National A national social 2,3,4 2019 All forms All settings Ensure high Within Family
plans to end norms and level Protection
VAC behavioral change engagemen Committee
committee on child t
protection was
established to
coordinate
activities in the
533 UNICEF Jordan: Country Office Annual Report, 2019
534 UNICEF Jordan: Country Office Annual Report, 2019
535 UNICEF (2019). RAM Outcome Reports
536 UNICEF Jordan: Country Office Annual Report, 2019
39
Country Name of Brief Description ToC Implementatio Type of VAC/VBG512 Venue (where Strategy Partners (name Budget (in
Office the Level n Period (see 4 types below) does the (UNICEF of Ministry, UN US$)
(CO)/Region activity- 511 (year year) VAC/GBV take VAC agency, NGO
al building (see 6 place)513 Framework or private
blocks510 levels - copied sector, media
below) below) etc.)
prevention Strengthen
interventions537 whole
systems
Engage in
multisector
al
approaches
to end VAC
Jordan National Social Media 2,3 2019 All forms Home Enhance Newspaper
plans to end Campaign: parent and platform
VAC/ Social Nationwide efforts caregiver
Media continued to support
Campaign address the high
levels of violence
against children
and women. End
violence messages
reached over
800,000 people via
social media, and
online episodes
promoting
parenting skills to
prevent violence
against children
reached 355,000
viewers538
537 UNICEF (2019). RAM Outcome Reports
538 UNICEF Jordan: Country Office Annual Report, 2019
40
Country Name of Brief Description ToC Implementatio Type of VAC/VBG512 Venue (where Strategy Partners (name Budget (in
Office the Level n Period (see 4 types below) does the (UNICEF of Ministry, UN US$)
(CO)/Region activity- 511 (year year) VAC/GBV take VAC agency, NGO
al building (see 6 place)513 Framework or private
blocks510 levels - copied sector, media
below) below) etc.)
Jordan National The National 1,2,3,4 2019 All forms All settings Build the NA
plans to end Violence against evidence
VAC/ Children (VAC) base
National study: formative
Study research on
bullying and Social
Norms and
Behavioral Change
(SNBC) on VAC, as
well as an
investment case for
foster care to
advocate for
family-based care
and to promote de-
institutionalization
539.
Lebanon National Expansion of the 4 2019 All forms Institutions Strengthen NA
plans to end Child Protection whole
VAC Information systems
Management
System (CPIMS) to
a total of nine
organizations
through the
enhancement of
the ability of state
and civil society
actors to deal with
critical child
539 UNICEF Jordan: Country Office Annual Report, 2019
41
Country Name of Brief Description ToC Implementatio Type of VAC/VBG512 Venue (where Strategy Partners (name Budget (in
Office the Level n Period (see 4 types below) does the (UNICEF of Ministry, UN US$)
(CO)/Region activity- 511 (year year) VAC/GBV take VAC agency, NGO
al building (see 6 place)513 Framework or private
blocks510 levels - copied sector, media
below) below) etc.)
protection
cases.540
Lebanon National The Lebanon 6 Feb 2020 All forms (Child Home Build the The Central
plans to end Multiple Indicator Protection) evidence Administration
VAC Cluster Survey base of Statistics,
2020 was UNICEF
launched. The
survey frames the
data from an equity
perspective by
highlighting
disparities related
to many fields
including child
protection.541
Lebanon Ending VAC Launch of study on 1,3 2019 Sexual, physical, School Strengthen Ministry of
IN in driving factors psychological and whole Education and
Community
schools behind school bullying systems Higher Ed.
violence against
children542
Build the
evidence
base
540 UNICEF Lebanon: Country Office Annual Report, 2019
541 UNICEF Lebanon press centre: https://www.unicef.org/lebanon/press-releases/global-survey-launched-lebanon-assess-situation-children-and-women, accessed 10/12/2020
542 UNICEF(2019). End of Year Results Summary Narrative Analysis- Lessons Learned and Innovations
42
Country Name of Brief Description ToC Implementatio Type of VAC/VBG512 Venue (where Strategy Partners (name Budget (in
Office the Level n Period (see 4 types below) does the (UNICEF of Ministry, UN US$)
(CO)/Region activity- 511 (year year) VAC/GBV take VAC agency, NGO
al building (see 6 place)513 Framework or private
blocks510 levels - copied sector, media
below) below) etc.)
Lebanon Case 40,000 children 1,2,3 2019 All forms Home setting Strengthen Government
manageme victims of violence, whole and civil society
nt abuse and systems organizations
exploitation and
women at risk were
helped through Engage in
social welfare multisector
support including al
individual case approaches
management, to end VAC
counseling,
psycho-social
support, safe
Enhance
spaces and other parent and
interventions to caregiver
help address their support
situation543
(TBC)
Lebanon National Child-friendly 3,4 2019 All forms All setting (TBC) Strengthen Municipal
plans to end policing, a whole Police
VAC systematic and systems
Ministry of
standardized
Education
approach to
training of Engage in Ministry of
municipal police on multisector Social Affairs
al
and protection was approaches
established for the to end VAC
first time544.
543 UNICEF(2019). End of Year Results Summary Narrative Analysis- Lessons Learned and Innovations
544 UNICEF(2019). End of Year Results Summary Narrative Analysis- Lessons Learned and Innovations
43
Country Name of Brief Description ToC Implementatio Type of VAC/VBG512 Venue (where Strategy Partners (name Budget (in
Office the Level n Period (see 4 types below) does the (UNICEF of Ministry, UN US$)
(CO)/Region activity- 511 (year year) VAC/GBV take VAC agency, NGO
al building (see 6 place)513 Framework or private
blocks510 levels - copied sector, media
below) below) etc.)
Lebanon National Qudwa: A new 1 (?), Oct 2018- All forms All settings Strengthen Partnership with
plans to end evidence based 2,3 June 2019 whole child protection
VAC Social Behavioral systems and GBV CSO
Change partners,
communication ministries, and
plan aiming at Engage in involve mass
preventing child multisector media, private
marriage, child al sector partners,
labour and violence approaches religious
against children to end VAC leaders546
and women was
developed. Coined
Enhance
Plan is parent and
encouraging new caregiver
behaviors by support
promoting positive
social norms,
drawing on the
strengths of what is
common to all
parents and
caregivers namely
that they want what
is best for their
children.545
Lebanon National The EVAC (Ending 1,2,3, 2019 All types All settings (TBC) Strengthen Local NGOs,
plans to end Violence Against whole schools, key
VAC and Children) initiative systems ministries
Parenting continued to be
programs rolled out in the
545 UNICEF(2019). End of Year Results Summary Narrative Analysis- Lessons Learned and Innovations
546 UNICEF (2019). Lebanon RAM Combined Outcomes Outputs and Edy Year Summary Narratives Report
44
Country Name of Brief Description ToC Implementatio Type of VAC/VBG512 Venue (where Strategy Partners (name Budget (in
Office the Level n Period (see 4 types below) does the (UNICEF of Ministry, UN US$)
(CO)/Region activity- 511 (year year) VAC/GBV take VAC agency, NGO
al building (see 6 place)513 Framework or private
blocks510 levels - copied sector, media
below) below) etc.)
Palestinian camps Enhance
and gatherings547 parent and
caregiver
An End Violence support
Against Children
(EVAC) campaign
was launched
focusing on
positive parenting
and alternative
discipline methods
reaching 4700
parents and
children and over
100
representatives of
local NGOs,
schools, key
ministries
participated in
public debate.
Lebanon Ending VAC Ministry of 1,3 2019 School Strengthen Ministry of
in in schools Education and whole Education and
Higher Education systems Higher
launched the Policy Education
for the Protection
Ministry of
of Students in the
Social Affairs
School
Environment548. Ministry of
Justice
547 UNICEF (2019). Lebanon RAM Combined Outcomes Outputs and Edy Year Summary Narratives Report
548 UNICEF (n.d.). Achievements Mainstreaming Child Protection Public School
45
Annex 6. Evaluation Matrix
EQs Lines of Inquiry Indicators Data Sources Data Collection
Techniques
1. Relevance (alignment and appropriateness)
1.1 To what extent are 1.1.1 To what extent are each ✓ Identification of national EVAC laws, • UNICEF Strategic and Document review
policies, strategies, plans or other Program Documentation
initiatives/ToC aligned with national frameworks, including GBV • Relevant national laws,
EVAC strategy and frameworks and priorities? ✓ References to relevant national legal policies, strategies and KIIs
theory of change, mandates and policy frameworks on plans on the matter
INSPIRE aligned with EVAC, including GBV, in strategic / • UNICEF staff involved in
each other and with programmatic documentation interventions
evidence-based ✓ Analysis of the consultative process with • Gender focal point
programming? government / public actors during the • Counterparts
design and implementation of the • Relevant national actors
interventions on EVAC, including GBV
✓
aligned with the national frameworks
(overlap of objectives and activities)
1.1.2. To what extent are each ✓ Identification of UNICEF EVAC activities • UNICEF Strategic and Document review
and ToC (if it exists) in each country Program Documentation
strategy/ToC aligned with the ✓ • UNICEF staff involved in
global EVAC framework interventions KIIs
✓ Deg
overlap with the global framework and its
seven priority areas
1.1.3 To what extent are each ✓ Alignment between national EVAC • Strategic and Document review
UNICEF EVAC initiatives interventions and the seven strategies of programmatic
aligned with the INSPIRE seven INSPIRE documentation at the
strategies and evidence-based country level KIIs
programming? • UNICEF staff involved in
interventions
• WHO
46
EQs Lines of Inquiry Indicators Data Sources Data Collection
Techniques
✓ Identification of SDG goals and targets • UNICEF Strategic and Document review
UNICEF EVAC activities/initiatives Program Documentation
aligned with the SDGs? aligned • UNICEF staff involved in
interventions KIIs
1.2 To what extent are 1.2.1 To what extent have each ✓ Availability of gender-sensitive • UNICEF and partner Document review
assessments prior to designing program documentation
initiatives within the been appropriately assessed and interventions • UNICEF staff involved in
CPD - appropriate given designed given the challenges facing ✓ Design is gender and age sensitive (girls, interventions KIIs
the national context and female and male rights holders in the boys, adolescents) • Studies, baselines and
challenges facing both country? diagnoses on EVAC,
male and female rights including GBV, available FGDs
holders in the country? in the country
• Gender policies?
• Counterparts Direct
• Service providers observation (if
• Parents/caregivers possible)
1.2.2 Have there been difficulties / ✓ Analysis of the nature of difficulties and • UNICEF and partner Document review
obstacles to the participation of the obstacles program documentation
target population? What measures ✓ Analysis of the existence and nature of • UNICEF staff involved in
have been implemented to mitigate mitigation measures interventions KIIs
them? • Counterparts
• Parents/caregivers
FGDs
Direct
observation (if
possible)
1.2.3 To what extent have the ✓ Specific analysis that have assessed the • UNICEF and partner Document review
interventions under evaluation been changing context on VAC program documentation
adapted to respond to the changing ✓ Specific changes that have been • Studies, baselines and
contexts (e.g., COVID-19, security introduced during the implementation of diagnoses on EVAC, KIIs
issues) and the needs of the target the interventions as a result of changes including GBV, available
population (guarantors and rights detected in the context-needs analysis in the country
holders)? • UNICEF staff involved in
interventions
• Counterparts
47
EQs Lines of Inquiry Indicators Data Sources Data Collection
Techniques
• Relevant actors in the
field of EVAC, including
GBV
1.2.4 To what extent does UNICEF's ✓ • UNICEF and partner Document review
work at the country level take into strategic/programmatic documents program documentation
account the specificity of violence recognize gender differences in terms of • UNICEF staff involved in
experienced by girls, boys and VAC? interventions KIIs
adolescents and address GBV as a ✓ To what extent have the different • Gender focal point
manifestation of EVAC? programs (Better Parenting, C4D etc.) • UNICEF protection and
been designed to address differences gender advisers-
between girls and boys, mothers and specialists at the
fathers? regional level
✓ To what extent does UNICEF create • Counterparts
linkages between its EVAC interventions • Relevant actors in
and those of other UN agencies working gender matters,
on GBV (e.g. UNFPA and UN Women)? including the UN
Women/UNFPA
1.2.5 To what extent have the ✓ Involvement of the gender focal point at • UNICEF and partner Document review
interventions mobilized the necessary the country level and the UNICEF regional program documentation
capacities to ensure the expert (degree of involvement and • UNICEF staff involved in
mainstreaming of the gender limitations) interventions KIIs
approach? ✓ Training implemented for this purpose • Gender focal point
(within UNICEF and with partners) and • Service providers
application of what has been learned at
work
✓ Analysis of relevant national actors in
matters of gender equality and GBV that
have been involved in the interventions
2. Efficiency
2.1 To what extent does 2.1.1 To what extent does UNICEF use ✓ Overall budget for EVAC • Programmatic and Document review
resources in a way that allows for cost ✓ Budget per type of EVAC activity financial documentation
in a way that allows for monitoring? ✓ Expenditures on EVAC • UNICEF staff involved in
cost monitoring? interventions KIIs
• UNICEF Finance &
Administration staff
2.1.2 To what extent have the human ✓ Analysis of the human resources involved • Programmatic and Document review
resources been adequate to achieve in the management and implementation of financial documentation
the expected products and results? EVAC interventions • UNICEF staff involved in
✓ Existence of EVAC focal point interventions
48
EQs Lines of Inquiry Indicators Data Sources Data Collection
Techniques
KIIs
2.2 To what extent did 2.2.1 To what extent did UNICEF ✓ Number of social service centers that are • Program documentation Document review
UNICEF consider consider supporting social centers run by government, NGOs and UNICEF • UNICEF staff involved in
alternative methods of through government structures, NGOs ✓ Number of social service staff trained by country interventions
programme delivery and and through direct implementation? UNICEF • Social Protection focal KIIs
successfully identify the ✓ Reasons for the different service delivery point
most effective delivery mechanisms • Service deliverers
method in each of these • Caregivers FGDs
countries?
2.2.2 To what extent did UNICEF ✓ SBCC campaigns implemented with the • Program documentation Document review
consider implementing SBCC through private sector and through other means • UNICEF staff involved in
different methods (e.g., private sector, ✓ Reasons for the different service delivery country interventions
NGOs etc.)? mechanisms • C4D focal point KIIs
• Service deliverers
• Caregivers
FGDs
3. Effectiveness
3.1 Who and how many 3.1.1 To what extent does the ✓ Existence of programmatic documents • UNICEF and partner Document review
people did these monitoring and evaluation (M&E) that include objectives, results, products, program
initiatives reach system measure progress in achieving activities and inputs documentation(including
(disaggregated by planned products and expected ✓ Existence of process and results AWP and RAM reports) KIIs
geographic location, results of interventions? indicators in program documents • Monitoring reports
gender, and other ✓ Number and type of indicators (see also • UNICEF staff involved in
relevant demographic disaggregation by sex, age and other interventions
considerations)? variables) • M&E Officer
✓ Existence of tools to collect data and • Counterparts
information • Implementing partners
✓ Frequency of data and information
collection
✓ Degree of achievement of the results
achieved based on outcome indicators
3.1.2 To what extent does the M&E ✓ Does the M&E system include the four • Programmatic Document review
system allow for monitoring against indicators to monitor against the global documentation
commitments? • Monitoring reports
49
EQs Lines of Inquiry Indicators Data Sources Data Collection
Techniques
outlined in its Global Strategic Plan? • M&E Officer KIIs
549
3.1.3 What have been the unplanned ✓ Existence and analysis of unplanned • Programmatic Document review
effects (positive or negative) of the effects generated from the interventions documentation
interventions? carried out • Monitoring reports
✓ Analysis of the mitigation strategies of the • UNICEF staff involved in KIIs
negative effects interventions
• Counterparts
• Service providers FGDs
3.2 In the last 18 3.2.1 In the last 18 months, what have ✓ Individual changes at the level of children • Monitoring reports Document review
months, to what extent been the changes at the individual and adolescents based on the perception • UNICEF staff involved in
level of children and adolescents to of those consulted interventions
KIIs
interventions, which the interventions have ✓ Analysis of relevant secondary • Counterparts
particularly in terms of contributed? documentation (children and adolescents • Fathers, mothers and
violence against the will not be consulted because of COVID- other caregivers
most marginalized 19 social distancing restrictions). • Relevant actors in the FGDs
children, contribute to field of VAC, including
building capacity and GBV
generating changes at
the different social levels
outlined in the EVAC
ToC?
3.2.2 In the last 18 months, what have ✓ Changes at the level of fathers, mothers • Monitoring reports Document review
been the changes at the level of and other caregivers based on the • UNICEF staff involved in
fathers, mothers and other caregivers perception of the people consulted interventions
to which the interventions have • Counterparts KIIs
contributed? • Fathers, mothers and
✓ Analysis of relevant secondary
other caregivers
documentation
FGDs
549 The key indicators related to EVAC in the Strategic Plan are the following: (1) Percentage of girls and boys who have ever experienced any sexual violence and sought help
from a professional (SDG 16.2.3); (2) Percentage of adults who think that physical punishment is necessary to raise/educate children (SDG 16.2.1); (3) Number of mothers,
fathers and caregivers reached through parenting programmes; and (4) Number of girls and boys who have experienced violence reached by health, social work or justice/law
enforcement services.
50
EQs Lines of Inquiry Indicators Data Sources Data Collection
Techniques
3.2.3 In the last 18 months, what have ✓ Changes in society and communities • Monitoring reports Document review
been the changes at the social / based on the perception of the people • UNICEF staff involved in
community level that the interventions consulted interventions
have contributed to? ✓ Analysis of relevant secondary • Counterparts KIIs
documentation • Implementing partners
• Relevant actors in the
field of VAC, including FGDs
GBV
3.2.4 In the last 18 months, what have ✓ Changes in systems and institutions • Monitoring reports Document review
been the changes at the systems and based on the perception of the people • UNICEF staff involved in
institutional level to which the consulted interventions
interventions have contributed to? ✓ Analysis of relevant secondary • Counterparts KIIs
documentation • Implementing partners
• Relevant actors in the
field of VAC, including FGDs
GBV
3.2.5 In the last 18 months, what have ✓ Changes in the legal and political • Monitoring reports Document review
been the changes at the level of legal frameworks based on the perception of • Policy documents and
and political frameworks to which the the people consulted legal frameworks
interventions have contributed to? ✓ Analysis of relevant secondary • UNICEF staff involved in KIIs
documentation interventions
• Counterparts
• Relevant actors in the
field of VAC, including
GBV
3.2.6 In the last 18 months, what are ✓ Analysis of changes in social norms and • UNICEF staff involved in KIIs
the changes to which interventions on gender inequalities based on the interventions
social norms and gender inequalities perception of the people consulted • Gender focal point
have contributed? • Counterparts FGDs
• Implementing partners
• Relevant actors in the
field of VAC, including
GBV
3.3 To what extent have ✓ Analysis of the channels and tools for • Programme Document review
coordination and EVAC activities complementing and EVAC coordination and communication at documentation
complementarity with coordinated with other UNICEF the level of the CO
51
EQs Lines of Inquiry Indicators Data Sources Data Collection
Techniques
relevant actors in the interventions in the country (internal ✓ Identification of synergies between • UNICEF staff involved in KIIs
field of VAC, including complementarity)? different UNICEF CO units country interventions
GBV, contributed to ✓ Level of satisfaction of the PO team • Gender focal point
achieving the expected regarding the communication and
results? coordination implemented
✓ Existence of mapping and analysis of • Programme Document review
initiatives and strategies EVAC actors documentation
complementing other EVAC ✓ Assessment of the selection criteria of • Mapping and
programmes being implemented in NGOs stakeholder analysis KIIs
each country (by other actors, ✓ Identification of alternative actors not • UNICEF staff involved in
government, NGOs, etc) (external considered in the interventions (mapping interventions
complementarity)? of actors) • Gender focal point
✓ Analysis of the channels and tools for • Counterparts
coordination and communication between • UN agencies
UNICEF and the counterparts and • Relevant stakeholders in
between the counterparts
the area of VAC,
✓ Analysis of multisectoral coordination
including GBV, including
mechanisms (justice, health, education
UN agencies
and social welfare) at different levels
(municipal, district, local, regional,
national)
✓ Analysis of the participation of women's
and children's organizations in
coordination mechanisms
✓ Analysis of difficulties encountered at the
coordination
3.4 Which of the 3.4.1 To what extent any of the ✓ Identification and analysis of interventions • Strategic and Document review
initiatives show a good interventions was innovative, that demonstrate innovative approaches programmatic
potential to develop addressed taboos, reached a greater (new partnerships, address taboos, etc) documentation
impact and could be number of beneficiaries than ✓ Identification and analysis of new modes • Annual reports KIIs
identified for a deeper anticipated, established new types of of service delivery due to COVID-19 • UNICEF staff involved in
analysis or evaluation at partnerships, etc. the interventions
a later stage? • Counterparts
3.5 What are the internal 3.5.1 What are the internal factors that ✓ Analysis of internal factors (staffing, • UNICEF staff involved in KIIs
and external actors that contribute or hinder progress towards motivation of staff, etc.) the interventions
contribute or hinder achieving the expected results? • Counterparts
progress towards • Implementing partners
52
EQs Lines of Inquiry Indicators Data Sources Data Collection
Techniques
achieving the expected
results?
3.5.2 What are external the factors that ✓ Analysis of external factors (capacities of • UNICEF staff involved in KIIs
contribute or hinder progress towards partners, COVID-19, political crisis, etc.) the interventions
achieving the expected results? • Counterparts
• Implementing partners
4. Sustainability
4.1 To what extent are 4.1.1 To what extent EVAC legal and ✓ Identification of national EVAC policies • Strategic and Document review
achievements on the policy frameworks have been set up in and laws that have been drafted and programmatic
legislation, attitudes, each country? passed in the last 18 months documentation
and direct interventions ✓ Identification of major gaps that still need • Annual reports KIIs
sustainable? to be addressed • UNICEF staff involved in
the interventions
• Counterparts
4.1.2 To what extent have national ✓ Identification and analysis of national • Strategic and Document review
EVAC strategies been developed, EVAC strategies and ToC programmatic
costed and included in national ✓ Do the strategies have an implementation documentation
budgets? plan • Annual reports Face-to-face
✓ Have the strategies/implementation plans • UNICEF staff involved in interviews at the
been costed the interventions country level
✓ Have the EVAC costing plan been • Counterparts
included in the national budget
4.1.3 To what extent are the national ✓ List of the national institutions involved in • Strategic and Document review
institutional arrangements/ EVAC strategy implementation? programmatic
responsibilities adequate for ✓ Clear mandates/responsibilities for each documentation
operationalizing the EVAC strategy institution clearly formulated and followed • Annual reports KIIs
and implementing the EVAC ✓ Coordination mechanisms put in place at • UNICEF staff involved in
interventions? the national and decentralized level the interventions
✓ Staff responsible for coordinating EVAC at • Counterparts
the national level sufficiently empowered
4.1.4 To what extent have Note: this will be assessed to the extent there • Programme Document review
interventions achieved changes in is secondary data available (e.g., other documentation
attitudes and behaviour?550 evaluations that have analyzed the • UNICEF staff involved in
sustainability of direct interventions) interventions KIIs
550 This question will be addressed predominantly by using secondary sources (assessments of Communication for Behavioral Change interventions is they exist) and through
some FGDs should the ET be able to conduct any.
53
EQs Lines of Inquiry Indicators Data Sources Data Collection
Techniques
✓ Perception of staff and beneficiaries that • Counterparts
changes in attitudes and behavior are • Implementing partners
FGDs
permanent and not temporary • Parents/Teachers
4.1.5 To what extent are direct Note: this will be assessed to the extent there • Programme Document review
interventions (e.g., service delivery and is secondary data available (e.g., other documentation
Child Helplines) sustainable? evaluations that have analyzed the • UNICEF staff involved in
sustainability of direct interventions) interventions KIIs
• Counterparts
✓ Allocation of budget for activity
• Implementing partners
✓ Sufficient staff to implement it
✓ Linkages with other institutions to follow
up
4.2 To what extent do 4.2.1 What strategies or components ✓ Identification and analysis of the • Programme Document review
the interventions, or of the interventions are potentially strategies / components of potentially documentation
some of their strategies / replicable or have already been replicable interventions in other contexts • UNICEF staff involved in
components, have the replicated? or countries interventions KIIs
capacity to be replicated ✓ Identification of the conditions / factors for • UNICEF protection and
and scaled? replicability based on the assumptions of gender advisers-
the ToC of the levels that apply specialists at the
regional level
• Counterparts
• Implementing partners
4.2.2 What strategies or components ✓ Identification and analysis of the ✓ Programme Document review
of the interventions are potentially strategies / components of potentially documentation
scalable or have already been scaled scalable interventions. ✓ UNICEF staff involved in
up? ✓ Identification of conditions / factors for interventions KIIs
scalability based on the assumptions of ✓ UNICEF protection and
the ToC of the levels that apply gender advisers-
specialists at the
regional level
✓ Counterparts
✓ Implementing partners
5. Gender
5.1 To what extent are 5.1.1 To what extent is UNICEF taking ✓ Existence of gender assessments to • Programme Document review
governments taking gender into consideration in EVAC inform design documentation
gender into initiative design? ✓ Involvement of Gender focal point in the • UNICEF staff involved in
consideration in EVAC design interventions KIIs
initiative design and • Gender focal point
monitoring? • Counterparts
54
EQs Lines of Inquiry Indicators Data Sources Data Collection
Techniques
• Implementing partners
5.1.2 To what extent is UNICEF taking ✓ ToCs/Strategies/implementation plans • Programme Document review
gender into consideration in EVAC include gender considerations documentation
initiative implementation? ✓ Coordination with organizations that focus • UNICEF staff involved in
on gender (e.g. UN Women, NGOs, etc.) interventions KIIs
✓ Specific training delivered on gender • Gender focal point
issues to UNICEF EVAC staff and • Counterparts
counterparts to provide gender services • Implementing partners FGDs
✓ Design of C4D messages that address
gender differences
✓ Different mechanisms to reach girls/boys,
Direct
mothers/fathers
observation (if
✓ Involvement of Gender focal point in the
possible)
implementation
5.1.3To what extent are governments ✓ Sex-disaggregated data on training and • AWP and RAM reports Document review
taking gender into consideration in service deliver • Monitoring reports
EVAC initiative monitoring? • M&E focal point
KIIs
55
Annex 7. Proposed Modifications to EQs
EQs in TORs Proposed EQs Rationale
RELEVANCE
scope of this evaluation.
INSPIRE aligned with good and best practices and INSPIRE aligned with each other and with evidence-
with each other? based programming?
within Focus is on UNICEF-funded/supported interventions
appropriate given the national context and challenges the CPD - appropriate given the national context and and not on gover
facing both male and female rights holders in the challenges facing both male and female rights holders
country? in the country?
EFFICIENCY
To what extent do high level national government Focus is on UNICEF-funded/supported interventions
EVAC initiatives use resources in a way that allows for resources in a way that allows for cost monitoring?
cost monitoring and maximizes utility per dollar of
investment? The ET believes it will not have the data to respond to
meetings during the Inception phase have revealed
EVAC but rather that budgets are allocated to Child
Protection interventions and financial reporting is
done accordingly.
To what extent did governmental actors consider To what extent did UNICEF consider alternative Focus is on UNICEF-funded/supported interventions
alternative methods of programme delivery and methods of programme delivery and successfully
successfully identify the most effective delivery identify the most effective delivery method in each of
method in each of these countries? these countries?
EFFECTIVENESS
To what extent were national capacities to EVAC Question has been reworded to link it with the global
build, particularly in terms of violence against the particularly in terms of violence against the most EVAC ToC.
most marginalized children? marginalized children, contribute to building capacity
and generating changes at the different social levels
56
EQs in TORs Proposed EQs Rationale
outlined in the EVAC ToC (i.e., individual, caregivers,
society, institutions, policies)?
Who and how many people did these initiatives reach Unchanged n/a
(disaggregated by geographic location, gender, and
other relevant demographic considerations)?
To what extent have coordination and The ET proposes to add this question to assess
complementarity with relevant actors in the field of internal coordination (among different UNICEF units in
VAC, including GBV, contributed to achieving the the CO and external multisectoral coordination
expected results? mechanisms
What are the internal and external factors that The ET proposes to add this question to better
contribute or hinder progress towards achieving the understand what are the factors internal/external that
expected results? affect results
To what extent are national EVAC initiatives in the Unchanged. Moved to sustainability n/a
MENA region scalable nationally, internationally and
regionally?
Which of the initiatives show a good potential to Unchanged n/a
develop impact and could be identified for a deeper
analysis or evaluation at a later stage?
SUSTAINABILITY
To what extent are achievements on the legislation, Unchanged Note that the ET will assess only the legislation,
attitudes, and direct interventions sustainable? SBCC and direct interventions that were implemented
in the last 18 months. Furthermore, this will be
assessed to the extent there is secondary data
available (e.g., other evaluations that have analyzed
the sustainability of direct interventions).
GENDER
To what extent are governments taking gender into Unchanged n/a
consideration in EVAC initiative design and
monitoring?
57
Annex 8. KII Interview Protocol
Note 1: It is expected that the interviews with donors and other UN agencies will last
approximately 1 hour (60 minutes). In the case of UNICEF staff directly involved in the
interventions and of the counterparts (civil society and public institutions), the interviews are
estimated to last from 90 to 120 minutes. In the case of some other actors (M&E officer and
finance/administration staff) they will not last longer than 30 minutes.
Note 2: The team does not identify any risk or discomfort that may result from participating
in it beyond the fatigue of talking for 60-120 minutes.
Note 3: The Matrix presented following the introduction details which questions will be asked
to which stakeholder.
Acknowledgments and presentation of the team
Hello, my name is _______________, and I work with IOD PARC. We want to thank you for
accepting the invitation to participate in this conversation, which will be of great importance
for the evaluation we are conducting.
The interview with you will take about [time; see Note 1 above] to complete.
Presentation of the evaluation
IOD PARC, a British consulting company, has been hired by the regional office of UNICEF in
Amman, Jordan to carry out a multi-country evaluation which covers Egypt, Jordan and
Lebanon. The objective of this study is to analyze interventions in the prevention and care of
violence against children promoted by UNICEF.
We will also be looking at how the specific needs of boys, girls and adolescents have been
addressed. We also would like to know if there has been and the positive and negative effects
they have had in terms of prevention and reduction of Violence Against Children. For this, it
is essential to know the opinion of different actors who have participated, directly or
indirectly, in their implementation.
Presentation of the interview and work methodology
We would like to clarify that by participating in this evaluation there will be no immediate
benefit, although in the long term it is expected that the results of the evaluation may favor
the improvement of the living conditions of children and adolescents in the country. Nor will
any incentive be offered for participating in this interview.
All interviews are confidential; The information will be used only in an aggregate form in our
report and the appointments that can be made cannot be related to the people interviewed -
58
that is, no interviewee will be identified, except as part of a relationship or list of people
interviewed, who It will be included at the end of the evaluation document.
Participation is completely voluntary. You have every right to decide to participate or not. You
will be asked the following question before starting the survey: Are you willing to participate?
In case of questions or complaints about this evaluation, you can contact UNICEF-Chief Child
Protection Officer [name]. Phone: [xxxxxxxx]
I have some questions to guide our conversation, in case there is something that you feel is
beyond your experience or knowledge, please let me know. To help the evaluation team
remember our conversation today, I will be taking some handwritten notes. However, I will
not be recording (audio) the meeting and will not take any photos.
Before we begin, do you have any questions or concerns related to the assessment or this
interview?
59
Annex 9. Evaluation sub-questions per type of stakeholder
EQs UNICEF UNICEF UNICEF UNICEF UNICEF Govern- UN Donors Implementing Private
CD/DCD sector staff Gender M&E staff Finance staff agencies Partners/ sector
ment
Focal Point
NGOs
1. RELEVANCE (ALIGNMENT AND APPROPRIATENESS)
change, INSPIRE aligned with each other?
initiatives/ToC aligned with national frameworks and X X X
priorities?
initiatives and X X
global EVAC framework?
initiatives aligned with the INSPIRE seven strategies? X X X (WHO)
EVAC
X X X X X
activities/initiatives aligned with the SDGs?
le and male rights holders in the country?
1.2.1 To what
initiatives been appropriately assessed and designed
X X X X X X
given the challenges facing female and male rights
holders in the country?
1.2.2 Have there been difficulties / obstacles to the
participation of the target population? What measures X X X X X
have been implemented to mitigate them?
1.2.3 To what extent have the interventions under
evaluation been adapted to respond to the changing
X X X X X
contexts (e.g., COVID-19, security issues) and the needs
of the target population (guarantors and rights holders)?
1.2.4 To what extent does UNICEF's work at the country X
level take into account the specificity of violence (UNFPA/
experienced by girls, boys and adolescents and address X X X X
UN
GBV as a manifestation of EVAC?
Women)
60
EQs UNICEF UNICEF UNICEF UNICEF UNICEF Govern- UN Donors Implementing Private
CD/DCD sector staff Gender M&E staff Finance staff agencies Partners/ sector
ment
Focal Point
NGOs
1.2.5 To what extent have the interventions mobilized the
necessary capacities to ensure the mainstreaming of the X X X X
gender approach?
2. EFFICIENCY
2.1 To what extent
2.1.1 To what extent does UNICEF use resources in a
X X X
way that allows for cost monitoring?
2.1.2 To what extent have the human resources been
X X
adequate to achieve the expected products and results?
2.2 To what extent did UNICEF consider alternative methods of programme delivery and successfully identify the most effective delivery method in each of these countries?
2.2.1 To what extent did UNICEF consider supporting
social centers through government structures, NGOs X X X X X
and through direct implementation?
2.2.2 To what extent did UNICEF consider implementing
SBCC through different methods (e.g., private sector, X X X X X
NGOs etc.)?
3. EFFECTIVENESS
3.1 Who and how many people did these initiatives reach (disaggregated by geographic location, gender, and other relevant demographic considerations)?
3.1.1 To what extent does the monitoring and evaluation
(M&E) system measure progress in achieving planned X X
products and expected results of interventions?
3.1.2 To what extent does the M&E system allow for
X X
outlined in its Global Strategic Plan?
3.1.3 What have been the unplanned effects (positive or
X X X
negative) of the interventions?
inalized children, contribute to building capacity and generating
changes at the different social levels outlined in the EVAC ToC?
3.2.1 In the last 18 months, what have been the changes
at the individual level of children and adolescents to X X X X X
which the interventions have contributed?
61
EQs UNICEF UNICEF UNICEF UNICEF UNICEF Govern- UN Donors Implementing Private
CD/DCD sector staff Gender M&E staff Finance staff agencies Partners/ sector
ment
Focal Point
NGOs
3.2.2 In the last 18 months, what have been the changes
at the level of fathers, mothers and other caregivers to X X X X
which the interventions have contributed?
3.2.3 In the last 18 months, what have been the changes
at the social / community level that the interventions have X X X
contributed to?
3.2.4 In the last 18 months, what have been the changes
at the systems and institutional level to which the X X X X X
interventions have contributed to?
3.2.5 In the last 18 months, what have been the changes
at the level of legal and political frameworks to which the X X X X X
interventions have contributed to?
3.2.6 In the last 18 months, what are the changes to
which interventions on social norms and gender X X X X X
inequalities have contributed?
3.3 To what extent have coordination and complementarity with relevant actors in the field of VAC, including GBV, contributed to achieving the expected results?
complementing and coordinated with other UNICEF X X X
interventions in the country (internal complementarity)?
strategies complementing other EVAC programmes
X X X X X
being implemented in each country (by other actors,
government, NGOs, etc) (external complementarity)?
3.4 Which of the initiatives show a good potential to develop impact and could be identified for a deeper analysis or evaluation at a later stage?
3.4.1 To what extent any of the interventions was
innovative, addressed taboos, reached a greater number
X X X X X
of beneficiaries than anticipated, established new types
of partnerships, etc.
3.5 What are the internal and external actors that contribute or hinder progress towards achieving the expected results?
3.5.1 What are the internal factors that contribute or
X X X
hinder progress towards achieving the expected results?
3.5.2 What are external the factors that contribute or
X X X X X X
hinder progress towards achieving the expected results?
4. SUSTAINABILITY
62
EQs UNICEF UNICEF UNICEF UNICEF UNICEF Govern- UN Donors Implementing Private
CD/DCD sector staff Gender M&E staff Finance staff agencies Partners/ sector
ment
Focal Point
NGOs
4.1 To what extent are achievements on the legislation, attitudes, and direct interventions sustainable?
4.1.1 To what extent EVAC legal and policy frameworks
X X X
have been set up in each country?
4.1.2 To what extent have national EVAC strategies been
X X
developed, costed and included in national budgets?
4.1.3 To what extent are the national institutional
arrangements/responsibilities adequate for
X X
operationalizing the EVAC strategy and implementing the
EVAC interventions?
4.1.4 To what extent have interventions achieved
X X X
changes in attitudes and behaviour?551
4.15 To what extent are direct interventions (e.g., service
X X X
delivery and Child Helplines) sustainable?
4.2 To what extent do the interventions, or some of their strategies / components, have the capacity to be replicated and scaled?
4.2.1 What strategies or components of the interventions
are potentially replicable or have already been X X X X X
replicated?
4.2.2 What strategies or components of the interventions
are potentially scalable or have already been scaled up? X X X X X
5. GENDER
5.1 To what extent are governments taking gender into consideration in EVAC initiative design and monitoring?
5.1.1 To what extent is UNICEF taking gender into
X X X X
consideration in EVAC initiative design?
5.1.2 To what extent is UNICEF taking gender into
X X X X
consideration in EVAC initiative implementation?
5.1.3To what extent are governments taking gender into
X X X X
consideration in EVAC initiative monitoring?
551 This question will be addressed predominantly by using secondary sources (assessments of Communication for Behavioral Change interventions is they exist) and through
some FGDs should the ET be able to conduct any.
63
Annex 10. List of People Interviewed
EGYPT
Last Name First Name Organization Title Sex
Thomas Saji UNICEF Chief of Child Protection M
El Fawal Salma UNICEF Child Protection Specialist - F
EVAC Focal Point
Bayoumi Dalia UNICEF M&E Specialist F
Mohamed Iman Hani UNICEF Child Protection M&E Consultant F
Bayad Ahmed Tawfik UNICEF M&E Consultant M
Mohareb Ahmed UNICEF Child Protection Officer - M
Children on the Move
Younis Rana UNICEF Child Protection Officer – Justice F
for Children
Ahmed Manar UNICEF Education Specialist F
Arafa Hadeer UNICEF M&E Specialist – Education F
Fam Michael UNICEF Education Consultant M
Dous Nevine UNICEF Health Specialist F
El-Masery Salma UNICEF Child Protection Officer F
Youssef Sawsan UNICEF Chief of Private Sector and F
Partnerships
El Sherbini Reem UNICEF Child Protection Officer F
Abdeldaiem Ahmed UNICEF Child Protection Specialist M
Rango Luigi Peter UNICEF Chief of Social Policy M
Crickx Jonathan UNICEF Chief of Communication M
Haikal Dina UNICEF Social and Behavioral Change F
Officer
Strigelli Gaia UNICEF Chief of Social and Behavioral F
Change
Anderson Jessica UNHCR Protection Officer (GBV and F
Child Protection)
Elhennawy Hala WHO Technical Officer – Promoting F
Health
El Messiri Geilan UN WOMEN Deputy Representative F
Boultylkova Eugenia Netherlands Political Officer F
Embassy
Radwan Amira USAID Senior Project Management F
Specialist – Women
Empowerment
Baudin Laure Terre Des Hommes Country Representative F
Omar Fairouz Terre Des Hommes Programs Coordinator F
Mahmoud Elham Terre Des Hommes Project Manager F
Helal Hany EFACC Managing Director and Children M
Rights Advocate
Hamdy Enas Harrassmap Executive Director F
Yehia Saad Mohamed Save the Children Child Protection Officer M
Mohamed Ahmed MoSS CPC Director in MoSS and M
Psychologist
Raafat Mohamed Carrefour Sustainability Manager M
JORDAN
Last name First name Organization Title Sex
El Najjar Sima UNICEF M&E Officer F
64
Moulla Diana UNICEF Information Management F
Specialist
Homsi Maha UNICEF Previous Chief of CP F
Mariyaselvam Mari UNICEF Chief CP M
Kasht Suzan UNICEF Child Protection Specialist F
Nubani Randa UNICEF Planning, M&E Officer F
Al Qasem Mariam UNICEF Child Protection Officer F
Kawar Rana UNICEF Education Specialist F
Madi Kenan UNICEF Program Specialist M
Chaix Jessica UNICEF Field Support Specialist F
Verisco Giorgia UNICEF Chief of Youth and Adolescent F
Development and Participation
Al Mukhaimer Sheeraz UNICEF CP Officer F
Al Derbi Sundus UNICEF Makani Coordinator in Azraq F
Camp
Attari Sajeda UNICEF Child Protection Specialist F
Kawafha Ruba UNICEF Child Protection Specialist F
Deir Yara UNFPA GBV Program Analyst F
Khalifa Belal UNHCR Protection Officer M
Al Musa Orouba UNRWA Head of Education Dept. F
Vettoretto Maria Rosa EU Program Manager with EU F
Response to Syrian Crisis
Al Omari Ola JRF Helpline supervisor F
Aqrabawi Iman JRF Intervention services manager F
Matalqah Hakam NCFA Family Affairs Manager M
Meqdady Mohammed NCFA DG of NCFA M
Abu Lawi Mohammad IMC Project Manager M
Al Abbous Zainab MoAIA Consultant to Minister on Family F
Awareness Program
Kharabsheh Mohammad MOSD Coordination and UNICEF FP M
within MOSD
Khalayleh Hanan MoJ Human Rights Directorate F
Manager
Abbadi Khuloud MOJ Assistant to Secretary General F
Khanfar Olfat MOJ Family and Gender Department F
Manager
Badawee Taghreed MOE Head of Career Counseling F
Al Zaben Ahmad MOSD Head of Juvenile and Social M
Protection Directorate
Sa’ed MOSD Head of Family Protection Unit M
Mubaideen Suhad MOSD Head of Girl and Women’s F
Shelter in Rusaifa
Qutoush Mohammad FPD Head of Reconciliation and M
Follow up
Al Ouri Malak MOH Head of the Directorate of F
People with Disabilities and
Mental Health
Barakat Nesreen To Excel General Manager F
LEBANON
Last name First name Organization Title Gender
Hammoud Farah UNICEF GBV officer F
Hallak Lara UNICEF CP officer F
AbiSamra May UNICEF Gender and Inclusion officer F
Nehme Simon UNICEF CP officer M
Atwi Jackline UNICEF CP officer (sector lead) F
Tawily Nisrine UNICEF CP officer (policy) F
AbiSaad Roula UNICEF CP officer (PSS) F
65
Karam Aimee UNICEF CP Officer (MoJ ) F
Yaacoub Nazih UNICEF Palestinian program M
ElMoghrabi Bochra UNICEF Palestinian program CP & GBV F
AbiKhalil Abir UNICEF Program specialist-Local F
governance
Ilias Sonia UNICEF Program specialist-local F
governance
Hassan Zaman UNICEF CP officer F
Higgins Ettie UNICEF Deputy country director F
Erikson Johanna UNICEF Chief of CP F
Wagner Emma UNRWA Team leader Protection and F
neutrality
Mayer Alisa UNRWA GBV coordinator F
Talentino Erica UNFPA Coordinator of Emergency F
humanitarian context on GBV
Kevorkian Rita UNHCR Associate protection specialist F
Chreif Sarah DRC CP/GBV specialist F
Walsh Bryony DRC Protection coordinator F
Badran Nadia Social workers President F
syndicate in
Lebanon
Tanios Charlotte Mouvement social CP coordinator F
Bitar Ghieth Himaya Regional manager (north) F
Sukkar Amira UPEL President F
Zayni Roula Mouvement Case worker F
social (Tripoli)
Semaan Maria Kafa Head of CP unit F
Zeitounalian Gary Abaad Gender program technical M
specialist
Isseid Jihane Abaad Technical coordinator F
Delbani Lamis IRC Women protection and F
empowerment manager
Abdallah Taghrid IRC CP senior manager F
Vujanovic Jelena TDH Head or program F
Yazbeck Lama Himaya Executive director F
Ahmad Abdallah MoSA General director M
66
Annex 11. Steering Committee Terms of
Reference
Multi Country Evaluation of Elimination of Violence against Children
in Egypt, Jordan and Lebanon
Background
The objective of the formative evaluation is to produce an independent and useful evaluation
report that can guide future action. The evaluation will provide accountability to UNICEF,
donors, governments, communities, private sector partners and rights-holders as to whether
purpose of supporting national initiatives to eliminate VAC.
Composition
The Steering Committee will comprise the following members:
• Chair: Stephen Blight, Senior Adviser Child Protection, Headquarters, UNICEF
• Member: Alexander Robert Butchart, Coordinator, Prevention of Violence, WHO
• Member: Ettie Higgins, Deputy Representative Jordan Country Office, UNICEF
• Member: Saji Thomas, Chief Child Protection Egypt Country Office, UNICEF
• Member: Johanna Eriksson, Chief Child Protection, Lebanon Country Office,
UNICEF
• Member: Carlos Javier Aguilar, Regional Adviser Child Protection, MENARO,
UNICEF
• Secretariat: Robert Stryk, Regional Adviser Evaluation, MENARO, UNICEF
Responsibilities
The Steering Committee will be responsible for the following:
• Approve the evaluation ToR;
• Endorse the evaluation's inception report;
• Engaging actively and periodically with the substance of the evaluation, providing
preliminary feedback to the evaluator(s) during all meetings / debriefs which require
the Committee's participation and / or deliberation (i.e. ToRs approval, inception
report approval, presentation of preliminary findings);
• Providing comments to the draft evaluation report;
• Resolving any unforeseen issue related to the evaluation that requires guidance and
/ or deliberation.
The Steering Committee will strive to reach consensus on issues discussed. Minority views
will be documented in cases where this should not be possible (e.g. with regard to comments
on the draft evaluation report, minority views will be annexed to the finalized version of the
evaluation report).
Participants will act as a collective group and, to the extent possible, will not represent
national / organizational interests.
67
Annex 12. Research Ethics Approval
Research Ethics
Approval
15 February 2021
Rima
Al-Azar
IOD
PARC
Omega Court
362 Cemetery
Road Sheffield
S11 8FT United Kingdom
RE: Ethics Review Board findings for: Multi-Country Formative and Summative
Evaluation of Elimination of Violence against Children in Egypt, Jordan and
Lebanon
(HML IRB Review #337EJLB21)
Dear Rima Al-Azar,
Protocols for the protection of human subjects in the above study were assessed through a research
ethics review by HML Institutional Review Board (IRB) on 12 January – 15 February 2021. This
study’s human subjects’ protection protocols, as stated in the materials submitted, received ethics
review approval.
You and your project staff remain responsible for ensuring compliance with HML IRB’s
determinations. Those responsibilities include, but are not limited to:
• ensuring prompt reporting to HML IRB of proposed changes in this study’s design,
risks, c onsent, or other human protection protocols and providing copies of any revised
materials;
• conducting the research activity in accordance with the terms of the IRB approval until
any proposed changes have been reviewed and approved by the IRB, except when
necessary to mitigate hazards to subjects;
• promptly reporting any unanticipated problems involving risks to subjects or others in the
course of this study;
• notifying HML IRB when your study is completed.
HML IRB is authorized by the United States Department of Health and Human Services,
Office of Human Research Protections (IRB #1211, IORG #850, FWA #1102).
Sincerely,
68
D. Michael Anderson, Ph.D., MPH
Chair & Human Subjects Protections Director, HML IRB
cc: Robert Stryk, Valentina Prosperi, Penelope Lantz, JD
HML IRB
1101 Connecticut Avenue, NW Suite 450
Washington, DC 20036 USA
+1.202.246.8504
unicef@hmlirb.com www.hmlirb.com
69
HML Ethics Review Board
Research Ethics Review Document
Review of UNICEF Research Project Materials for the Protection of Human Subjects
This document serves to meet UNICEF ethical standards for research, evaluation, data collection and analysis, and is the official record of an
ethics review. It is designed to ensure effective processes and accountability for ethical oversight and to ensure the protection of, and respect
for, child and adult rights within all research, evaluation, and data collection processes undertaken or commissioned by UNICEF. It conforms
with the UNICEF Procedure for Ethical Standards in Research, Evaluation, Data Collection and Analysis; Document Number:
CF/PD/DRP/2015-001; Effective Date: 01 April 2015, Issued by Director, Division of Data, Research and Policy.
The Purpose of Research Ethics Review
The purpose of an Ethics Review Board (ERB) or Institutional Review Board (IRB) is the protection of human research subjects’ rights. These rights include
Respect for individuals to make free decisions, Justice or equity regarding distribution of the burdens and benefits of research, and Beneficence or the
obligation to do good and avoid harm.
ERBs review research protocols that involve the collection and analysis of data from human subjects to ensure that ethical standards are upheld. This is to
protect the rights and welfare of subjects and to ensure that:
• subjects know the purpose of the study and are not placed at undue risk;
• participation is voluntary and confidential;
• subjects are provided and agree to informed consent prior to their participation;
• and;
70
• data collection and analysis does not result in the violation of privacy or discrimination.
Before issuing approval, the ERB must determine that the following requirements are satisfied:
• representative;
• the proposed research design is scientifically sound and that risks to subjects are minimized;
• any risks to subjects are reasonable in relation to anticipated benefits;
• subject selection is equitable;
• safeguards are included for subjects likely to be vulnerable to undue influence or coercion;
• maximized.
Materials Requested for Review: Also, please include:
1. Inception Report / Research Protocol, containing, e.g.,: 4. Written protocols to ensure subjects’ safety.*
specific aims or objectives, research questions, study 5. Written protocols for the protection of human subjects’
design, analysis & dissemination plans. identities.*
6. Written protocols for the protection of data.*
2. Copies of all Informed Consent documents. 7. Other relevant documents.
*These may be statements incorporated into research plans and/or embedded in
3. Copies of all data collection instruments. a single protection protocol.
.
HML IRB is an autonomous committee authorized by the United States Department of Health and Human Services, Office for Human Research Protections
(IRB #1211, FWA #1102, IORG #850), to review and approve research involving human subjects before the start of research, and to conduct annual reviews
of that research independent of affiliation with the research organization submitting materials for review.
Please submit your materials for review to:
D. Michael Anderson, PhD, MPH, HML IRB Chair & Human Subjects Protections Director and Penelope A.
Lantz, JD, HML IRB General Counsel
unicef@hmlirb.com
HML IRB
1101 Connecticut Avenue, NW Suite 450
Washington, DC 20036 USA
+1.202.246.8504 www.hmlirb.com
71
Protections
→ INVESTIGATORS: Please confirm your project information and any additional
information requested below.
Project Title: Multi-Country Formative and Summative Evaluation of Elimination of
Violence against Children in Egypt, Jordan and Lebanon
HML IRB Research Ethics Review ID#: 337EJLB21
Initiating UNICEF Official: Robert Stryk, Regional Evaluation Advisor, Middle East and North Africa
Name, CO, & RO Regional Office
Principal Investigator/Project Manager: Rima Al-Azar (Team Leader)
Name, degree(s), organization, & address IOD PARC
Other Key Personnel: Sirsa Qursha (Child Protection Specialist
Names & titles
Contracting Firm: IOD PARC
Name & address Omega Court
362 Cemetery Road
Sheffield
S11 8FT United Kingdom
Primary study site(s): Egypt, Jordan, Lebanon
(e.g., country, province, region)
Project duration: December 2020 to March 2021
(Dates from -- to) December 2020 to April 2021
Duration of Subjects’ Participation: Please update
(Dates from -- to) 1-28 February 2021
72
Thematic Area/Areas: VAC Child Protection Social Policy
Target population: Child Protection, EVAC and Gender Specialists to assess interventions and
improve programming.
Date of ERB Request 12 January 2021
Date(s) ERB Comments Returned 14 January 2021
Date Final Documents Received 15 February 2021
DATE OF ERB APPROVAL 15 February 2021
UNICEF Ethics Review Process
HML Ethics Review Board (UNICEF LTAS 42107154) will conduct a research ethics review of submitted materials and make
comments below under Additional Information Needed. We will then return this template for responses from investigators.
Please respond to our comments in another colour, directly under each comment.
• Please provide any requested or revised materials, and please note where revisions to your materials may be found by page or
paragraph number.
• Please do not alter ERB comments or the format of this document.
This HML ERB review document serves as the official record of the ethics review for the project named below. This document, including all
comments and responses, will be retained by UNICEF and HML ERB as a record of this review. Once you and we have agreed on the ethical
rights of your research subjects, we will issue a letter of approval.
73
Additional Information Needed X or
Ethics Review Board → Investigators: NA
equal
Criteria of Interest Please respond to ERB info requests in
PASS
another color directly below the request
(for ERB
use)
Section ERB Submission: Are all requested project
1
information, materials, and final documents
provided separately or incorporated in text? This
includes:
1.1 Inception Report or Research Protocol, containing, e.g.,: Please keep us informed of any subject protection X
specific aims or objectives, research questions, study protocol or research design changes that need to occur
design, analysis & dissemination plans in adaptation to the coronavirus pandemic.
OK. Noted.
1.2 Informed Consent documents X
1.3 Surveys and data collection instruments X
1.4 Written protocols to ensure subjects’ safety X
1.5 Written protocols for protection of subjects’ identities X
1.6 Written protocols for protection of data X
1.7 Other relevant documents X
1.8 Do protocols include a section identifying ethical issues X
and measures to mitigate ethical problems as required
by UNICEF Procedure (VI.i)?
1.9 Have informed consent and data collection instruments Please respond. X
been pre-tested? No they have not.
1.10 Are all submitted documents final versions? Please respond. X
Yes they are.
1.11 May the final protocol and instruments be included in an Please respond: include or omit. X
internal UNICEF searchable database for colleagues to Include
learn from your work? (Include/omit)
1.12 Additional comments or suggestions X
74
Additional Information Needed X or
Ethics Review Board → Investigators: NA
equal
Criteria of Interest Please respond to ERB info requests in
PASS
another color directly below the request
(for ERB
use)
Section Research Design: Do submitted materials describe
2
the proposed research? This includes:
2.1 Is the study’s background, rationale, and study design X
scientifically sound?
2.2 Does study involve intervention, treatment, comparison, X
or control groups?
2.3 Type of data collection: X
a. survey questionnaire………………..…………..
b. subject interview………………………..………..
c. key informant interview (KII) ............................ X
d. focus group discussion (FGD) ......................... X
e. document (desk) review .................................. X
f. on-site observation .......................................... X
g. case study………………………………………..
h. physical measurements ………………………..
i. biological specimen ……………….….…………
j. other..……………………………………………..
2.4 Number of Data Collections: This is a one-time only data collection, correct? X
a. one-time (no follow-up) .................................... X Correct
b. two or more (follow-up) …………………………
2.5 Sample size: Approximate total n = 111 Please estimate total sample size = X
KIIs sample size approximately 45 (15 per country)
FGDs sample size 6 persons per FGD. 4 FGDs in
Lebanon; 5 FGDs in Jordan and 2 FGDs in Egypt for
a total of approximately 66 (Covid restrictions
permitting)
2.6 Are any subjects children (<18 years old)? None X
None
75
Additional Information Needed X or
Ethics Review Board → Investigators: NA
equal
Criteria of Interest Please respond to ERB info requests in
PASS
another color directly below the request
(for ERB
use)
2.7 Additional comments or suggestions X
Section Subject Risks: Are risks reasonable in relation to
3
any benefits to subjects and to the importance of
knowledge that may be expected to result from the
research?
3.1 Is the research Minimal Risk Only?: This means the X
probability and magnitude of anticipated harm or
discomfort is no greater than ordinarily encountered in
daily life or during performance of routine physical or
psychological exams or tests.
3.2 Does the research involve greater than minimal risk, but X
where risks are justified by anticipated benefits; where
the relation of the anticipated benefits to risks is at least
as favorable as available alternative approaches; and
where the intervention or procedure is likely to yield
generalizable knowledge? If so, are mitigating
procedures described?
3.3 Do study objectives show that risks are reasonable in X
relationship to expected gains and benefits are clearly
articulated?
3.4 By their participation, are subjects vulnerable to any of Please discuss any potential risk to FGD participants X
the following?: should their identity and comments be disclosed by
a. physical risk …………………………………….. someone else participating in the group.
b. psychological risk ……………………………....
76
Additional Information Needed X or
Ethics Review Board → Investigators: NA
equal
Criteria of Interest Please respond to ERB info requests in
PASS
another color directly below the request
(for ERB
use)
c. social risk ……………………………….………. The questions in the FGDs are formulated in such a
d. economic risk …………………………………... way that they would not pose any risk should
e. legal risk ……………….……………………....... comments be disclosed outside the group.
f. political risk ……………………….…………….. Nevertheless, a participant may share information
g. employment risk………………………………… that may lead to discrimination in services provided
h. academic risk…………………………………..... in the future should a participant disclose the
i. religious risk…………………………………..…. answer to unscrupulous staff of the service
j. other……………………………………………… provider. The ET believes that this risk is extremely
minimal. Furthermore, the participants have the
choice not to respond to a question if they feel it
may put them at risk.
Please discuss any repercussions that KII participants
could incur if confidentiality were similarly breached.
Similarly, should KII confidentiality be breached
there may be employment risks. The ET has put in
place several measures to ensure that the risk of
such a breach is extremely minimal. The ET will not
collect the names or any personal information of KII.
3.5 In event of any of the above risks, do protocols describe X
clear strategies to mitigate risks?
3.6 Does the study request information or opinions where X
public disclosure may result in danger, limitations to
future freedoms, or access to services?
77
Additional Information Needed X or
Ethics Review Board → Investigators: NA
equal
Criteria of Interest Please respond to ERB info requests in
PASS
another color directly below the request
(for ERB
use)
3.7 Do gender, ethnicity, or other demographic Please describe how FGDs will be comprised. Will they X
characteristics -- or grouping of subjects by any of these be mixed or same gender? Will they be stratified by any
characteristics, especially in FGDs -- increase subject other characteristics?
risk? Given the very limited number of FGDs (that is if the
Evaluation Team is able to conduct them), and given
the nature of the evaluation (high-level), the FGDs
are more to provide anecdotal insights and are not
expected to be representative. As such, the
Evaluation Team will hold the FGDs onsite (not
remotely) with the persons who are willing to
participate and who are present in the Social Service
Centers on the day/time the ET will visit the centers.
As such, the composition of the FGDs will be totally
random. The ET will endeavor to talk separately to
women and to men. It is also the understanding of
the ET that it is mostly mothers who visit the Social
Centers.
3.8 If a subject discloses or is suspected to be at risk outside Please describe. X
the study, are procedures in place to address or report During the KIIs/FGDs, the evaluation team will
risk and refer subject for relevant support? inform adult stakeholders, that if anyone is
suspected/discloses that they may be at risk outside
the study, the case will be reported to UNICEF CO.
78
Additional Information Needed X or
Ethics Review Board → Investigators: NA
equal
Criteria of Interest Please respond to ERB info requests in
PASS
another color directly below the request
(for ERB
use)
3.9 Is reporting abuse of minors mandatory? If yes, has While the questions in the interview guide do not seek X
consideration been given to the impacts and information about specific instances of suspected abuse
consequences of mandatory reporting? or neglect, it is possible that a disclosure could be made
and mandatory reporting be necessary. Please describe
reporting procedures.
During the KIIs/FGDs, the evaluation team will
inform stakeholders, that if any case of violence
against children or adolescents or situations that
may endanger the life or integrity of children
emerges during the consultation it will be referred to
the relevant legal and psychosocial institutions in
each country. In addition, UNICEF CO will also be
informed.
3.10 Additional comments or suggestions X
Section High Risk: When subjects are vulnerable to
4
heightened risk have additional safeguards been
included to protect their rights and welfare?
4.1 Can subjects be perceived as vulnerable, including: X
children, especially unaccompanied or separated
(UASC); lacking WASH, food, shelter, or medical care;
refugees in conflict or post conflict; those in natural,
ecological, or disaster settings; mothers & pregnant
79
Additional Information Needed X or
Ethics Review Board → Investigators: NA
equal
Criteria of Interest Please respond to ERB info requests in
PASS
another color directly below the request
(for ERB
use)
women; forced migrants and illegal or undocumented
immigrants; prisoners or persons in institutions including
orphanages or juvenile justice systems; gang members;
those with mental or physical illness or disability; those
with HIV/AIDS; those at economic or educational
disadvantage; persecuted minority groups, or under high
familial, peer, or social pressure? If yes, are study-
specific protection protocols provided?
4.2 Does the sampling strategy target people at risk for X
issues such as: violence, torture, abuse, kidnapping;
sexual exploitation, harassment, violence or abuse;
prostitution or pornography, female genital mutilation,
reproductive or sexual issues; sexual orientation; child,
early or forced marriage; suicide? If yes, are study-
specific protection protocols provided?
4.3 Are subjects involved in any of the following: slavery, X
including the sale and trafficking of children; forced
labour, servitude, forced recruitment to armed groups;
war or armed conflict; illegal activities, production or
trafficking of drugs; economic exploitation; work that
could damage health or safety; removal of organs for
exploitation? If yes, are study-specific protection
protocols provided?
4.4 Does the study request information relating to illegal X
activities? If yes, is an MOU in place with government to
ensure that no participant is prosecuted? Have
participants been notified of this agreement?
4.5 Additional comments or suggestions X
80
Additional Information Needed X or
Ethics Review Board → Investigators: NA
equal
Criteria of Interest Please respond to ERB info requests in
PASS
another color directly below the request
(for ERB
use)
Section Recruitment: Do submitted materials describe
5
subjects and the recruitment process?
5.1 To what extent are subjects identified: Will names or other PII be recorded for KIIs? X
a. names are recorded with responses…………. Names will be recorded separately from responses
b. names recorded separate from responses… X in order to be able to go back to the respondent
c. no names are recorded ..………………………. should further information be needed. Furthermore,
d. other personally identifiable information (PII) is subjects will be given unique identifier numbers.
recorded………………………………………….
e. no PII is recorded ………………………….……
f. subjects are given a unique identifier .............. X
g. other……………………………………….………
5.2 If subject name or any other PII is recorded, are Please describe. X
procedures included for how this info will be kept A separate table will be prepared where the subject
separate from responses? name and assigned interview code will be recorded.
This is necessary in order for the ET to be able to go
back to the interviewee should they need further
information/clarification on a point that was
mentioned during the interview.
5.3 Are subject recruitment procedures & sampling strategy Please describe recruiting procedures. X
adequately described? As mentioned above, given the difficulties and
uncertainties to conduct FGDs under Covid-19
conditions, should the FGDs take place, the ET will
not recruit any subject to participate in the FGD. It
will carry out the FGD with the persons that are
already available at the Social Service Center on the
day of the field visit. There will not be any online
FGDs.
81
Additional Information Needed X or
Ethics Review Board → Investigators: NA
equal
Criteria of Interest Please respond to ERB info requests in
PASS
another color directly below the request
(for ERB
use)
5.4 Do recruitment procedures clearly describe ways and Please describe. X
means to ensure privacy of subjects throughout the The FGDs will take place in a private room and
recruitment process? names will not be used or recorded. No photographs
will be taken, no images or audios will be recorded.
5.5 If subjects are children or other vulnerable groups, are NA
materials (e.g.: survey instruments, focus group topics,
etc.) age appropriate?
5.6 If subjects are children or other vulnerable groups, or if NA
subject matter is sensitive, is recruitment sensitive to
subjects’ potential vulnerabilities (real or perceived) and
does it ensure privacy throughout recruitment?
5..7 Do recruitment procedures show indication of bribery, X
coercion, intimidation, compulsion, pressure, or force?
5..8 Is recruitment of some members of the population and Please briefly discuss. X
not others likely to result in resentment for either As mentioned earlier, there will be very few FGDs
inclusion or exclusion? Have strategies to address this held (if any) and the stakeholders included will be
been adequately described? the ones present in the Social Service center. There
will be no active “recruitment” or “selection”. The
ET does not expect that this will generate
resentment or pose a risk.
5.9 Are potential subjects likely to conflate participation with X
potential or actual goods or service provision? Have
strategies to address this been adequately described?
5.10 If subjects are paid, compensated, provided a gift, or Is there any compensation? If so what is it and in what X
provided other benefits or services for participation, is amount?
the incentive described and justified as non-coercive? No compensation is foreseen.
82
Additional Information Needed X or
Ethics Review Board → Investigators: NA
equal
Criteria of Interest Please respond to ERB info requests in
PASS
another color directly below the request
(for ERB
use)
5.11 Additional comments or suggestions X
Section Informed Consent: IC is a negotiation whereby
6
subjects are informed about the study and their
rights, and they agree to participate voluntarily. IC
must be sought from each subject or the subject's
authorized representative confirming this process.
6.1 Type of Informed Consent: All informed consent is provided verbally, correct? X
a. written & signed ……………………..…………. Yes, verbally for both KIIs and FGDs. It will not be
b. written not signed ………………………………. signed by the participant.
c. written & signed by authorized representative..
d. verbal & signed or recorded…………………….. How will verbal consent for FGDs and KII be noted or
e. verbal & signed by authorized representative…. recorded by the interviewer?
f. verbal not signed or recorded ........................... X The interviewer will read the IC and will explain the
g. active……………………………………………… purpose of the meeting. S/he will make a written
h. passive………………………………………….. remark (as part of the note-taking that informed
i. other ………………………………………….… consent has been obtained).
6.2 Are the processes for obtaining each IC adequately X
described?
6.3 Does the IC include a clear and simple invitation to X
participate, an explanation of what the subject will be
expected to do, and why they are being recruited?
6.4 Does IC include the purpose of the research presented X
in simple, age, education, and culturally appropriate local
language?
6.5 Does IC state that participation is voluntary, and subject X
may choose to not respond to any or all questions, or
may withdraw anytime without consequences?
83
Additional Information Needed X or
Ethics Review Board → Investigators: NA
equal
Criteria of Interest Please respond to ERB info requests in
PASS
another color directly below the request
(for ERB
use)
6.6 Does IC include the expected duration of the subject's X
participation (hours/minutes)?
6.7 Are subjects given a clear indication of who will have X
access to their responses and in what form?
6.8 Are subjects given a clear description of potential re-use X
or sharing of data, with whom, and in what form?
6.9 Does IC include a description of any risks or benefits to X
subjects?
6.10 Does IC include a statement describing how X
confidentiality (or anonymity) will be maintained, and if
there are any limitations to confidentiality?
6.11 Does IC provide identity and contact info of Please see Item 6.17, below. X
investigators? Is the form of contact useful and The IC will provide the name and cell phone number
appropriate given power dynamics and access to of the Chief of Child Protection in the country office.
resources like phones and/ or transport? Given the wide availability of cell phones in the 3
countries, the ET believes all stakeholders will be
able to contact UNICEF should they so which to do.
Furthermore, the interviewer will clearly present
him/herself giving full name and explaining who they
are should the participant wish to report the
interviewer to UNICEF or any other authority.
6.12 For child subjects, is IC being obtained from parent, NA
guardian, caregiver, or authorized representative? If not,
is a justification provided for why this is unnecessary?
6.13 For child subjects, is their role in the study described NA
adequately and in an age and culturally appropriate
manner for them to provide written or verbal assent?
84
Additional Information Needed X or
Ethics Review Board → Investigators: NA
equal
Criteria of Interest Please respond to ERB info requests in
PASS
another color directly below the request
(for ERB
use)
6.14 Do IC materials advise subjects to keep focus group Please include in IC for FGD subjects. X
discussions (FGD) confidential from anyone outside the
group? Also, in the IC for FGDs you state, “Other people will not
know if you are in this study or what you have said.”
Clearly, however, other discussants will know. Please
revise to mean anyone outside the group.
Done.
6.15 Where subjects differ by type (e.g.: age, sex, risk, status, X
etc.), are IC documents specific for each type?
6.16 Where data collection differs by method (e.g.: survey, Please include a statement on each IC about how X
FGD, interview, audio recording), do ICs cover each responses will be recorded (e.g., notes? audio
method? recording?).
Only written notes, no audio recording. Statement
included in both ICs (KIIs and FGDs)
6.17 If IC is written, is a copy left with subjects or there is Will a copy be left? If not, please provide contact X
explanation for not doing so? information in writing.
No copy will be left. Noted: contact information will
be provided in writing.
6.18 Additional comments or suggestions X
Section Subject Protections: Do submitted materials clearly
7
identify protection against risk?
85
Additional Information Needed X or
Ethics Review Board → Investigators: NA
equal
Criteria of Interest Please respond to ERB info requests in
PASS
another color directly below the request
(for ERB
use)
7.1 Do materials describe protocols for subjects’ safety In the context of COVID-19, when and how will the X
throughout data collection, analysis, storage, and decision be made regarding in-person data collection,
dissemination? including site visits and FGDs?
The decision for Jordan and Lebanon will be taken
at the last moment, after the Inception Report is
approved and based on the prevailing Government’s
restrictions. This is not possible to determine now
since these restrictions keep changing. For Egypt,
the ET expects to be able to do both FGDs and KIIs
in person.
7.2 Are all data collected necessary for the purposes of X
evidence generation?
7.3 Do data analysis and reporting procedures ensure X
subject confidentiality (or anonymity) and security?
7.4 If future contact with subjects is planned, does it provide NA
for confidentiality and data security through the research
period and beyond?
7.5 If children or other vulnerable groups are subjects, have NA
personnel had experience working with these groups? If
not, what specialized instruction will they receive?
7.6 Have personnel collecting data from subjects had ethical X
training specific to the target group?
7.7 Are personnel collecting data aware of ethical issues X
that may arise and provided mitigation strategies?
7.8 Additional comments or suggestions X
Section Data Protection: Do data collection and storage
8
protocols adequately ensure subject & data safety?
86
Additional Information Needed X or
Ethics Review Board → Investigators: NA
equal
Criteria of Interest Please respond to ERB info requests in
PASS
another color directly below the request
(for ERB
use)
8.1 Are data collection tools appropriate and constructed to X
assure subject confidentiality or anonymity?
8.2 Do data collection procedures and environment ensure Please describe COVID precautions to be used in the X
data security? event you proceed with in-person data collection.
• Evaluators will also be required to use medical
masks during all data collection activities;
• Evaluators will make clear in setting up the FGDs
that distancing guidelines are requested andthat
participants need to have masks on. If these
conditions are not met, the evaluator is
empowered to not proceed with the FGDs;
• Should a member of the IOD PARC team become
ill and suspected to have COVID-19, in-person
data collection will be paused until that person
can be tested; and
• Should that person be positive, IOD PARC will
communicate that fact back to UNICEF CO and
all participants who had been in contact with that
individual.
8.3 Do procedures cover all data types (e.g., written, audio, Will site visits include any digital or audio recording? X
video, observation), and are protections described for No recording will take place.
each type?
8.4 If data will be shared with partners, is there a clear X
agreement or NDA?
87
8.5 Do protocols describe chain of custody of data and Please describe. X
protections for data transfer or transmission, storage, de- Measures have been designed to protect the use and
identification, and destruction? safe storage of data and information.
Specifically, the notes will not record any name or
personal information.
The national consultants will share the field notes
with IOD PARC by uploading them the Microsoft
Teams site as that will log them directly into
SharePoint email. Once the evaluation is finalized,
they will no longer have access to these files from
their devices.
IOD PARC will store them safely for 5 years.
8.6 Additional comments or suggestions X
88
Annex 13. Alignment of UNICEF EVAC Interventions with SDGs 5
and 16
SDG 5.2 SDG 16.1 SDG 16.2
Eliminate all forms of violence Significantly reduce End abuse,
Initiative Implementation Period against all women and girls in the all forms of violence exploitation, trafficking
public and private spheres, and related death and all forms of
including trafficking and sexual rates everywhere violence against and
and other types of exploitation torture of children
Strengthening Child Protection Committees (CPCs).552 2015-2022 ✓ ✓ ✓
Mainstreaming CP interventions in the health sector with 2020 ✓ ✓ ✓
MoHP.553
Strengthening the Child Help Line (CHL) through a digital 2019 ✓ ✓ ✓
switchboard and call registration with a data system that
captures the full CM process.554
“Expanding the Access to Education and Protection for at The execution period started ✓ ✓
Risk Children in Egypt” Programme:555 Supporting the on the 11th of December
Government in operationalizing the Child Law and the 2015 and will end 84 months
provisions of the Constitution related to the protection of after this date (7 years)
children.
Launch of the Third Phase of “Awladna” National Campaign Sept 2020 ran for 6 weeks ✓ ✓
to End Violence Against Children.556
552 IBF International Consulting: Mid-term Evaluation – of the EU funded programme "PAGODA Delegation Agreement for Expanding Access to Education and Protection for at
Risk Children in Egypt, December 2019
553 Ending Violence Against Children: Plan for Action for the National Strategic Framework, Egypt (2020-2030)
554 UNICEF Egypt: Country Office Annual Report, 2019
555 IBF International Consulting: Mid-term Evaluation – of the EU funded programme "PAGODA Delegation Agreement for Expanding Access to Education and Protection for at
Risk Children in Egypt, December 2019
556 UNICEF Egypt press centre: https://www.unicef.org/egypt/press-releases/launch-third-phase-awladna-national-campaign-end-violence-against-children, accessed
11/12/2020
89
SDG 5.2 SDG 16.1 SDG 16.2
Eliminate all forms of violence Significantly reduce End abuse,
Initiative Implementation Period against all women and girls in the all forms of violence exploitation, trafficking
public and private spheres, and related death and all forms of
including trafficking and sexual rates everywhere violence against and
and other types of exploitation torture of children
Awladna – End Violence Against Children (EVAC) Cyber Feb 10-24 2020 ✓ ✓
Bullying Campaign557
9,000 children reached through CM558 2020 ✓ ✓ ✓
67409 caregivers reached through programmes (adapted to 2020
context of COVID-19)559
National Girls’ Empowerment Initiative, Dawwie560 2019-2020 ✓
JORDAN
National (SOP) for child protection and GBV were 2019 ✓ ✓ ✓
launched561
Redevelopment of the Better Parenting Program.562 Ongoing since 1996,
redeveloped in 2019
Supported addition of discipline module the most recent Initiated in 2018 (TBC). ✓ ✓ ✓
Jordan Population and Family Health Survey563
The Family Violence Tracking system (FVTS) was 2019 ✓ ✓ ✓
developed and rolled out.564
b) Supporting MOE in the institutionalization of “Ma’An” 565 2019 ✓
c) Enhancing the capacity of 42,000 parents–through 2019 ✓ ✓ ✓
Makani centres566
d) Reaching 90,000 children with child protection related
awareness and services567
557 UNICEF Egypt (2020). RAM (3) Full Draft Outcome Report
558 UNICEF Egypt (2020). RAM (3) Full Draft Outcome Report
559 UNICEF Egypt (2020). RAM (3) Full Draft Outcome Report
560 UNICEF Egypt (2020). RAM (3) Full Draft Outcome Report
561 UNICEF Jordan (2019). RAM Outcome Reports
562 UNICEF, NCFA: Changing Norms and Behaviors to End Physical Violence Against Children in Jordan, 2019-2021
563 UNICEF, NCFA: Changing Norms and Behaviors to End Physical Violence Against Children in Jordan, 2019-2021
564 UNICEF Jordan: Country Office Annual Report, 2019
565 UNICEF Jordan: Country Office Annual Report, 2019
566 UNICEF Jordan: Country Office Annual Report, 2019
567 UNICEF (2019). RAM Outcome Reports
90
SDG 5.2 SDG 16.1 SDG 16.2
Eliminate all forms of violence Significantly reduce End abuse,
Initiative Implementation Period against all women and girls in the all forms of violence exploitation, trafficking
public and private spheres, and related death and all forms of
including trafficking and sexual rates everywhere violence against and
and other types of exploitation torture of children
Tarbiyah, a behavioural change initiative, was introduced in 2019 ✓
2019 prioritizing all boys’ schools in camps with the highest
rates of violence. 568
Social Media Campaign: Nationwide efforts continued to 2019 ✓ ✓ ✓
address the high levels of violence against children and
women. End violence messages reached over 800,000
people via social media, and online episodes promoting
parenting skills to prevent violence against children reached
355,000 viewers569
The National Violence against Children (VAC) study: 2019 ✓ ✓ ✓
formative research on bullying and Social Norms and
Behavioural Change (SNBC) on VAC, as well as an
investment case for foster care to advocate for family-based
care and to promote de-institutionalization570.
Upgrading JRF’s helpline systems as a result of COVID-19 2020 ✓ ✓ ✓
to support remote service delivery of CP activities 571
Launch of study on driving factors behind school violence 2019 ✓
against children572
40,000 children victims of violence, abuse and exploitation 2019 ✓ ✓ ✓
and women at risk were helped through social welfare
support 573
18,300 children at risk of violence, abuse and exploitation
received a comprehensive package of response services
including case management services (5,390) and focused
psychosocial support interventions (12,900).
Child-friendly policing574 2019 ✓
LEBANON
568 UNICEF Jordan: Country Office Annual Report, 2019
569 UNICEF Jordan: Country Office Annual Report, 2019
570 UNICEF Jordan: Country Office Annual Report, 2019
571 UNICEF (n.d.). JRF’s Helpline
572 UNICEF (2019). End of Year Results Summary Narrative Analysis- Lessons Learned and Innovations
573 UNICEF(2019). End of Year Results Summary Narrative Analysis- Lessons Learned and Innovations
574 UNICEF(2019). End of Year Results Summary Narrative Analysis- Lessons Learned and Innovations
91
SDG 5.2 SDG 16.1 SDG 16.2
Eliminate all forms of violence Significantly reduce End abuse,
Initiative Implementation Period against all women and girls in the all forms of violence exploitation, trafficking
public and private spheres, and related death and all forms of
including trafficking and sexual rates everywhere violence against and
and other types of exploitation torture of children
Qudwa: A new evidence based Social Behavioural Change Oct 2018- June 2019 ✓ ✓ ✓
communication plan aiming at preventing violence against
children and women was developed.575
The EVAC (Ending Violence Against Children) initiative 2019 ✓ ✓ ✓
continued to be rolled out in the Palestinian camps and
gatherings576
An End Violence Against Children (EVAC) campaign was
launched focusing on positive parenting and alternative
discipline methods reaching 4700 parents and children and
over 100 representatives of local NGOs, schools, key
ministries participated in public debate.
Development of 3 strategies on CP and GBV577 2019 ✓ ✓ ✓
575 UNICEF(2019). End of Year Results Summary Narrative Analysis- Lessons Learned and Innovations
576 UNICEF (2019). Lebanon RAM Combined Outcomes Outputs and Edy Year Summary Narratives Report
577 UNICEF (2019). Lebanon RAM Combined Outcomes Outputs and End Year Summary Narratives Report
92
INSPIRE Framework
Name of the Brief Description Implementation Implementation Norms and Safe Parent Income and Response Education
activity- Period (year – and values environments and economic and and life
building year) enforcement of caregiver strengthening support skills
blocks578 laws support services
National Strengthening Child 2015-2022 ✓
plans to end Protection Committees
VAC (CPCs).579
National The National Strategic 2019 ✓
plans to end Framework on EVAC
VAC developed in 2018
complemented by a National
Plan of Action (PoA) in
2019.580
National Development of the National 2018/2019 ✓
plans to end Information Management (TBC)
VAC and System (IMS) for child
Case protection.581
Management
National Mainstreaming CP 2020 ✓
plans to end interventions in the health
VAC sector with MoHP.582
Case
management
National Establishment of Child 2019 ✓
plans to end Protection Units (CPU) in
VAC
578 The “building blocks” are: Ending VAC in schools, Parenting programs, Case management, Child safety online, National plans to end VAC
579 IBF International Consulting: Mid-term Evaluation – of the EU funded programme "PAGODA Delegation Agreement for Expanding Access to Education and Protection for at
Risk Children in Egypt, December 2019
580 IBF International Consulting: Mid-term Evaluation – of the EU funded programme "PAGODA Delegation Agreement for Expanding Access to Education and Protection for at
Risk Children in Egypt, December 2019
581 IBF International Consulting: Mid-term Evaluation – of the EU funded programme "PAGODA Delegation Agreement for Expanding Access to Education and Protection for at
Risk Children in Egypt, December 2019
582 Ending Violence Against Children: Plan for Action for the National Strategic Framework, Egypt (2020-2030)
93
Name of the Brief Description Implementation Implementation Norms and Safe Parent Income and Response Education
activity- Period (year – and values environments and economic and and life
building year) enforcement of caregiver strengthening support skills
blocks578 laws support services
more than half of the CPCs in
16 governorates.583
National Strengthening the Child Help 2019 ✓
plans to end Line (CHL) through a digital
VAC switchboard and call
registration with a data system
Case that captures the full CM
management process. Child Help Line
(CHL) through a digital
switchboard and call
registration with a data system
that captures the full CM
process. An independent IMS
system was put in place to
strengthen monitoring and
analysis584
National “Expanding the Access to The execution ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓
plans to end Education and Protection for period started on
VAC at Risk Children in Egypt” the 11th of
Programme:585 December 2015
Supporting the Government in and will end 84
operationalizing the Child Law months after this
and the provisions of the date (7 years)
Constitution related to the
protection of children.
Case Support to Ministry of Social 2019 ✓
management Solidarity (MoSS) in the
development of its internal CM
system to regulate the
provision of child protection
services and shift towards
child-centric and out-come
based provision.586 587
583 UNICEF Egypt: Country Office Annual Report, 2019
584 UNICEF (2019). Egypt RAM Combined Outcomes Outputs and End Year Summary Narratives Report
585 IBF International Consulting: Mid-term Evaluation – of the EU funded programme "PAGODA Delegation Agreement for Expanding Access to Education and Protection for at
Risk Children in Egypt, December 2019
586 UNICEF Egypt: Country Office Annual Report, 2019
587 IBF International Consulting: Mid-term Evaluation – of the EU funded programme "PAGODA Delegation Agreement for Expanding Access to Education and Protection for at
Risk Children in Egypt, December 2019
94
Name of the Brief Description Implementation Implementation Norms and Safe Parent Income and Response Education
activity- Period (year – and values environments and economic and and life
building year) enforcement of caregiver strengthening support skills
blocks578 laws support services
Parenting Launch of the Third Phase of Sept 2020 ✓ ✓ ✓
programs “Awladna” National Campaign ran for 6
to End Violence Against weeks
Children.588
National Social workforce to support 2019 ✓
plans to end EVAC: Development of an
VAC accreditation scheme for
social workforce and a
capacity-building package for
the accreditation scheme.589
Child Safety Awladna – End Violence Feb 10-24 ✓ ✓ ✓
Online Against Children (EVAC) 2020
Cyber Bullying Campaign590
Case 9,000 children reached 2020 ✓
Management through CM591
National National Plan of Action on 2020 ✓ ✓ ✓
plans to end Ending Violence Against
VAC Children (EVAC) is finalized,
outlining sectors’
responsibilities towards CP
include592:
- Legal amendments
to CP system
- Social workforce
accreditation
scheme
- Comprehensive
model endorsed by
MoETE to address
violence in schools
National Designed a comprehensive 2020 ✓ ✓ ✓
plans to end model endorsed by the
VAC Ministry of Education, defining
stakeholders’
roles/accountabilities to create
588 UNICEF Egypt press centre: https://www.unicef.org/egypt/press-releases/launch-third-phase-awladna-national-campaign-end-violence-against-children, accessed
11/12/2020
589 UNICEF Egypt: Country Office Annual Report, 2019
590 UNICEF Egypt (2020). RAM (3) Full Draft Outcome Report
591 UNICEF Egypt (2020). RAM (3) Full Draft Outcome Report
592 UNICEF Egypt (2020). RAM (3) Full Draft Outcome Report
95
Name of the Brief Description Implementation Implementation Norms and Safe Parent Income and Response Education
activity- Period (year – and values environments and economic and and life
building year) enforcement of caregiver strengthening support skills
blocks578 laws support services
violence-free culture in
schools593
Parenting 67409 caregivers reached 2020 ✓
Programs through programmes
(adapted to context of COVID-
19)594
National National Girls’ Empowerment 2019-2020 ✓ ✓ ✓
plans to end Initiative, Dawwie595
VAC
National NCFA, UNICEF and other Has been in ✓
plans to end partner organizations working progress since at
VAC on developing a least 2014 as per
comprehensive law on Child CRC Committee
Rights, which is essential in Reports (TBC)597.
addressing the issues of
violence against children in
homes and by caregivers.596
National National (SOP) for child 2019 ✓ ✓
Plans to end protection and GBV were
VAC launched598
Parenting Redevelopment of the Better Ongoing since ✓ ✓
programs Parenting Program.599 1996,
redeveloped in
2019
National Supported addition of Initiated in ✓ ✓
Plans to end discipline module the most 2018 (TBC).
VAC recent Jordan Population and
Family Health Survey600
Case The Family Violence Tracking 2019 ✓
management system (FVTS) was
developed and rolled out.601
593 UNICEF Egypt (2020). RAM (3) Full Draft Outcome Report
594 UNICEF Egypt (2020). RAM (3) Full Draft Outcome Report
595 UNICEF Egypt (2020). RAM (3) Full Draft Outcome Report
596 UNICEF, NCFA: Changing Norms and Behaviors to End Physical Violence Against Children in Jordan, 2019-2021
597 Committee on the Rights of the Child (2014)
598 UNICEF (2019). RAM Outcome Reports
599 UNICEF, NCFA: Changing Norms and Behaviors to End Physical Violence Against Children in Jordan, 2019-2021
600 UNICEF, NCFA: Changing Norms and Behaviors to End Physical Violence Against Children in Jordan, 2019-2021
601 UNICEF Jordan: Country Office Annual Report, 2019
96
Name of the Brief Description Implementation Implementation Norms and Safe Parent Income and Response Education
activity- Period (year – and values environments and economic and and life
building year) enforcement of caregiver strengthening support skills
blocks578 laws support services
National a) Supporting the 2019 ✓ ✓
plans to end implementation of the multi-
VAC sectoral national plan for
social norms and behavior
change.602
Ending VAC b) Supporting MOE in the 2019 ✓ ✓
in schools institutionalization of “Ma’An”
603
Ending VAC c) Enhancing the capacity of 2019 ✓ ✓ ✓
in schools 42,000 parents–through
Makani centres604
Parenting d) Reaching 90,000 children
programs with child protection related
awareness and services605
Ending VAC Tarbiyah, a behavioural 2019 ✓ 607 ✓
In schools change initiative, was
introduced in 2019 prioritizing
all boys’ schools in camps with
the highest rates of violence.
606
National A national social norms and 2019 ✓
plans to end behavioural change
VAC committee on child protection
was established to coordinate
activities in the prevention
interventions608
National Social Media Campaign: 2019 ✓ ✓
plans to end Nationwide efforts continued
VAC/ Social to address the high levels of
Media violence against children and
Campaign women. End violence
messages reached over
800,000 people via social
media, and online episodes
promoting parenting skills to
602 UNICEF Jordan: Country Office Annual Report, 2019
603 UNICEF Jordan: Country Office Annual Report, 2019
604 UNICEF Jordan: Country Office Annual Report, 2019
605 UNICEF (2019). RAM Outcome Reports
606 UNICEF Jordan: Country Office Annual Report, 2019
607 In this instance, it was teacher and not caregiver support.
608 UNICEF (2019). RAM Outcome Reports
97
Name of the Brief Description Implementation Implementation Norms and Safe Parent Income and Response Education
activity- Period (year – and values environments and economic and and life
building year) enforcement of caregiver strengthening support skills
blocks578 laws support services
prevent violence against
children reached 355,000
viewers609
National The National Violence against 2019 ✓ ✓
plans to end Children (VAC) study:
VAC/ formative research on bullying
National and Social Norms and
Study Behavioural Change (SNBC)
on VAC, as well as an
investment case for foster
care to advocate for family-
based care and to promote de-
institutionalization610.
National Upgrading JRF’s helpline 2020 ✓ ✓
plans to end systems as a result of COVID-
VAC 19 to support remote service
delivery of CP activities 611
National Expansion of the Child 2019 ✓
plans to end Protection Information
VAC Management System
(CPIMS) to a total of nine
organizations.612
National The Lebanon Multiple Feb 2020 ✓
plans to end Indicator Cluster Survey 2020
VAC was launched.613
Ending VAC Launch of study on driving 2019 ✓ ✓
in in schools factors behind school violence
against children614
Case 40,000 children victims of 2019 ✓ ✓
management violence, abuse and
exploitation and women at risk
609 UNICEF Jordan: Country Office Annual Report, 2019
610 UNICEF Jordan: Country Office Annual Report, 2019
611 UNICEF (n.d.). JRF’s Helpline
612 UNICEF Lebanon: Country Office Annual Report, 2019
613 UNICEF Lebanon press centre: https://www.unicef.org/lebanon/press-releases/global-survey-launched-lebanon-assess-situation-children-and-women, accessed
10/12/2020
614 UNICEF(2019). End of Year Results Summary Narrative Analysis- Lessons Learned and Innovations
98
Name of the Brief Description Implementation Implementation Norms and Safe Parent Income and Response Education
activity- Period (year – and values environments and economic and and life
building year) enforcement of caregiver strengthening support skills
blocks578 laws support services
were helped through social
welfare support 615
18,300 children at risk of
violence, abuse and
exploitation case
management services (5,390)
and focused psychosocial
support interventions
(12,900)616.
National Child-friendly policing617. 2019 ✓ ✓
plans to end
VAC
National Qudwa: A new evidence Oct 2018 - ✓ ✓
plans to end based Social Behavioural June 2019
VAC Change communication plan
aiming at preventing violence
against children and women
was developed.618
National The EVAC (Ending Violence 2019 ✓ ✓ ✓
plans to end Against Children) initiative
VAC and continued to be rolled out in
Parenting the Palestinian camps and
programs gatherings619
An End Violence Against
Children (EVAC) campaign
was launched focusing on
positive parenting and
alternative discipline methods
reaching 4700 parents and
children and over 100
representatives of local
NGOs, schools, key ministries
participated in public debate.
Ending VAC Ministry of Education and 2019 ✓ ✓
in in schools Higher Education launched
the Policy for the Protection of
615 UNICEF(2019). End of Year Results Summary Narrative Analysis- Lessons Learned and Innovations
616 UNICEF (2019). Lebanon RAM Combined Outcomes Outputs and End Year Summary Narratives Report
617 UNICEF(2019). End of Year Results Summary Narrative Analysis- Lessons Learned and Innovations
618 UNICEF(2019). End of Year Results Summary Narrative Analysis- Lessons Learned and Innovations
619 UNICEF (2019). Lebanon RAM Combined Outcomes Outputs and End Year Summary Narratives Report
99
Name of the Brief Description Implementation Implementation Norms and Safe Parent Income and Response Education
activity- Period (year – and values environments and economic and and life
building year) enforcement of caregiver strengthening support skills
blocks578 laws support services
Students in the School
Environment620.
National Development of 3 strategies 2019
plans to end on CP and GBV621
VAC
National Capacity building of state 2019 ✓
plans to end actors and CSOs on CP and
VAC GBV with the objective of
further harmonizing provision
of services and building
capacities of social welfare,
justice, health, and education
professionals to be able to
prevent, mitigate and respond
to child protection concerns
and gender-based
violence622
620 UNICEF (n.d.). Achievements – Mainstreaming Child Protection Public School
621 UNICEF (2019). Lebanon RAM Combined Outcomes Outputs and End Year Summary Narratives Report
622 UNICEF (2019). Lebanon Combined Outcomes Outputs and End Year Summary Narratives Report
100
Annex 15. Initiatives to
Violence Against Children Programme Guidance:
Seven Strategies
Name of Brief Description ToC Implementatio Type of VAC/VBG625 Alignment of UNICEF’s National Initiatives to UNICEF’s Violence Against Children
the Level n Period (year (see 4 types below) Programme Guidance: Seven Strategies
activity- 624 (see – year)
(1) Ensure (2) (3) Build (4) (5) Engage (6) (7)
building 6
high-level Strengthe the Strengthen in Enhance Strengthe
blocks623 levels
engagemen n whole evidenc legislative multisector parent and n public
below)
t systems e base framework al caregiver financing
s approaches support for child
to end VAC protection
Egypt
National Strengthening 4,6 2015-2022 All forms ✓ ✓
plans to end Child Protection
VAC Committees
(CPCs).626
National The National 5,6 2019 All forms ✓ ✓
plans to end Strategic
VAC Framework on
EVAC developed in
2018
complemented by a
National Plan of
Action (PoA) in
2019.627
623 The “building blocks” are: Ending VAC in schools, Parenting programs, Case management, Child safety online, National plans to end VAC
624 The six levels are the following: at the micro Level: (1) Boys, Girls and Adolescents, (2) Parents, Mothers and other caregivers. At the meso level: (3) Society / Communities,
(4) Systems and institutions. At the macro Level: (5) Legal and political frameworks and (6) Coordinated multisectoral national action.
625 The four types of VAC are: (1) Sexual violence, (2) Physical violence, (3) Psychological violence, (4) Neglect and (5) Online/Cyber Violence
626 IBF International Consulting: Mid-term Evaluation – of the EU funded programme "PAGODA Delegation Agreement for Expanding Access to Education and Protection for at
Risk Children in Egypt, December 2019
627 IBF International Consulting: Mid-term Evaluation – of the EU funded programme "PAGODA Delegation Agreement for Expanding Access to Education and Protection for at
Risk Children in Egypt, December 2019
101
Name of Brief Description ToC Implementatio Type of VAC/VBG625 Alignment of UNICEF’s National Initiatives to UNICEF’s Violence Against Children
the Level n Period (year (see 4 types below) Programme Guidance: Seven Strategies
activity- 624 (see – year)
(1) Ensure (2) (3) Build (4) (5) Engage (6) (7)
building 6
high-level Strengthe the Strengthen in Enhance Strengthe
blocks623 levels
engagemen n whole evidenc legislative multisector parent and n public
below)
t systems e base framework al caregiver financing
s approaches support for child
to end VAC protection
National Development of the 4,6 2018/2019 All forms violence ✓ ✓ ✓
plans to end National (TBC) (CP)
VAC and Information
Case Management
Manageme System (IMS) for
nt child protection.628
National Mainstreaming CP 4,6 2020 All forms violence ✓ ✓
plans to end interventions in the (CP)
VAC health sector with
MoHP.629
Case
manageme
nt
National Establishment of 4 2019 All forms violence ✓
plans to end Child Protection (CP)
VAC Units (CPU) in
more than half of
the CPCs in 16
governorates.630
National Strengthening the 4 2019 All forms violence ✓ ✓
plans to end Child Help Line (CP)
VAC (CHL) through a
digital switchboard
Case and call registration
manageme with a data system
nt that captures the
full CM process. An
independent IMS
system was put in
place to strengthen
monitoring and
analysis631
628 IBF International Consulting: Mid-term Evaluation – of the EU funded programme "PAGODA Delegation Agreement for Expanding Access to Education and Protection for at
Risk Children in Egypt, December 2019
629 Ending Violence Against Children: Plan for Action for the National Strategic Framework, Egypt (2020-2030)
630 UNICEF Egypt: Country Office Annual Report, 2019
631 UNICEF (2019). Egypt RAM Combined Outcomes Outputs and End Year Summary Narratives Report
102
Name of Brief Description ToC Implementatio Type of VAC/VBG625 Alignment of UNICEF’s National Initiatives to UNICEF’s Violence Against Children
the Level n Period (year (see 4 types below) Programme Guidance: Seven Strategies
activity- 624 (see – year)
(1) Ensure (2) (3) Build (4) (5) Engage (6) (7)
building 6
high-level Strengthe the Strengthen in Enhance Strengthe
blocks623 levels
engagemen n whole evidenc legislative multisector parent and n public
below)
t systems e base framework al caregiver financing
s approaches support for child
to end VAC protection
National “Expanding the 5 The execution All forms violence ✓
plans to end Access to period started (CP)
VAC Education and on the 11th of
Protection for at December
Risk Children in 2015 and will
Egypt” end 84 months
Programme:632 after this date
Supporting the (7 years)
Government in
operationalizing the
Child Law and the
provisions of the
Constitution related
to the protection of
children.
Case Support to Ministry 4 2019 All forms violence ✓
manageme of Social Solidarity (CP)
nt (MoSS) in the
development of its
internal CM system
to regulate the
provision of child
protection services
and shift towards
child-centric and
out-come based
provision.633 634
Parenting Launch of the Third 2 Sept 2020 ran Physical violence ✓ ✓
programs Phase of “Awladna” for 6 weeks Psychological/emotion
National Campaign al violence
632 IBF International Consulting: Mid-term Evaluation – of the EU funded programme "PAGODA Delegation Agreement for Expanding Access to Education and Protection for at
Risk Children in Egypt, December 2019
633 UNICEF Egypt: Country Office Annual Report, 2019
634 IBF International Consulting: Mid-term Evaluation – of the EU funded programme "PAGODA Delegation Agreement for Expanding Access to Education and Protection for at
Risk Children in Egypt, December 2019
103
Name of Brief Description ToC Implementatio Type of VAC/VBG625 Alignment of UNICEF’s National Initiatives to UNICEF’s Violence Against Children
the Level n Period (year (see 4 types below) Programme Guidance: Seven Strategies
activity- 624 (see – year)
(1) Ensure (2) (3) Build (4) (5) Engage (6) (7)
building 6
high-level Strengthe the Strengthen in Enhance Strengthe
blocks623 levels
engagemen n whole evidenc legislative multisector parent and n public
below)
t systems e base framework al caregiver financing
s approaches support for child
to end VAC protection
to End Violence
Against Children.635
National Sl workforce to 4 2019 All forms ✓
plans to end support EVAC:
VAC Developociament
of an accreditation
scheme for social
workforce and a
capacity-building
package for the
accreditation
scheme.636
Child Safety Awladna – 5 Feb 10-24 Cyber bullying ✓ ✓
Online End Violence 2020
Against Children
(EVAC) Cyber
Bullying
Campaign637
Case 9,000 children 1 2020 All forms ✓
Manageme reached through
nt CM638
National National Plan of 4,5,6 2020 All forms ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓
plans to end Action on Ending
VAC Violence Against
Children (EVAC) is
finalized, outlining
sectors’
responsibilities
towards CP
include639:
635 UNICEF Egypt press centre: https://www.unicef.org/egypt/press-releases/launch-third-phase-awladna-national-campaign-end-violence-against-children, accessed
11/12/2020
636 UNICEF Egypt: Country Office Annual Report, 2019
637 UNICEF Egypt (2020). RAM (3) Full Draft Outcome Report
638 UNICEF Egypt (2020). RAM (3) Full Draft Outcome Report
639 UNICEF Egypt (2020). RAM (3) Full Draft Outcome Report
104
Name of Brief Description ToC Implementatio Type of VAC/VBG625 Alignment of UNICEF’s National Initiatives to UNICEF’s Violence Against Children
the Level n Period (year (see 4 types below) Programme Guidance: Seven Strategies
activity- 624 (see – year)
(1) Ensure (2) (3) Build (4) (5) Engage (6) (7)
building 6
high-level Strengthe the Strengthen in Enhance Strengthe
blocks623 levels
engagemen n whole evidenc legislative multisector parent and n public
below)
t systems e base framework al caregiver financing
s approaches support for child
to end VAC protection
- Legal
amendments
to CP system
- Social
workforce
accreditation
scheme
- Comprehensiv
e model
endorsed by
MoETE to
address
violence in
schools
National Designed a 3,4 2020 All forms ✓
plans to end comprehensive
VAC model endorsed by
the Ministry of
Education, defining
stakeholders’
roles/accountabiliti
es to create
violence-free
culture in
schools640
Parenting 67409 caregivers 2 2020 All forms ✓
Programs reached through
programmes
(adapted to context
of COVID-19)641
National National Girls’ 1 2019-2020 All forms ✓
plans to end Empowerment
VAC Initiative,
Dawwie642
640 UNICEF Egypt (2020). RAM (3) Full Draft Outcome Report
641 UNICEF Egypt (2020). RAM (3) Full Draft Outcome Report
642 UNICEF Egypt (2020). RAM (3) Full Draft Outcome Report
105
Name of Brief Description ToC Implementatio Type of VAC/VBG625 Alignment of UNICEF’s National Initiatives to UNICEF’s Violence Against Children
the Level n Period (year (see 4 types below) Programme Guidance: Seven Strategies
activity- 624 (see – year)
(1) Ensure (2) (3) Build (4) (5) Engage (6) (7)
building 6
high-level Strengthe the Strengthen in Enhance Strengthe
blocks623 levels
engagemen n whole evidenc legislative multisector parent and n public
below)
t systems e base framework al caregiver financing
s approaches support for child
to end VAC protection
Jordan
National NCFA, UNICEF 5 Has been in Mainly physical ✓ ✓ 645
plans to end and other partner progress since violence
VAC organizations at least 2014
working on as per CRC
developing a Committee
comprehensive law Reports
on Child Rights, (TBC)644.
which is essential
in addressing the
issues of violence
against children in
homes and by
caregivers.643
National National (SOP) for 6 2019 All forms ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓
Plans to child protection and
end VAC GBV were
launched646
Parenting Redevelopment of 2 Ongoing since All forms of violence ✓ ✓
programs the Better 1996,
Parenting redeveloped in
Program.647 2019
National Supported addition 5 Initiated in Physical violence ✓
Plans to of discipline 2018 (TBC).
end VAC module the most
recent Jordan
Population and
Family Health
Survey648
643 UNICEF, NCFA: Changing Norms and Behaviors to End Physical Violence Against Children in Jordan, 2019-2021
644 Committee on the Rights of the Child (2014)
645 UNICEF strategically commissioned a costing study and investment case to advocate for the adoption of the Child Rights Law and Juvenile Law; as stated in UNICEF
Jordan (2019). RAM Outcome Report
646 UNICEF Jordan (2019). RAM Outcome Reports
647 UNICEF, NCFA: Changing Norms and Behaviors to End Physical Violence Against Children in Jordan, 2019-2021
648 UNICEF, NCFA: Changing Norms and Behaviors to End Physical Violence Against Children in Jordan, 2019-2021
106
Name of Brief Description ToC Implementatio Type of VAC/VBG625 Alignment of UNICEF’s National Initiatives to UNICEF’s Violence Against Children
the Level n Period (year (see 4 types below) Programme Guidance: Seven Strategies
activity- 624 (see – year)
(1) Ensure (2) (3) Build (4) (5) Engage (6) (7)
building 6
high-level Strengthe the Strengthen in Enhance Strengthe
blocks623 levels
engagemen n whole evidenc legislative multisector parent and n public
below)
t systems e base framework al caregiver financing
s approaches support for child
to end VAC protection
Case The Family 4,6 2019 VAC and Domestic ✓ ✓
manageme Violence Tracking violence
nt system (FVTS) was
developed and
rolled out.649
National a) Supporting the 6 2019 Physical violence ✓ ✓
plans to end implementation of
VAC the multi-sectoral
national plan for
social norms and
behavior change.650
Ending VAC b) Supporting 1,2,4 2019 Physical violence ✓
in schools MOE in the
institutionalization
of “Ma’An” 651
Ending VAC c) Enhancing the 1,2 2019 Physical violence ✓
in schools capacity of 42,000
parents–through
Parenting Makani centres652
programs d) Reaching 90,000
children with child
protection related
awareness and
services653
Ending VAC Tarbiyah, a 1,4 2019 Physical violence ✓ ✓ 655
In schools behavioural change
initiative, was
introduced in 2019
prioritizing all boys’
schools in camps
with the highest
649 UNICEF Jordan: Country Office Annual Report, 2019
650 UNICEF Jordan: Country Office Annual Report, 2019
651 UNICEF Jordan: Country Office Annual Report, 2019
652 UNICEF Jordan: Country Office Annual Report, 2019
653 UNICEF (2019). RAM Outcome Reports
655 In this instance, it was teacher and not caregiver support
107
Name of Brief Description ToC Implementatio Type of VAC/VBG625 Alignment of UNICEF’s National Initiatives to UNICEF’s Violence Against Children
the Level n Period (year (see 4 types below) Programme Guidance: Seven Strategies
activity- 624 (see – year)
(1) Ensure (2) (3) Build (4) (5) Engage (6) (7)
building 6
high-level Strengthe the Strengthen in Enhance Strengthe
blocks623 levels
engagemen n whole evidenc legislative multisector parent and n public
below)
t systems e base framework al caregiver financing
s approaches support for child
to end VAC protection
rates of violence.
654
National A national social 2,3,4 2019 All forms ✓ ✓ ✓
plans to end norms and
VAC behavioural change
committee on child
protection was
established to
coordinate
activities in the
prevention
interventions656
National Social Media 2,3 2019 All forms ✓
plans to end Campaign:
VAC/ Social Nationwide efforts
Media continued to
Campaign address the high
levels of violence
against children
and women. End
violence messages
reached over
800,000 people via
social media, and
online episodes
promoting
parenting skills to
prevent violence
against children
reached 355,000
viewers657
National The National 1,2,3,4 2019 All forms ✓
plans to end Violence against
VAC/ Children (VAC)
study: formative
654 UNICEF Jordan: Country Office Annual Report, 2019
656 UNICEF (2019). RAM Outcome Reports
657 UNICEF Jordan: Country Office Annual Report, 2019
108
Name of Brief Description ToC Implementatio Type of VAC/VBG625 Alignment of UNICEF’s National Initiatives to UNICEF’s Violence Against Children
the Level n Period (year (see 4 types below) Programme Guidance: Seven Strategies
activity- 624 (see – year)
(1) Ensure (2) (3) Build (4) (5) Engage (6) (7)
building 6
high-level Strengthe the Strengthen in Enhance Strengthe
blocks623 levels
engagemen n whole evidenc legislative multisector parent and n public
below)
t systems e base framework al caregiver financing
s approaches support for child
to end VAC protection
National research on
Study bullying and Social
Norms and
Behavioural
Change (SNBC) on
VAC, as well as an
investment case for
foster care to
advocate for family-
based care and to
promote de-
institutionalization
658.
National Upgrading JRF’s 1,2,3 2020 All forms ✓ ✓ ✓
plans to end helpline systems as
VAC a result of COVID-
19 to support
remote service
delivery of CP
activities 659
Lebanon
National Expansion of the 4 2019 All forms ✓
plans to end Child Protection
VAC Information
Management
System (CPIMS) to
a total of nine
organizations.660
National The Lebanon 6 Feb 2020 All forms (Child ✓
plans to end Multiple Indicator Protection)
VAC Cluster Survey
658 UNICEF Jordan: Country Office Annual Report, 2019
659 UNICEF (n.d.). JRF’s Helpline
660 UNICEF Lebanon: Country Office Annual Report, 2019
109
Name of Brief Description ToC Implementatio Type of VAC/VBG625 Alignment of UNICEF’s National Initiatives to UNICEF’s Violence Against Children
the Level n Period (year (see 4 types below) Programme Guidance: Seven Strategies
activity- 624 (see – year)
(1) Ensure (2) (3) Build (4) (5) Engage (6) (7)
building 6
high-level Strengthe the Strengthen in Enhance Strengthe
blocks623 levels
engagemen n whole evidenc legislative multisector parent and n public
below)
t systems e base framework al caregiver financing
s approaches support for child
to end VAC protection
2020 was
launched.661
Ending VAC Launch of study on 1,3 2019 Sexual, physical, ✓ ✓
IN in driving factors psychological and
schools behind school bullying
violence against
children662
Case 40,000 children 1,2,3 2019 All forms ✓ ✓ ✓
manageme victims of violence,
nt abuse and
exploitation and
women at risk were
helped through
social welfare
support 663
18,300 children at
risk of violence,
abuse and
exploitation
received a
comprehensive
package of
response services
including case
management
services (5,390)
and focused
psychosocial
support
interventions
(12,900).
661 UNICEF Lebanon press centre: https://www.unicef.org/lebanon/press-releases/global-survey-launched-lebanon-assess-situation-children-and-women, accessed
10/12/2020
662 UNICEF(2019). End of Year Results Summary Narrative Analysis- Lessons Learned and Innovations
663 UNICEF(2019). End of Year Results Summary Narrative Analysis- Lessons Learned and Innovations
110
Name of Brief Description ToC Implementatio Type of VAC/VBG625 Alignment of UNICEF’s National Initiatives to UNICEF’s Violence Against Children
the Level n Period (year (see 4 types below) Programme Guidance: Seven Strategies
activity- 624 (see – year)
(1) Ensure (2) (3) Build (4) (5) Engage (6) (7)
building 6
high-level Strengthe the Strengthen in Enhance Strengthe
blocks623 levels
engagemen n whole evidenc legislative multisector parent and n public
below)
t systems e base framework al caregiver financing
s approaches support for child
to end VAC protection
National Child-friendly 3,4 2019 All forms ✓ ✓
plans to end policing664.
VAC
National Qudwa: A new 1 (?), Oct 2018- June All forms ✓ ✓ ✓
plans to end evidence based 2,3 2019
VAC Social Behavioural
Change
communication
plan aiming at
preventing violence
against children
and women was
developed.665
National The EVAC (Ending 1,2,3, 2019 All types ✓ ✓ ✓
plans to end Violence Against
VAC and Children) initiative
Parenting continued to be
programs rolled out in the
Palestinian camps
and gatherings666
An End Violence
Against Children
(EVAC) campaign
was launched
focusing on
positive parenting
and alternative
discipline methods
reaching 4700
parents and
children and over
100
representatives of
local NGOs,
664 UNICEF(2019). End of Year Results Summary Narrative Analysis- Lessons Learned and Innovations
665 UNICEF(2019). End of Year Results Summary Narrative Analysis- Lessons Learned and Innovations
666 UNICEF (2019). Lebanon RAM Combined Outcomes Outputs and Edy Year Summary Narratives Report
111
Name of Brief Description ToC Implementatio Type of VAC/VBG625 Alignment of UNICEF’s National Initiatives to UNICEF’s Violence Against Children
the Level n Period (year (see 4 types below) Programme Guidance: Seven Strategies
activity- 624 (see – year)
(1) Ensure (2) (3) Build (4) (5) Engage (6) (7)
building 6
high-level Strengthe the Strengthen in Enhance Strengthe
blocks623 levels
engagemen n whole evidenc legislative multisector parent and n public
below)
t systems e base framework al caregiver financing
s approaches support for child
to end VAC protection
schools, key
ministries
participated in
public debate.
Ending VAC Ministry of 1,3 2019 ✓
IN in Education and
schools Higher Education
launched the Policy
for the Protection of
Students in the
School
Environment667.
National Development of 3 5 2019 ✓
plans to end strategies on CP
VAC and GBV668
National Capacity building of 4 2019 All forms ✓ ✓
plans to end state actors and
VAC CSOs on CP and
GBV with the
objective of further
harmonizing
provision of
services and
building capacities
of social welfare,
justice, health, and
education
professionals to be
able to prevent,
mitigate and
respond to child
protection concerns
and gender-based
violence669
667 UNICEF (n.d.). Achievements – Mainstreaming Child Protection Public School
668 UNICEF (2019). Lebanon RAM Combined Outcomes Outputs and End Year Summary Narratives Report
669 UNICEF (2019). Lebanon Combined Outcomes Outputs and End Year Summary Narratives Report.
112
Annex 16: Global School-Based Student Health Survey
Lebanon
Egypt Jordan
(Students aged 13-
(Students aged 13-15)670 (Students aged 13-15)671
17)672
Girls Boys Total Girls Boys Total Females Males Total
PROTECTIVE FACTORS
Percentage of students who reported that their parents or
guardians most of the time or always understood their 33.8 48.1
32.5 35.5 n/a n/a n/a 46.3 47.3
problems and worries during the 30 days before the
survey
Percentage of students who reported that most of the
students in their school were never or rarely kind and n/a n/a n/a 29.8 43.1 36.1 n/a n/a n/a
helpful during the past 30 days
Percentage of students who reported that their parents or
guardians most of the time or always really knew what
52.4 38.6 45.7 35.0 34.9 34.9 54.7 40.2 48.1
they were doing with their free time during the 30 days
before the survey
UNINTENTIONAL INJURIES AND VIOLENCE
Percentage of students who were physically attacked one
n/a n/a n/a 26.3 51.1 38.2 n/a n/a n/a
or more times during the past 12 months
Percentage of students who were in a physical fight one 45.1 24.0
28.9 62.0 29.9 65.1 46.5 55.2 38.7
or more times during the 12 months before the survey
Percentage of students who were seriously injured one or
20.5 46.5 32.9 34.5 53.4 43.5 32.0 43.7 37.5
more times during the 12 months before the survey
Percentage of students who were bullied on one or more
69.7 70.1 70.0 37.1 45.6 41.1 12.9 21.0 16.6
days during the 30 days before the survey
670 WHO (2011). Global School-based Student Health Survey Egypt 2011 Fact Sheet
671 WHO (2007). Global School-based Student Health Survey Jordan 2007 Fact Sheet
672 WHO (2017). Global School-based Student Health Survey Lebanon 2017 Fact Sheet
113
Global School-based Student Health Survey Lebanon, private vs public schools)
Private Schools Public Schools Lebanon
(Students aged 13-17)673 (Students aged 13-17)674 (Students aged 13-
17)675
Girls Boys Total Girls Boys Total Females Males Total
PROTECTIVE FACTORS
Percentage of students who reported that their parents or 52.8 47.8 48.9 45.5 43.5 44.6 48.1 46.3 47.3
guardians most of the time or always understood their problems
and worries during the 30 days before the survey
Percentage of students who reported that most of the students n/a n/a n/a
in their school were never or rarely kind and helpful during the
past 30 days
Percentage of students who reported that their parents or 57.3 41.3 49.5 51.0 38.0 45.8 54.7 40.2 48.1
guardians most of the time or always really knew what they
were doing with their free time during the 30 days before the
survey
UNINTENTIONAL INJURIES AND VIOLENCE
Percentage of students who were physically attacked one or n/a n/a n/a
more times during the past 12 months
Percentage of students who were in a physical fight one or more 26.1 56.3 41.4 20.9 52.8 33.9 24.0 55.2 38.7
times during the 12 months before the survey
Percentage of students who were seriously injured one or more 34.6 46.3 40.6 28.4 38.1 32.3 32.0 43.7 37.5
times during the 12 months before the survey
Percentage of students who were bullied on one or more days 14.5 21.9 18.3 10.5 18.9 13.9 12.9 21.0 16.6
during the 30 days before the survey
673 WHO (2017). Global School-based Student Health Survey Lebanon 2017 Fact Sheet
674 WHO (2017). Global School-based Student Health Survey Lebanon 2017 Fact Sheet
675 WHO (2017). Global School-based Student Health Survey Lebanon 2017 Fact Sheet
114
Annex 17. UNICEF Egypt External Communications EVAC
Campaigns 2020
Engagement
Campaign Duration Reach Engagement Views Description Budget
rate
UNICEF Egypt promoted the campaign
through a Twitter Masthead. This function
$27,000
locked down a space for the hashtag on
Including video
Egypt trends for 24 hours, leading the
productions,
Safer Internet 9.6M trending section. It also screened the first
14 days 587K 7% 2.1M content creation
Day 2020 video as one of the first 3 videos
and promotion
appearing on the feed when users open
through LTAs.
Twitter. A number of previous tweets
related to bullying were also promoted
against the promoted trend.
Raise awareness amongst children,
parents and caregivers about the need to
protect children and young people from
Amani Dot 23M new threats they may face in the online
14 days 1M 4% 5.17M $15,000
Com 2020 world, including, exposure to harmful
content, and abuse. In addition to,
providing means to report these crimes,
which is the Child Helpline 16000.
58K
18.8K views on arsenal of anti-bullying new features at
Instagram User UNICEF their disposal. These new features help
Campaign generated Instagram people protect their accounts from bullies
against content channel and unwanted contact, encourage positive
4 weeks 2.1M 1% $14,000
online (UGC): 4.2K and 1.8M interactions, and empower people to
harassment users used views on stand up for themselves. The campaign
and bullying the filter Actress featured a public appearance of Goodwill
Mona Ambassador Mona Zaki and her daughter
Lilly Ahmed Helmy in a video, in which
115
instagram they speak about their experience with
account cyberbullying and explain how the new
features on Instagram can better protect
its users. More than 20 public figures,
celebrities and social media influencers
along with digital platforms like The
Glocal.
The campaign focused on encouraging to
recognize the negative consequences of
violent discipline and corporal
punishment, as well as to raise awareness
on the fact that exposure to violence
Third phase
negatively affects the development of
$36,204
children and transmits in the community
National 4% average (communication
and across generations. The campaign
campaign on (8% for some budget)
6 weeks 84M 3M carried the hashtag #CalmNotHarm to
positive specific $346,000
reinforce positive discipline and positive
parenting content) (programme
child adult relationships. Three TV Public
(adolescents) budget)
Service Announcements (PSAs) were out
2019
on broadcast and social media. Three
radio PSAs were out for airing. Billboards
in high traffic areas across Egypt and on
ground activations in stores, and sports
clubs.
To raise the awareness amongst children,
parents and caregivers about the need to
Results not protect children and young people from
Amani Dot available yet. new threats they may face in the online
14 Days $47,000
Com 2021 Campaign world, including, exposure to harmful
ongoing. content, and abuse. In addition to,
providing means to report these crimes,
which is the Child Helpline 16000.
UNICEF Egypt produced a TikTok $ 58,000
Results not
campaign to reach out to Generation Z, including (jingle,
available yet.
with the use of TikTok content creators music video
Tiktok 2020 2 weeks Pending
and influencers to boost community production,
reports from
engagement. Along with the jingle and additional videos,
TikTok
music video production. post promotion)
116
Annex 18. Select RAM Indicators 2019-2020
EGYPT
2019 2020
Value Status Rating Value Status Rating
Output 4500/A0/05/883/003 3.3: CHILD PROTECTION SYSTEM STRENGTHENING
Output Output 3.3: Protection
Statement
National Plan of
Action on Ending
VAC national Violence Against
VAC national
plan of action Children in Egypt is
plan of action
Country has a national, multi-sectoral finalized finalized
finalized
plan(s) or strategy(ies) for coordinated including all A time-bound,
Standard including all VAC POA
action to prevent and respond to violence provisions per costed plan with
Indicators provisions per is in place
against children that meets key criteria for the global clear targets and a
the global
quality, according to status of plan. guideline comprehensive M&E
guideline
defintions framework will be
definitions
developed through a
consultative process
by Q1 of 2021
National Plan of
Action on Ending
Violence Against
EVAC National Children in Egypt is
Plan of Action is finalized
supplemented A time-bound,
with costing and costed plan with
a monitoring clear targets and a
framework comprehensive M&E
framework will be
developed through a
consultative process
by Q1 of 2021
117
EVAC National National Plan of
Plan of Action is Action on Ending
supplemented Violence Against
with costing and Children in Egypt is
a monitoring finalized
framework
Framework is
final- System of
licensing and
accreditation
System is in late System is in late
and data
Degree of Development of the Quality Framework development development
system and
Assurance System for Social Work is final including early including early roll-
supervision are
roll-out out
in the early
drafting stages
including
piloting
Number of research analysis, advocacy
tools and policy briefs to inform improved
Additional coordination, planning, monitoring and
4 11 7 8
Indicators financing in child protection prevention and
response produced, with support from
UNICEF
Percentage of child protection cases
managed in accordance with national
quality criteria (standard operating 30 ?? 30 Data unavailable
procedures/SOP), with support from
UNICEF
Output. 4500/A0/05/883/004 3.4: EVAC AND QUALITY CHILD PROTECTION INTERVENTIONS
Output Statement 3.4: Protection Service Access & Quality: Service providers in targeted locations have strengthened capacities to prevent
violence against children and deliver quality child protection interventions to children at risk, including those in contact with law, on the move
and survivors of violence.
Case
An interim IMS at NCCM and
Quality of inter-operable information management System
system is MoSS is incepted
Standard management system supports and tracks PRIMERO including case
in place and will undergo
Indicator case management, incident monitoring, capacity management is
before testing in Q1 of
and programme monitoring development in place
PRIMERO 2021.
plan is finalised
118
and is
implemented introduced
and SOP for
standard data
management
developed-
Programme
monitoring
revised
System IMS at NCCM and
including case MoSS is being
management is tested
in place.
Percentage of UNICEF-targeted girls and
29,597
boys in humanitarian situations provided
100% of 80,364 Male: 14,076
with psychosocial support, including 100% of 70,000
50,000 Female: 15,521
access to child friendly spaces with
intersectoral programming interventions
Core prevention and response
interventions addressing violence against
children through UNICEF-supported
programmes (adapted to context of
COVID-19): (a) number of mothers, fathers
88,354
and caregivers reached through parenting
(a) 41,345 parents
programmes; and (b) number of girls and
n/a n/a 36,000 and caregivers
boys who have experienced violence
(b) 47,009 children
reached by health, social work or
justice/law enforcement services Number
of children who have experienced violence
reached by health, social work and/or law
enforcement/justice (adapted for delivery
during the pandemic) [COVID]
Number of children cases reached with
child management (including children on
Additional 28,731 10,321
the move), disaggregated by gender, age, 35,000 10,000
Indicators
nationality, location (rural/urban), residence
(governorate), type of intervention
Output 4500/A0/05/883/005 3.5: POSITIVE PARENTING AND FGM
119
Output Statement Output 3.5: Social & Behavioral Change Social perceptions and attitudes towards violence against children and harmful
gender-based practices are improved in targeted areas
Number of women, men, girls and boys
Standard targeted by social norm change
15,000 30,000 30,000 30,000
Indicators interventions or other GBV-related
information or awareness intervention
Budgeting for C4D Strategies meets quality
75% 60% 75% 75%
standards
UNICEF-supported Government-led
coordination mechanism/s for C4D meet/s 25% 50% 50% 50%
quality standards
% of attained level of knowledge of RL who
Additional
received TOT on Elimination of Violence 70% 15% n/a 72
Indicators
against children
% of attained level of knowledge of
community members who received
70% 60% 70% 15%
awareness sessions on elimination of
violence against children conducted by RL
Number of people engaging with Dawwie
25,000 1,000 500,000 200,000
activities (off line and online)
% of engagement by platform 5% 3% 6% 6%
Reach on social media platforms 25 5 10,000,000 n/a
% of overall engagement on digital
10,000 4,526 6% 6%
platforms
JORDAN
2019 2020
Value Status Rating Value Status Rating
Output 2340/A0/05/883/001 3.1 LEGISLATIVE AND ADMINISTRATIVE FRAMEWORKS, ACCOUNTABILITY
Output Statement. Legislative and administrative frameworks, accountability and national capacity are strengthened to plan, budget and prevent and
respond to violence, abuse, exploitation and neglect.
Standard Indicators - No approved indicator ratings
120
2019 2020
Value Status Rating Value Status Rating
Additional # of laws, by-laws, and guidelines supporting 1 law, 3 bi- 2 Laws 2 bi-laws Approved
Indicators child rights adopted by the Government of laws Childhood
Jordan law
Amended
Juveniles Law
CEDAW & CRC periodic reports submitted on one 1 CRC report Inputs drafted The sixth periodic
time additional submitted report of the CRC
report was duly
submitted
addressing the
main 2014
concluding
observations
Output. 2340/A0/05/883/002 3.2 CHILDREN AND WOMEN AT RISK OF VIOLENCE AND EXPLOITATION HAVE IMPROVED ACCESS
Output Statement. Children and women at risk of violence and exploitation have improved access to an integrated package of quality child protection
and gender-based violence prevention and response services.
Standard # of women and children in humanitarian n/a n/a n/a 15,000 3,065
Indicators situations who received Gender-Based
Violence (GBV) response services through
UNICEF-supported programmes
# of girls and boys who are receiving n/a n/a n/a 7,000 3,955
specialized child protection services(68966)
# of women, girls, and boys benefiting from 15,000 13,778 15,000 6,653
quality case management services for
violence, gender-based violence, or other
child protection issues
Child Protection system has both preventive No No Yes Approved
and responsive services available that are
fully aligned and complementary
# of additional children accessing early 1,000 250 3,000 88
developmental screening and intervention
services
# girls and boys participating in structured, n/a n/a n/a 95,000 106987
sustained child protection or psychosocial
support programmes
121
2019 2020
Value Status Rating Value Status Rating
# girls and boys who are receiving specialized
child protection services
# women and men participating in PSS or n/a n/a n/a 35,000 31,700
parenting education programmes
# women and men trained on child protection n/a n/a n/a 2,500 1,645
Output. 2340/A0/05/883/003 3.3 CHILDREN, FAMILIES AND COMMUNITIES HAVE INCREASED CAPACITIES
Output Statement. Children, families and communities have increased capacities to promote practices to protect themselves and reduce violence.
Standard Indicators - No approved indicator ratings
Additional Proportion of targeted parents with improved 75% 96% 75% 98.5%
Indicators knowledge on positive parenting practices
and non-violence as a result of better
parenting training
# of additional targeted parents/primary 21,900 48,895 19,280 31,700
caregivers reached by programmes
addressing child-rearing practices
% physical and verbal violence incidences at Physical Physical Physical 0
targeted schools violence: violence: 8%, violence: 9%,
10%, verbal verbal verbal
violence: violence: 15% violence: 14%
15%
# of additional people reached through the 500,000 730,000 1,500,000 5,000,000
END of violence programme
Output:2340/A0/05/883/004 3.4 TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE - CHILD PROTECTION No indicators monitored
Output.2340/A0/05/883/005 COVID RESPONSE CP
Output Statement. COVID response CP
Standard Indicators - No approved indicator ratings
Additional # of vulnerable women, girls, and boys n/a n/a 1,500 2,247
Indicators benefiting from quality prevention and
response to violence, gender-based violence,
or other child protection services (remotely) to
mitigate the negative impact of COVID-19
Core prevention and response interventions n/a n/a 60,000 98,185
addressing violence against children through
UNICEF-supported programmes (adapted to
context of COVID-19): (a) number of mothers,
122
2019 2020
Value Status Rating Value Status Rating
fathers and caregivers reached through
parenting programmes; and (b) number of
Number of children, parents and primary n/a n/a 35,000 107,311
caregivers provided with community based
mental health and psychosocial support
Number of UNICEF personnel and partners n/a n/a 450 372
that have completed training on GBV risk
mitigation and referrals for survivors
Number of children and adults that have n/a n/a 130,000 114,936
access to a safe and accessible channel to
report sexual exploitation and abuse
LEBANON
2019 2020
Value Status Rating Value Status Rating
Output. 2490/A0/07/203/001 3.1 STRENGTHENED POLITICAL COMMITMENT, ACCOUNTABILITY AND NATIONAL CAPACITY
Output Statement. 3.1 Appropriate technical expertise and administrative support are provided to the Child Protection section to enable delivery
of the programme.
Standard Indicators - No approved indicator ratings
Existence of policies, strategies for child
Additional
protection (including Justice) and gender-based 4 3 4 1
Indicators
violence in line with international standards
% of interventions in new National Strategic 8/44 planned
Plan for Child Protection and Gender-Based 30% interventions 30% 23
Violence implemented ongoing (18%)
no - Preparatory
work, including
definition of
% of MOSA budget allocated towards
Budget terms of TBD based on
appropriate child protection and gender-based 0
analysis reference, and budget analysis
violence prevention and response interventions
negotiations
were undertaken
during the
123
reporting period
but the analysis
has not yet been
undertaken -
planned in 2020
Output. 2490/A0/07/203/002 3.2 PREVENTION & RESPONSE SERVICES
Output Statement. 3.2 Boys, girls and women at risk or survivors of violence have access to an integrated package of quality prevention and
response services in most disadvantaged localities in Lebanon
UNICEF-targeted children in humanitarian
Standard
situations benefitting from psychosocial 10,000 11,000 6758
Indicators
support
Number of girls and women accessing safe
27,000 0 21,000 19316
spaces, disaggregated by age and sex
Additional % of children (boys and girls) who report an
80% 79% 70% 0
Indicators increase in their psychosocial wellbeing
# of boys and girls assisted through CP case
4,400 5,389 5,000 5,077
management and specialized services
% girls and women accessing GBV services
70% 91% 80% 100%
who report feeling empowered
# women and girls accessing mobile and static
27,000 22,912 21,000 19,316
safe spaces
% of GBV case management agencies reporting
sufficient capacities to support survivors 85% 0 90% 0
seeking services
# of institutional actors trained who
600 141 360 672
demonstrate increased knowledge on SGBV
# of girls and boys receiving
specialized/focused PSS (RAM: # UNICEF-
targeted boys and girls in humanitarian 10,000 12,923 11,000 6,758
situations benefiting from Psychosocial
support)
# of partners and government staff trained and
using the National Child Protection Standard
Operating Procedures (SOP) and Case 960 719 800 596
Management Tools (including CPIMS) for child
protection
# of service providers, professionals, frontline 530 Work in
Up to 530 judges 0
workers and other actors working with children judges progress,
124
in contact with the law who have access to an training will be 12,000 lawyers
institutional, standard and regular capacity 12,000 rolled out and and 15.000 law
building programme lawyers completed in enforcement
2020 personnel
# of boys and girls assisted through child
protection case management services with 1,320 2,458 1,500 1,839
positive outcomes and case closed
# of facilities with ongoing CP and GBV
activities where UNICEF Youth and Child
Protection programmes implement Joint
25 6 8 0
programming targeting adolescent girls
(including GBV services + BLN or Skills building
activities and Youth friendly services
% of boys and girls in case management,
focused PSS or women and girls safe spaces
0 30 0
referred to other sectors services (e.g.
education, youth, livelihoods)
Output. 2490/A0/07/203/003 3.3. INCREASED COMMUNITY CAPACITIES
Output Statement. 3.3 Children, families and communities in most disadvantaged localities have increased capacities to promote practices that
protect them
Standard Indicators - No approved indicator ratings
Additional # of girls and boys participating in community 40,496
44,000 19,712 16,639
Indicators based child protection activities
# of caregivers engaged in activities to promote 24,320
22,000 9,500 7,977
wellbeing and protection of children
% of women and girls who report actions taken
60% 83% 60% 2 %
in the past 6 months that made them feel safer
% of respondents who say that members of
their reference network or public figure at the
0 TBD 0
community support protective practices with
women, girls and boys. (SBCC Plan Pillar 1)
% of respondents who believe the roles of
women/girls/mothers and men/boys/fathers
0 TBD 0
can be expanded beyond stereotyped gender
roles. (SBCC Plan Pillar 2)
125
# of Qudwa initiatives conducted to prevent
child marriage, child labor and violence against
n/a 200 173
children and women in communities. (SBCC
Plan Pillar 3)
% of respondents who believe have skills,
support (family/ friends/neighbors) and
confidence towards applying positive
n/a TBD 0
alternative practices to child marriage, child
labor and violence against children and women.
(SBCC Plan Pillar 4)
% of persons trained within local institutions
running recreational activities with children who
n/a TBD 0
start applying qualitative methods to strengthen
psychosocial wellbeing of children
Output. 2490/A0/07/203/004 3.4 KNOWLEDGE MANAGEMENT
Output Statement. 3.4 Improved data and knowledge to inform programming and advocacy initiatives to prevent and protect children and women
from violence, abuse and exploitation
Standard Indicators - No approved indicator ratings
# studies, policy briefs used in child protection
Additional
and gender-based violence advocacy or 5 2 7 4
Indicators
programmatic initiatives
2490/A0/07/203/090 3.5 CHILD
Output
PROTECTION PROGRAMME SUPPORT
3.5 Appropriate technical expertise and
Output administrative support are provided to the
Statement Child Protection section to enable delivery of
the programme.
Standard
No approved indicator ratings
Indicators
Output. 2490/A0/07/203/020 3.6 PPL IMPROVED CHILD PROTECTION SYSTEM
Output Statement. 3.6 Child Protection (APD): Girls and boys increasingly benefit from improved child protection systems for the prevention of
and response to violence, abuse, exploitation and neglect.
Standard Indicators - No approved indicator ratings
Additional # of caregivers engaged in activities to promote
5,600 6,999 5,600 7,400
Indicators well-being and protection of children(57553)
126
# of boys and girls with access to a package of
response services (case management, focused
1,200 1,220 1,200 1,322
PSS and provision and referrals to specialized
services)(47382)
# of girls, boys engaged in Community based
23,042 23,669 23,042 17,533
Child Protection activities(57535)
# of School aged children targeted by UNICEF
that have access to psychosocial support in
12,000 7,791 12,000 831
their schools/learning spaces during and after
the humanitarian situation(57539)
# of high to medium risk boys and girls receiving
250 214 250 199
case management(57542)
# of mothers, fathers, community members,
boys and girls engaged in awareness,
sensitisation and social mobilization 8,960 17,324 8,960 17,329
interventions on child protection, justice for
children and gender based violence(57547)
# of community actors actively engaged in
105 0 105 0
promoting child protection/GBV(57551)
Output. 2490/A0/07/203/005 3.7 CP - EMERG. RESPONSE FOR OUTBREAK
Output Statement - New element
Number of children without parental or family
Standard
care provided with appropriate alternative care 100 5
Indicators
arrangements [COVIDSitRep]
Number of children, parents and primary
caregivers provided with community based
10,000 16,586
mental health and psychosocial support and
messaging [COVIDSitRep] (93-01-L3-02)
Number of children and adults that have access
to a safe and accessible channel to report 30,000 31,402
sexual exploitation and abuse [COVIDSitRep]
Number of UNICEF personnel and partners that
have completed training on GBV risk mitigation 460 607
and referrals for survivors [COVIDSitRep]
127
Annex 19. Case Management Indicators in Lebanon
# of girls and boys receiving specialized/focused PSS
(Aligned with or feeds into UNICEF Global Strategic Plan 2018-2021 3.a.5.a, 3.a.5.c & 3.a.7)
Lebanese
Syrians
Palestinian
Female
Male
Children/Youth with disabilities
# of partners and government staff trained on Child Protection (including on the National Child Protection Standard Operating Procedures -
SOP - and Case Management Tools - including CPIMS - for child protection). (To some extent aligned UNICEF Global Strategic Plan 2018-
2021 3.a.3)
Female
Male
# of institutional actors trained who demonstrate increased knowledge of SGBV
Female
Male
# of service providers, professionals, frontline workers and other actors working with children in contact with the law who have access to
an institutional, standard and regular capacity building programme
# of boys and girls assisted through child protection case management and specialized services
Lebanese
Syrians
Palestinian
Female
Male
Children/Youth with disabilities
# of boys and girls assisted through child protection case management services with positive outcomes and case closed
Lebanese
128
Syrians
Palestinian
Female
Male
Children/Youth with disabilities
% of boys and girls in case management, focused PSS or women and girls safe spaces referred to other sectors services (e.g. education,
youth, livelihoods)
Lebanese
Syrians
Palestinian
Female
Male
Children/Youth with disabilities
% of children, boys and girls, participating in focused PSS activities who report an increase in their psychosocial wellbeing
Lebanese
Syrians
Palestinian
Female
Male
Children/Youth with disabilities
# women and girls accessing mobile and safe spaces
(Aligned with UNICEF Global Strategic Plan 2018-2021 3.a.6)
Lebanese
Syrians
Palestinian
Children/Youth with disabilities
# of facilities with ongoing CP and GBV activities where UNICEF Youth and Child Protection programmes implement Joint programming
targeting adolescent girls ( including GBV services + BLN or Skills building activities and Youth friendly services
% of adolescent girls and female youth referred to youth employability and Livelihood programs
Lebanese
129
Syrians
Palestinian
Children/Youth with disabilities
% girls and women accessing GBV services who report feeling empowered
(This indicator feeds into UNICEF Global Strategic Plan 2018-2021 3.a.3)
% of GBV case management agencies reporting sufficient capacities to support survivors seeking services
Source: UNICEF CO, Lebanon
130
Annex 20. Planned Targets and Results Achieved (SitReps)
EGYPT
2019 2020
Planned Achieved % Planned Achieved %
Girls Boys Girls Boys
Target Results Achieved Target Result Achieved
# children, adolescents and youth participating
in structured, sustained PSS, life skills and CP 40,000 80,346 201% n/a n/a 70,000 22,675 32% n/a n/a
programmes
# women and men participating in n/a positive
15,000 21,729 145% n/a n/a 20,000 12,993 65% n/a n/a
parenting programmes
# children, adolescents and youth benefitting
5,000 5,679 114% n/a n/a 15,000 6,679 45% n/a n/a
from multi sectoral case management
JORDAN
2019 2020
Planned Results % Planned Results %
Girls Boys Girls Boys
Target Achieved Achieved Target Achieved Achieved
# girls and boys Host: 77% /
Host:
participating in Za’atari: 11%
73% /
structured, / Azraq: 9% /
80,000 110,951 139% 54% 46% 95,000 99,465 105% 54% 46% Zaatari:
sustained child Temporary
12% /
protection or settlements:
Azraq:
psychosocial 3%
131
2019 2020
Planned Results % Planned Results %
Girls Boys Girls Boys
Target Achieved Achieved Target Achieved Achieved
support 10% /
programmes ITS: 4%
# girls and boys Host:
who are 70% /
Host: 50% /
receiving Zaatari:
8,000 5,986 75% 42% 58% Za’atari: 21% 8,000 3,730 47% 47% 53%
specialized child 14% /
/ Azraq: 30%
protection Azraq:
services 16%
Host:
# women and Host: 73% /
83% /
men Za’atari: 15%
Zaatari:
participating in / Azraq: 9% /
45,000 48,895 109% 87% 13% 35,000 30,492 87% 79% 10% 10% /
PSS or parenting Temporary
Azraq:
education settlements:
8% / ITS:
programmes 3%
3%
Host:
Host: 54% / 76% /
# women and
Za’atari: 17% Zaatari:
men trained on 2,600 2,884 111% 65% 35% 2,600 1,654 64% 63% 20%
/ Azraq: 28% 20% /
child protection
/ EJC: 1% Azraq:
4%
LEBANON
2019 2020
Planned Achieved % Planned Achieved %
Girls Boys Girls Boys
Target Result Achieved Target Result Achieved
# of girls and boys receiving specialized/ focused
10,000 12,923 129% 50% 50% 11,000 4,441 40% 49 51
PSS
132
# of boys and girls assisted through child
protection case management and specialized 4,400 5,389 122% 40% 60% 5,000 3,355 67% 49 51
services
# women and girls accessing mobile and safe
27,000 22,912 85% 94% 6% 21,000 13,508 64% 97 3
spaces
133