EVALUATION REPORT
October 2022
Evaluation of the UNICEF Response
to the Level 3 Humanitarian Crisis
in Syria
Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the Level 3 Humanitarian Crisis in Syria 2
Cover Photo: © UNICEF/UN0603139/Belal
EVALUATION REPORT
October 2022
Evaluation of the UNICEF Response
to the Level 3 Humanitarian Crisis
in Syria
Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the Level 3
Humanitarian Crisis in Syria
© United Nations Children’s Fund, New York, 2022
United Nations Children’s Fund
Three United Nations Plaza
New York, New York 10017
October 2022
The purpose of publishing evaluation reports produced by the UNICEF Evaluation Office is to fulfil
a corporate commitment to transparency through the publication of all completed evaluations. The
reports are designed to stimulate a free exchange of ideas among those interested in the topic and
to assure those supporting the work of UNICEF that it rigorously examines its strategies, results, and
overall effectiveness.
The report was prepared by James Darcy (team leader), Enrico Leonardi, Francesca Ballarin, Jeff
Duncalf and Laura Olsen. Jane Mwangi managed and led the overall evaluation process with active
engagement and support from UNICEF staff in various headquarters divisions, regional offices and
country offices.
The purpose of the report is to facilitate the exchange of knowledge among UNICEF personnel and its
partners. The contents of the report do not necessarily reflect the policies or views of UNICEF. The text
has not been edited to official publication standards and UNICEF accepts no responsibility for error.
The designations in this publication do not imply an opinion on the legal status of any country or
territory, or of its authorities, or the delimitation of frontiers.
The copyright for this report is held by the United Nations Children’s Fund. Permission is required
to reprint/reproduce/photocopy or in any other way to cite or quote from this report in written
form. UNICEF has a formal permission policy that requires a written request to be submitted. For
non-commercial uses, the permission will normally be granted free of charge. Please write to the
Evaluation Office at the address below to initiate a permission request.
For further information, please contact:
Evaluation Office United Nations Children’s Fund
3 United Nations Plaza New York, New York 10017
evalhelp@unicef.org
This report is available online at: https://www.unicef.org/evaluation/reports#/detail/18406/
UNICEF, 2022. Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the Level 3 Humanitarian Crisis in Syria.
UNICEF Evaluation Office, New York.
Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the Level 3 Humanitarian Crisis in Syria i
TABLE OF CONTENTS
PREFACE iii
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY v
TABLE OF ACRONYMS xxi
1. BACKGROUND AND OVERVIEW 1
1.2 Evaluation purpose, scope and intended users 3
1.3 Evaluation approach and methodology 5
1.4 Evaluation questions 10
2. THE SYRIA CRISIS AND THE HUMANITARIAN RESPONSE 11
2.1 The Syria crisis and its effects 11
2.2 The international humanitarian aid context since 2018 25
3. UNICEF ROLE AND STRATEGY IN RESPONSE TO THE SYRIA CRISIS 30
3.1 The organization’s evolving role and strategy 30
3.2 How should the UNICEF role in humanitarian action be understood? 34
4. EVALUATING THE UNICEF PROGRAMME 39
4.1 Introduction 39
4.2 Programme relevance, appropriateness and adaptation to context 42
4.3 Programme strategy, logic and consistency with the CCCs 49
4.4 Programme coverage and targeting 56
4.5 Balance and coherence of UNICEF programme 59
4.6 Programme delivery and effectiveness 62
Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the Level 3 Humanitarian Crisis in Syria ii
5. WORKING WITH OTHERS: LEADERSHIP, COORDINATION, PARTNERSHIPS 66
5.1 UNICEF leadership and coordination roles 66
5.2 UNICEF collaboration with GoS, ministries and other authorities 69
5.3 UNICEF collaboration with United Nations agencies, SARC and NGOs 73
5.4 Accountability to and engagement with affected populations 77
6. MANAGEMENT AND OPERATIONAL SUPPORT 79
6.1 Whole of Syria management and support arrangements 79
6.2 Finance and risk management 85
6.3 Staffing and human resources 87
6.4 Supply and the procurement of goods and services 90
6.5 Programme monitoring, quality assurance and beneficiary feedback 91
6.6 Knowledge and information management 93
6.7 Fundraising 93
6.8 Communications and public advocacy 95
7. CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS 97
7.1 Overall conclusions 97
7.2 Programme, coordination and partnership conclusions 105
7.3 Management and support function conclusions 111
7.4 Cross-cutting issues 115
7.5 Recommendations 116
ANNEXES 127
Annex 1. Terms of Reference 127
Annex 2. Evaluation Matrix 140
Annex 3 . List of Words Cited 157
Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the Level 3 Humanitarian Crisis in Syria iii
PREFACE
Since the outbreak of conflict in Syria over a decade ago, UNICEF has been responding to the
needs of Syrian children and their families both inside and outside the country. This report
focuses on the UNICEF response inside Syria over the last four years. It asks whether UNICEF
has found the right roles for itself, given the challenging and evolving context, and assesses
how well UNICEF performed those roles.
This evaluation contains lessons for UNICEF and for the wider humanitarian community.
Its recommendations, many of which have been already acted upon, take into account
the current context and its likely future directions, and I am confident that this report will
contribute to improving the organization’s work to serve children in Syria and around the
world.
The Evaluation Office assembled a specialized team of independent consultants to conduct
this exercise. I am grateful to James Darcy, the team leader, for his insight, professionalism
and commitment to this exercise. I am also grateful to the team members, Francesca Ballarin,
Jeff Duncalf, Enrico Leonardi, and Laura Olsen for their excellent work. This evaluation would
not have been possible without the support of UNICEF staff at all levels of the organization,
and I would like to express sincere thanks to Adele Khodr, Bo Viktor Nylund, Ghada Kachachi,
Michiru Sugi Mita, Olivia Roberts, Mohamad Abbsi, Aya Elbizem, Melinda Young, Robert
Stryk, Alhaji Bah and Jamilya Jusaeva. Finally, many thanks to colleagues in the UNICEF
Evaluation Office, namely, Jane Mwangi, Laura Olsen, Dalma Rivero and Geeta Dey.
Robert McCouch
Director of Evaluation
UNICEF
Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the Level 3 Humanitarian Crisis in Syria iv
Note on terminology used in this report
We use the phrase ‘Syria crisis’ primarily to refer to the direct and indirect effects of the
conflict (in humanitarian and development terms) on children and their families. It does, of
course, have wider political, economic and social connotations.
We use the term ‘humanitarian’ in the relatively broad sense that it is used in humanitarian
response plans, to encompass emergency work and work with highly aid-dependent popu-
lations (e.g., internally displaced persons), work on early recovery, urgent rehabilitation and
support to essential service provision.
We use the following non-standard abbreviations in the report:
• GCAs for Government of Syria-controlled areas
• Non-GCAs for areas of Syria not under government control
• NWS (non-GCA) for non-government-controlled areas of northwest Syria
• NES (non-GCA) for non-government-controlled areas of northeast Syria
• ‘Cross-line’ to describe aid or services provided from GCAs to non-GCAs in NWS
• ‘Cross-zone’ to describe aid or services provided from GCAs to non-GCAs in NES
Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the Level 3 Humanitarian Crisis in Syria v
EXECUTIVE
SUMMARY
Summary finding
In spite of an extraordinarily challenging context, the UNICEF response to the crisis
in Syria, while variable across sectors and locations, has been strong overall. The
evaluation finds that UNICEF managed to identify the right roles for itself over the
evaluation period, although it has sometimes struggled (often for reasons beyond
its control, including the political complexity of the context) to fulfil those roles,
particularly its system-wide roles of sector coordination and leadership. In common
with other agencies, it has also struggled to mount a response proportionate to the
scale of needs and to monitor those needs, given often very limited direct access
to communities. Despite this, the hard work and commitment of UNICEF staff and
partners have helped protect millions of children across all parts of Syria from
the worst effects of the crisis over the past four years. Those consulted for the
evaluation noted the commitment, professionalism and expertise of UNICEF staff, the
organization’s generally strong relations with other actors, including with governing
authorities, local partners, sister United Nations agencies and donors, and its strong
reputation in the region.
Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the Level 3 Humanitarian Crisis in Syria vi
The evaluation also finds that UNICEF needs to develop a more coherent approach to
its work across the whole of Syria. In particular, it needs a better-defined approach to
the wider humanitarian agenda in order to address the acute and pervasive threats
to children’s well-being and development. While support to direct service delivery
remains crucial, UNICEF should continue to demonstrate the case for more systematic
and sustainable approaches to meeting needs in a context of protracted recovery, while
pursuing opportunities to help strengthen child-related policy and systems. Resourcing
this in the face of diminishing donor funding will require prioritization, a phased
approach and greater programmatic focus, and it will require new forms of partnership
and collaboration.
Evaluation scope and purpose evolving context, and how well it
performed in those roles. This includes
consideration of UNICEF interventions
1 Commissioned by the UNICEF
across the whole of Syria, managed
Evaluation Office, this evaluation
from three main ‘hubs’ (Damascus,
concerns the UNICEF response to
Gaziantep, Amman), including how
the Level 3 (L3) humanitarian crisis
well these interventions have been
in Syria over the period 2018–2021. It
harmonized. It takes an ‘outside-in’
has both a learning and accountability
approach, assessing the value of
purpose, and while it is largely
UNICEF interventions with respect
summative in nature, it makes
to the priorities for children and their
recommendations for strengthening
families, the organization’s mandate
the organization’s approach in light of
and core functions, the roles played
the current situation and likely future
by other actors and the needs of the
developments in the country.
wider response system. These in turn
are considered against the backdrop
The evaluation is strategic rather
of an evolving political, institutional,
than technical or operational in its
economic and demographic context
focus: it asks whether UNICEF has
across the country.
found the right roles for itself in Syria
over the past four years given the
Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the Level 3 Humanitarian Crisis in Syria vii
Evaluation questions, The evolving context and
methodology and process priorities for children
2 The focus of the evaluation has been 3 The humanitarian situation in Syria
on questions of the relevance and since 2018 has been different to that
coverage of the UNICEF response, its prevailing in earlier periods of the
quality and effectiveness, its coherence crisis, and yet equally demanding
across sectors and geographic areas, of UNICEF engagement. On some
and its connectedness and balance metrics, notably food security, the
between short- and longer-term situation continues to deteriorate, as
agendas. These questions are reviewed reflected in the most recent United
with respect to the UNICEF programme Nations-led Humanitarian Needs
and in relation to its wider role within Overview (HNO) for 2022. Needs
the United Nations family and the now relate less to the direct effects
humanitarian system. of conflict than to its indirect effects:
continuing mass displacement, steep
Evidence was gathered from a variety economic decline, damaged or lost
of sources, including documentation infrastructure, inoperative systems,
and key informants from both loss of professional capacities, and
within and outside UNICEF. Around related loss of access to basic services.
180 interviews were conducted in Over half of the pre-conflict population
total. During field visits in October/ remains displaced, of which around
November 2021, in-person interviews 6.9 million are internally displaced
were conducted in Gaziantep, Amman, (a further 5.6 million are refugees).
Damascus, Aleppo and Deir-ez-Zor. For Greater stability has allowed increased
operational reasons, the evaluation humanitarian access in some areas,
team was not able to travel in the areas although access remained limited
of northwestern and northeastern throughout the evaluation period,
Syria (NWS/NES) outside government particularly in areas of the country
control. These in-person interviews outside government control. High
were supplemented by remote levels of insecurity continue to
informant interviews and by online characterize some areas, particularly
surveys of staff and partners. in NWS.
Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the Level 3 Humanitarian Crisis in Syria viii
While the Government of Syria child development and life chances,
controls around 70 per cent of the including lack of access to basic
state’s territory, large areas in the education and lack of opportunities for
northwest and northeast of the adolescents. These agendas overlap
country remained outside government and are causally inter-related: failure
control over the evaluation period. to address one risks exacerbating
From a humanitarian perspective, the others. Each agenda requires a
the result has been three main different approach. The first typically
geographic regions of concern: the requires (sustained) direct service
areas controlled by government, delivery, while the second and third
and the areas of NWS (in Idlib and require support to existing or new
Aleppo Governorates) and NES (in systems of basic service provision. The
Deir-ez-Zor, Ar-Raqqa, Al-Hasakah and challenge of achieving scale, quality
parts of Aleppo Governorate) that and complementarity of services is
lie outside its control. The latter are increasingly likely to require area-
characterized by high levels of internal based, multi-sector and multi-agency
displacement, general lack of services approaches.
and restricted access for international
humanitarian actors. But humanitarian
needs, increasingly linked to economic
hardship, are prevalent across almost
the entire country.
4 The evaluation suggests that the wider
humanitarian agenda encompasses
three priority agendas for children
across the whole of Syria. The
first (Agenda A) concerns specific
emergency or high aid-dependency
situations that pose severe, acute
threats to child health, well-being
and safety. The second (Agenda B)
relates to less acute but widespread,
severe and persistent threats to child
health, security or well-being. The third
(Agenda C) concerns critical threats to
Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the Level 3 Humanitarian Crisis in Syria ix
5 The needs in Syria are on a huge response. The evaluation concludes
scale – both for Agenda A and that the decisions made were
(particularly) for Agendas B and C, largely appropriate and remained so
which require large-scale and multi- throughout the evaluation period.
year financing. Yet UNICEF and others However, UNICEF has struggled
have been working largely with to make a coherent whole of the
(limited and decreasing) short-term various parts of its response across
humanitarian funding, and even that the different response hubs inside
has often been subject to extremely and outside Syria. This is reflected
tight conditionality, particularly in in the lack of an overarching WoS
government-controlled areas. Taken strategy and the tendency to treat
together with other constraints, the cross-border work as anomalous
the result is that UNICEF and other or even peripheral to its strategy
agencies have struggled to work for Syria. The evaluation found that
on the scale the situation demands. one reason for this was the lack of a
It has also limited opportunities to coherent overall vision for the UNICEF
work on systems, capacity and policy response in Syria, coupled with a lack
agendas that could bring wider and of clearly articulated responsibilities
more sustained benefits to children. and accountabilities for oversight and
This arguably represents the dominant delivery.
challenge for UNICEF and others:
how best to address the effects both 7 The ‘strategic shift’ towards support
of conflict and a sudden massive to resilience proposed by the Syria
development deficit using limited Country Office (SCO) rightly addresses
humanitarian funding and approaches. the challenge of sustainable service
delivery. However, given the ongoing
scale and severity of needs across
UNICEF strategy and Whole of
Syria, the evaluation concludes that
Syria architecture
what is required is an evolution of
the organization’s approach to the
6 UNICEF has faced major strategic humanitarian agenda. Delivering on
choices over the course the crisis, its Core Commitments to Children in
including decisions about where Humanitarian Action across Syria as a
and how to work and decisions whole requires a balance – depending
about the architecture best suited to on the specific context – between
managing the Whole of Syria (WoS) continued direct engagement (with
Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the Level 3 Humanitarian Crisis in Syria x
partners) in essential service delivery, UNICEF performance in
shifting as far as possible to more leadership and system-wide
sustainable modes of delivery; and roles
support to (or at least complementing
of) the relevant official systems of 9 The evaluation finds that UNICEF has
service delivery. Risk communication generally done well in navigating an
and related policy and advocacy work extremely challenging and sensitive
are the essential complement to this, context, and in some cases expanding
and UNICEF has a unique role to play the space to operate; in fact, it has
in this regard. set a leading example among United
Nations agencies in this regard. The
8 The most immediate challenge agency’s system-wide roles – in sector
facing UNICEF and others is how coordination, supply, advocacy and
to maintain coverage of the more more general leadership on child-
acute and high dependency needs related issues – are essential to
(Agenda A) in NWS and NES given its added value to the wider Syria
the combined constraints of access, response. Any performance deficits in
authorization, available implementing these areas are therefore of particular
partners and declining funding. concern, and the organization should
Effective contingency planning for the give as much weight to these roles as it
potential closure of the final border does to delivering its own programme.
crossing from Türkiye may require a This has particular urgency for the
fundamental shift in the current model functions currently performed for the
of engagement, although at the time cross-border programme in NWS and
of the evaluation, there appeared to be cross-zone in NES.
limited joint thinking on this between
UNICEF hubs. Coordination
10 UNICEF (co-)leadership of sectors
Overall, it is essential for UNICEF to
and sub-sectors is central to its added
continue to demonstrate in practice
value, but its record in Syria is highly
equality of concern for children living in
uneven. Water, sanitation and hygiene
all parts of Syria, whether government-
(WASH) and child protection have been
controlled or not.
strong in most areas of coordination,
Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the Level 3 Humanitarian Crisis in Syria xi
both at WoS and hub levels, helped by of UNICEF public advocacy, and in
close involvement of senior managers particular about its willingness to
at SCO and regional office levels. highlight conflict-related violations of
These sectors have also shown the child rights (attacks on schools was
potential for effective coordination raised as a particular example).
cross-zone in NES, something on
which UNICEF and others should build. Supply
In education and nutrition, UNICEF has 12 The evaluation found that UNICEF
not been able to provide the consistent continues to play a crucial role in
leadership needed. Some of this is a vaccine supply and distribution for
matter of resourcing: the evaluation the health sector, including cold chain
found that the practice of ‘double-’ provision. Problems with vaccine
or even ‘triple-hatting’ has had a supply in relation to coronavirus
negative impact on this aspect of the disease 2019 (COVID-19) relate in
organization’s role. part to global availability, although
some aspects of the collaboration
Leadership, advocacy and
with the World Health Organization,
communications
including around risk communication
11 Overall, the evaluation finds that and addressing vaccine hesitancy,
UNICEF has been a powerful advocate could be strengthened. The main
for children in Syria, both through supply-related issue identified by
public and private communications, the evaluation concerned the supply
and had led strongly on child-related processes in SCO, which have been
issues. This included campaign work affected by many factors, external
(e.g., back-to-school) as well as a and internal. An internal audit in
wide range of public communications 2019 reported a significant problem
initiatives. Private communications with delayed procurement, and while
and advocacy are by their nature recommendations from that audit are
difficult to evaluate, but the evaluators now being implemented, the situation
found evidence of strong and appears not to have been fully
effective UNICEF engagement with resolved.
international, national and local
political actors on child rights and
protection, as well as with key officials
across Syria itself. Some informants
raised concerns about the consistency
Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the Level 3 Humanitarian Crisis in Syria xii
UNICEF programme strategy whole country. These challenges have
and performance been particularly acute in non-GCAs.
Programme relevance and adaptation Within this overall picture there
to context is considerable variation. In non-
government held areas of the
13 The evaluation found that since 2018,
northwest, UNICEF and its partners
UNICEF has largely managed to
have done well to adapt to the
implement programmes appropriate to
rapidly evolving context, including
the different contexts of government-
mass displacements in 2019–2020.
controlled areas (GCAs) and non-
In non-government held areas of the
government-controlled NWS, and
northeast, since 2020 and the closure
to adapt its approach to changing
of the cross-border route from Iraq, the
circumstances over the evaluation
evaluation found positive examples of
period. While each region has posed
programme adaptation, particularly in
different challenges, lack of up-to-date
health and WASH, while the nutrition
data on needs and limited ability to
and education programmes faced
monitor the effects of interventions
more challenges – although here
have been common factors across the
Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the Level 3 Humanitarian Crisis in Syria xiii
and elsewhere across Syria, UNICEF education and adolescent development
has done well to depoliticize the and participation in particular and have
education agenda and support multiple severely limited UNICEF support to the
pathways for children to learn and gain formal education system.
accreditation after years of disruption.
Complex work on child protection, Programme coverage and targeting
including work with third-country 15 Across all sectors, UNICEF and the
nationals and children associated relevant clusters have targeted (but
with armed forces and armed groups, not always met) around 70-80 per
has been innovative and appropriate, cent of the assessed needs. Within
and a good demonstration of the that figure, target achievement has
organization’s added value. been variable across sectors and
regions. While some sectors (WASH,
14 The organization’s work in GCAs health) have achieved relatively high
over the evaluation period has coverage, others have been unable to
seen increasing engagement with achieve adequate coverage. Evaluating
government counterparts and local UNICEF programme coverage against
administrations, which has allowed assessed needs proved difficult given
UNICEF to pursue a shift towards a major uncertainties concerning the
recovery strategy, tackling Agendas reliability of system-wide needs
B and C (basic service strengthening, assessment data and related ‘people
rehabilitation, etc.), although this in need’ figures. The specific impacts
remains constrained by multiple of the crisis on children were often
factors. This approach is appropriate assumed rather than assessed, with
given the relative stability of the access for assessment severely limited
environment of GCAs, and reflects the across the whole country. Likewise,
need for approaches that go beyond UNICEF figures for ‘reach’ are based on
relief and service delivery. However, achievement of output delivery targets
UNICEF interventions are often (as assessed by partners, third-party
dwarfed by the scale of destruction of monitors and facilitators) rather than
systems and infrastructure, the effects being based on data and feedback
of the economic collapse, and the loss concerning benefits actually delivered.
of professional personnel, particularly Targeting has often been influenced as
in health, education and WASH. Donor much by opportunities to programme
conditionalities on funding in GCAs as by assessed needs and priorities.
have heavily constrained work on
Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the Level 3 Humanitarian Crisis in Syria xiv
Programme effectiveness the Syrian Arab Red Crescent (SARC)
were found generally to have been
16 While the evaluation draws some
constructive and effective, although
specific conclusions about the
there are significant areas in which
effectiveness of particular programme
these need to be strengthened. Its
elements, the ability of UNICEF
working relationships with non-
to gauge the effectiveness of its
governmental organizations (NGOs)
interventions suffers from many of
– local, national and international –
the same limitations noted above
have varied in quality and type across
with regard to needs assessment
the three main crisis areas, in part
and coverage. Assessing whether
because of restrictions on partnerships
a given programme intervention
and partner presence. UNICEF lacks
achieved the desired result has
some usual key partner international
relied too heavily on output delivery
NGOs, but there remains more scope
/ target achievement data and the
for international NGO partnerships in
logic of the programme itself. The
Damascus and beyond. Its partnerships
lack of feedback from communities
with local NGOs in all three areas are
themselves is one essential missing
central to the implementation of the
component here, as is outcome data
UNICEF programme, and from a wider
more generally. Although progress
perspective, they are also essential to
has been made in this regard, UNICEF
the effective resourcing, support and
itself acknowledges the need to find
capacity-building of Syrian NGOs, who
better ways of establishing that its
have been key actors in the delivery of
interventions and those of its partners
essential services across WoS. UNICEF
are having the desired effect. The
technical support and capacity-building
importance of the UNICEF role in
of NGOs has been particularly valued.
public health risk communication and
in related programming (vaccination,
18 The evaluation found that accountabil-
including COVID-19, WASH) emerges
ity to affected populations (AAP), and
as one clear area of major impact for
more generally, engagement with com-
which effectiveness can reasonably
munities, has been one of the weakest
inferred from the level of coverage.
aspects of UNICEF practice to date.
Collaborations, partnerships and This is related to the lack of UNICEF
community engagement presence in many areas, necessitating
a ‘remote’ approach that relies on third
17 Working relationships with sister
parties to engage with communities. In
United Nations agencies and with
Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the Level 3 Humanitarian Crisis in Syria xv
recognition of this, UNICEF (particular- 20 The gender-related aspects of the crisis
ly SCO) has taken steps to enhance its were found generally to have been well
ability to gain feedback from commu- reflected in the UNICEF response, par-
nities, but the relative lack of proximity ticularly with regard to girls’ access to
and community engagement remains a primary education. However, given the
significant constraint on the organiza- highly gendered impacts of the crisis –
tion’s ability to account for, and ensure including the vulnerabilities of women
the relevance and effectiveness of, its and girls in particular to violence and
interventions. coercion – this remains a crucial area
of concern and one on which UNICEF
should continue to work closely with
Cross-cutting issues
other agencies. The situation of ad-
olescents (girls and boys), including
19 Humanitarian principles were access to education and training, and
considered across various aspects related issues of child labour and early
of the UNICEF response. Largely for marriage, is an area that needs more
reasons of operating restrictions international attention, and UNICEF
and lack of data, UNICEF cannot say has an important role to play here.
with confidence that it has always
responded on the basis of (assessed)
need. Although the evaluation
found that the response was broadly
equitable and needs-based, some
priority agendas have been under-
served. Greater transparency
concerning operational limitations
would help to address potential
concerns about lack of independence.
The evaluation found that UNICEF
engagement with the Government
of Syria and with de facto authorities
in areas outside government control
had been appropriate and necessary.
Nevertheless, more work is needed to
establish in practice the principle of
independence.
Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the Level 3 Humanitarian Crisis in Syria xvi
According to the 2022 HNO, of the 14.6 R1. Reframe the Whole of Syria
million people in need inside Syria, some agenda and related
4.2 million have a disability. The majority humanitarian strategy
of children with disabilities aged 12–17
are not attending school and households The UNICEF crisis response in Syria,
that have persons with disabilities are for all its strengths, has been hampered
some of the most vulnerable in Syria, by the lack of a coherent strategy for
both in terms of access to basic needs and its humanitarian work. Disconnected
protection. UNICEF has done important strategies across the whole of Syria have
work to support such households through reflected the fragmentation of the country:
its education and social protection cross-border and cross-line efforts have
programmes (notably in its disability not been well harmonized, and both
programming in Aleppo) but it has not appear to be disconnected from work in
been able to mount such work on a scale GCAs. Over the course of the evaluation
commensurate with need. Given both the period, the humanitarian situation in Syria
priority of the need and the impact that has largely evolved into three distinct
UNICEF has demonstrated in this area, the crises, each posing different challenges
evaluation concluded that this should be a for humanitarian response and recovery
priority for future action. efforts. UNICEF needs to find a way to
encompass these within a single strategy
and analytical framework. Doing so
Recommendations
requires fully recognizing the scale of the
overall humanitarian crisis and the distinct
The evaluation makes recommendations characteristics and priorities of each ‘sub-
under the following headings, crisis’, as well as the linkages between
recognizing that many of these issues them.
are acknowledged by UNICEF and some
progress has already been made on the While the political and security context
agendas listed here. Implementation of (national and international) will largely
some of these recommendations also continue to define what is possible by way
depends on factors such as funding and of effective intervention, UNICEF must
access (in some areas) over which UNICEF maintain the position that its mandate
has limited control or influence. The applies to all children equally across Syria,
recommendations should be read in that and that this requires it to work across
light. political boundaries. This should be the
foundation of discussions with both the
Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the Level 3 Humanitarian Crisis in Syria xvii
Government of Syria (GoS) and with de Ensuring continuity of support for the
facto authorities in NWS and NES. needs of children and their families in non-
GC NWS must continue to be a priority
R2. Review Whole of Syria
for UNICEF, given the scale and severity of
arrangements
needs involved. The situation remains fluid
and levels of vulnerability (as well as levels
The UNICEF WoS arrangement needs of aid dependency) are high. Uncertainty
to evolve to reflect the change of over the future of cross-border support and
circumstances since it was established challenges to increasing cross-line support
while maintaining certain key functions. from GCAs add to that vulnerability and
Specifically, it needs to provide a stronger planning against future scenarios is an
platform for assessing needs and immediate priority.
coordinating interventions to all parts of
R4. Repurpose the strategy for
Syria according to a common humanitarian
support to non-government-
strategy and plan. This includes much
controlled areas of northeastern
stronger harmonization of cross-border
Syria
and cross-line support. The WoS office
in Amman and SCO need to collaborate
closely on this agenda. UNICEF has made real strides in opening
space and responding to critical needs, but
More generally, the arrangements there are key service gaps (e.g., in nutrition
need to provide a clearer framework and education) and the scale and coverage
of responsibilities and accountabilities are insufficient, particularly in areas outside
for each hub and the functions located the formal IDP camps. Progressively
within them. Lack of clarity on this has extending the support provided cross-
been a significant barrier to effective and zone will require closer collaboration with
harmonized working for UNICEF across NGOs as well as de facto authorities (self-
WoS. dministration) together with higher-level
advocacy to increase the operating space.
R3. Ensure continuity of Agenda
Doing this will involve rebuilding trust and
A support to areas of
will require more transparency and better
northwestern Syria outside GoS
communication on both sides. This is also
control, while adapting the
essential for securing the trust of donors,
support strategy to reflect the
who currently express understandable
evolving situation
confusion as to the nature and extent of
aid efforts in NES (by UNICEF and others)
Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the Level 3 Humanitarian Crisis in Syria xviii
and concern at the lack of coordination and R6. Address critical service gaps
collaboration between the United Nations and maintain key services
and NGOs. For its part, UNICEF must be
more open about the extent and limits Consistent with the wider humanitarian
of its ability to support work cross-zone, strategy, UNICEF should identify critical
even within the camps where it currently service gaps across the whole of Syria,
operates. analyse the reasons behind them, and
take steps to address them as a matter of
R5. Build the scale of work in GCAs
priority. Some of these (nutrition is a key
through enhanced partnerships
example) cannot wait. Others may take
and consortia
some time to address but should be treated
with the urgency they deserve. Some
UNICEF has done well to work with demand strengthening not only the UNICEF
national and local authorities, SARC and programme response but the wider sector
approved NGOs in GCAs despite the response and its coordination.
multiple limitations imposed by donor
conditionalities, as well as limits imposed R7. Strengthen needs assessment,
by the government on needs assessment situational monitoring and
and response. The main challenge targeting across WoS
identified by the evaluation is one of
scale: UNICEF needs to find ways to better Related to R4 above, UNICEF needs a plan
address the humanitarian agenda for to strengthen its ability – and that of the
children in GCAs at scale, through wider sectors for which it has lead responsibilities
partnerships, integrated programming – to better gauge the evolving picture of
and area-based approaches. While this is needs and vulnerabilities across all parts
dependent on donor willingness to fund as of Syria, including with regard to under-5
well as GoS permissions, joint inter-agency malnutrition. The methods employed may
approaches – possibly using consortium vary somewhat across the three crisis
or event joint venture models – could help areas, but a common analytical framework
to provide assurance as well as a potential should be used at sector and inter-sector
scale multiplier effect. levels. This needs to allow for more ‘real-
time’ and baseline data gathering.
Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the Level 3 Humanitarian Crisis in Syria xix
R8. Strengthen monitoring and R10. Strengthen the supply
accounting for programme function
delivery and performance
Supply for the programme in GCAs and
UNICEF needs to be better able to cross-zone in NES has been a persistent
account (internally and externally) for problem, related in part to the economic
its programme interventions through crises in Syria and Lebanon. The SCO
partners in all parts of Syria. The inability should request expert support from the
to do so reliably is a reputational risk and Middle East and North Africa Regional
means that UNICEF lacks a sound basis Office (MENARO) or Supply Division to help
for programme management. As part of identify steps necessary for improvements,
this, UNICEF needs to be significantly as well as to provide general support to the
more transparent in reporting both what supply section. A head of section needs
it does (and where), and what it is unable to be recruited as soon as possible. The
to do. It also needs to ensure comparable evaluation suggests that a task team be
transparency concerning the work of established, including programme and
clusters and areas of responsibility (AoRs) fundraising staff, to monitor progress on
for which it has lead responsibilities. agreed steps and report to senior managers
on progress. This is a core function for
R9. Strengthen cluster and AoR
UNICEF, the performance of which has
leadership and coordination
system-wide implications.
R11. Enhance risk management and
While in some sectors, UNICEF leadership
control processes
and coordination have been strong, in
other areas they have been relatively weak
at both hub and WoS levels. UNICEF must While UNICEF risk management and
make sure that its own programme delivery control processes appear relatively
is not privileged over fulfilment of its strong, the review of risks should happen
essential system-wide roles. Double- and more regularly than it does at present
triple-hatting has seriously affected UNICEF (we suggest quarterly). Collaboration on
performance and the well-being of the staff due diligence and spot checks under the
concerned. harmonized approach to cash transfers
(HACT) system could be extended beyond
Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the Level 3 Humanitarian Crisis in Syria xx
the current United Nations partners. On of gross abuses of child rights (it has
safeguarding and prevention of sexual sometimes been too risk-averse in this
exploitation and abuse, while good regard). Such communication needs to
progress is being made internally, more be distinguished from communications
needs to be done to raise awareness designed primarily to promote UNICEF and
amongst beneficiaries and establish its work. The current practice of routing
case management protocols at a such advocacy mainly through MENARO is
community level. Continued advocacy at appropriate.
a governmental level is required to enable
wider progress on this agenda. While UNICEF has tended to highlight
its own (positive) role, not enough
R12. Strengthen communication
communication work is done to highlight
and advocacy efforts
the gaps in coverage for children across
WoS, and particularly in NWS. Given
While UNICEF (SCO/MENARO) has made the limited presence of international
good use of private advocacy channels with NGOs across the various hubs, this is an
authorities across Syria and in the wider especially important agenda for UNICEF. An
region over the evaluation period, it needs advocacy strategy and rollout plan should
to be more consistent and responsive in form part of the proposed humanitarian
its public advocacy and condemnations strategy and plan (R1).
Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the Level 3 Humanitarian Crisis in Syria xxi
TABLE OF ACRONYMS
AAP Accountability to Affected Populations
ADAP Adolescent Development and Participation
AoR Area of Responsibility
C4D Communications for Development
CAAFAG Children Associated with Armed Forces and Armed Groups
CCCs Core Commitments to Children in Humanitarian Action
CLA Cluster Lead Agency
COVID-19 Coronavirus disease 2019
CPD Country Programme Document
EiE Education in Emergencies
EMOPS Office of Emergency Programmes
EMT Emergency Management Team
EPI Expanded Programme on Immunization
EU European Union
GCA Government-Controlled Areas
GEC Global Emergency Coordinator
GoS Government of Syria
HNAP Humanitarian Needs Assessment Programme
HNO Humanitarian Needs Overview
HPC Humanitarian Planning Cycle
HR Human Resources
HRP Humanitarian Response Plan
HQ Headquarters
ICRC International Committee of the Red Cross
IDP Internally Displaced Persons
IFRC International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies
INGO International Non-Governmental Organization
JOP Joint Operational Planning
KII Key Informant Interview
L3 Level 3 Emergency
MAM Moderate Acute Malnutrition
Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the Level 3 Humanitarian Crisis in Syria xxii
MENARO Middle East and North Africa Regional Office
MHPSS Mental Health and Psychosocial Support
MRM Monitoring and Reporting Mechanism on Grave Violations Against
Children in Situations of Armed Conflict
NES Non-government-controlled areas of Northeastern Syria
NFI Non-Food Item
NGO Non-Governmental Organization
NLG No Lost Generation
NWS Non-government-controlled areas of Northwestern Syria
OCHA United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
PG Programme Group
PBR Programme Budget Review
PSN Programme Strategy Note
PSS Psychosocial Support
RCCE Risk Communication and Community Engagement
RD Regional Director
RO Regional Office
SAM Severe Acute Malnutrition
SARC Syrian Arab Red Crescent
SCO Syria Country Office
SCR Security Council Resolution
SSOP Simplified Standard Operating Procedures
ToC Theory of Change
ToR Terms of Reference
TPM Third-Party Monitoring
UNCT United Nations Country Team
UNDAF United Nations Development Assistance Framework
UNEG United Nations Evaluation Group
UNFPA United Nations Population Fund
UNHCR United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
UNSC United Nations Security Council
WASH Water, Sanitation and Hygiene
WHO World Health Organization
WFP World Food Programme
WoS Whole of Syria
Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the Level 3 Humanitarian Crisis in Syria xxiii
Figure 1: Map of Syria
Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the Level 3 Humanitarian Crisis in Syria xxiv
Box 1: A selective humanitarian timeline for the Syria crisis
Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the Level 3 Humanitarian Crisis in Syria 1
1
BACKGROUND AND OVERVIEW
This evaluation was commissioned by it is only partly an evaluation of UNICEF
the UNICEF Evaluation Office1 at its programme and operational performance,
headquarters and concerns the UNICEF with as much attention given to questions
response to the Level 3 (L3) humanitarian of relevance, prioritization and overall
crisis in Syria over the period 2018–2021. approach. The evaluation takes an ‘outside-
It is strategic rather than technical or in’ approach, assessing the value of
operational in nature; it asks whether UNICEF interventions with respect to the
UNICEF found the right roles for itself in context, children’s needs, the organization’s
Syria over the past four years given the mandate and core functions, the roles
context, as well as examining how well played by other actors and the needs of the
it performed in those roles. In that sense, wider response system.
1 The terms of reference (see Annex 1) were drafted following consultation with the Syria country office, the Middle East and North Africa regional office
and a wider internal reference group. The evaluation was conducted in close collaboration with those offices.
Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the Level 3 Humanitarian Crisis in Syria 2
The evaluation is based on an extensive The evaluation takes account of other
documentary and data review, together relevant reviews, evaluations and studies,
with remote informant interviews during including the UNICEF Syria Corporate
an inception phase (July–August 2021); Review (February 2019), an internal
in-person interviews in Gaziantep and review of UNICEF Whole of Syria (WoS)
Amman in September and October 2021; coordination in 2021, and the internal
field visits and in-person interviews in audit of the Syria country office (December
Syria (Damascus, Aleppo, Deir-ez-Zor) in 2019). It is being undertaken concurrently
November 2021; subsequent follow-up with a formative ‘strategic shift’ evaluation
informant interviews; and online surveys of commissioned separately by the Syria
staff and partners. country office (SCO).2
This report sets out the main findings, Section 1 of this report sets out the
conclusions and recommendations of the approach and limits of the evaluation,
evaluation. This includes an analysis of including the main evaluation questions.
the way in which the crisis should best Section 2 considers the evolving Syria
be understood, since it cannot properly context since 2018 and the UNICEF
be understood as a single ‘crisis’, and the response, while section 3 is specifically
UNICEF response has to be considered concerned with evaluating the
across at least three distinct crisis organization’s strategic approach in Syria.
contexts since 2018. The organization last Section 4 is concerned with the design,
commissioned an evaluation of its Syria relevance and performance of the UNICEF
response in 2015. The present evaluation programme response to the crisis. Section
covers the period 2018 to the end of 2021, 5 considers how UNICEF has worked
and there is therefore a gap in evaluation with others, including through its sector
coverage of the UNICEF response for the coordination lead roles. Section 6 reviews
years 2016–2017. While some reference some of the main management and
is made to the evolution of the UNICEF operational support issues arising. Finally,
programme since 2016, the evaluative section 7 contains the main conclusions
component is limited to the period since and recommendations. The annexes
2018, and within this, the dominant focus is contain the terms of reference (ToR), the
on 2020 and 2021. full evaluation matrix, and a list of sources
referred to in the text.
2 “Formative Evaluation of the Strategic Shift in Syria”, commissioned April 2021. While this overlaps to some degree with the L3 evaluation, it is
formative in nature and focused specifically on the question of how UNICEF can achieve a strategic shift from a relief/supply approach to one focused
on ‘resilience’. The present evaluation differs in being largely summative, concerned with the relevance, performance and effectiveness of the UNICEF
humanitarian response (including recovery work) in Syria since 2018. From this it draws some formative conclusions about the organization’s role over
the next two to three years.
Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the Level 3 Humanitarian Crisis in Syria 3
1.2 Evaluation purpose, scope • Based on collation and analysis of
and intended users relevant data and information,
generate evidence, conclusions
Evaluation purpose and key lessons and make
recommendations to improve the
As set out in the ToR, the evaluation is
response in Syria and similar
intended to fulfil two functions:
responses elsewhere and in the
(i) An accountability function, reflecting
future.
the need to account (internally
and externally) for one of the largest
The evaluation is essentially summative,
UNICEF country programmes,
though it has some formative aspects – in
designated a corporate L3 priority
other words, it looks both backward and
throughout the evaluation period;3
forward. As established in the inception
(ii) A learning function, reflecting the phase of the evaluation, this is intended
need to capture lessons from a to be a strategic evaluation rather than
programme of this duration and a technical or operational one, and this
significance, to inform the in- shapes both the scope of the evaluation
country programme and UNICEF and the approach adopted.
global programming and practice.
Evaluation scope
The specific objectives of the evaluation as
The overall subject of the evaluation is
described in the ToR are to:
defined in the ToR as being the UNICEF
• Provide a comprehensive assessment “response to the L3 Syria humanitarian
of the overall UNICEF response to crisis” since 2018. The scope is limited
the crisis (including cross-border to UNICEF work in Syria itself; it does
programming) in relation to the not cover the response to the wider
organization’s mandate and regional crisis involving Syrian refugees
standards, its stated objectives, and in surrounding countries or programming
standard evaluation criteria; for Palestinian refugees in Syria. As
per the ToR, the evaluation assesses
3 As of 4 February 2022, the Syria situation has been reclassified as L1 until 31 December 2022. In her statement announcing the change, the Executive
Director noted that “the operational context in Syria remains complex and volatile despite some reduction in armed violence, and humanitarian needs
continue to grow”. She also stressed the “urgency for UNICEF and its partners to continue strong advocacy for a renewal of UN Security Council Reso
lution (UNSCR) 2585, which authorizes cross-border operations into northwest Syria. We must also continue to strengthen UNICEF engagement in
actions across the humanitarian operation to reduce our dependency on the cross-border modality”.
Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the Level 3 Humanitarian Crisis in Syria 4
the appropriateness of the UNICEF The evaluation reviews what is understood
strategy and programme designs in to be the whole agenda of humanitarian
the sectors supported by UNICEF, and concern for UNICEF in seeking to answer
the delivery modalities in the different the evaluation questions below. To this
parts of the country, including for hard- end, it covers those elements that relate to
to-reach populations. It also includes addressing the more acute effects of the
“an assessment of coverage, results, crisis on children (emergency response,
effectiveness, quality and efficiency, as direct service delivery); urgent recovery and
well as a review of the quality and use of rehabilitation agendas, including support to
evidence, assessing how well the response essential services and prevention of system
has used previous evidence … to inform collapse; and addressing critical short- to
or adapt current programming, and medium-term threats to child development.
what systems are in place to monitor the Taken together, these are understood as
situation and UNICEF performance”. constituting the humanitarian agenda in
the broader sense in which it is understood
Under the headings of accountability and in the Humanitarian Response Plans (HRPs)
efficiency, the evaluation includes a review for Syria.
of key issues arising in the management
and operational aspects of the programme, The corollary of this broad approach is that
including structures and lines of in this evaluation there is inevitably limited
accountability; monitoring and reporting; depth of coverage of each sector, and of
financial and risk management processes; the specific issues relating to management
and the quality and effectiveness of and operational support. Since this is not
the supply and human resources (HR) a technical evaluation or detailed review
functions. While the evaluation does not of programme components, the analysis
focus on individual responsibility for is not structured according to sectors of
actions taken, it does review the extent to intervention. However, examples from
which UNICEF has been able to account sectoral interventions across different parts
properly for its interventions to the of the country – and specifically the three
relevant stakeholders, including affected main crisis areas – are used to inform the
communities themselves and UNICEF analysis of broader issues of relevance,
donors. coverage, effectiveness and so on.
Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the Level 3 Humanitarian Crisis in Syria 5
Evaluation stakeholders and intended 1.3 Evaluation approach and
users methodology
The evaluation is primarily intended for
UNICEF staff, including: The approach of the evaluation has been
consultative, looking to identify lessons
• UNICEF staff in Syria and the outpost
and ways forward in collaboration with
office in Gaziantep (Türkiye) respon-
the staff involved in the response, while
sible for programme implementation,
maintaining independence of judgement
support and oversight;
and a willingness to challenge accepted
• UNICEF staff in the Middle East and
wisdom. Given the strategic nature of the
North Africa regional office
evaluation, direct community consultation
(MENARO) and headquarters (HQ)
and primary data collection (beyond
divisions responsible for coordinating
informant interviews) was not undertaken.
and supporting the L3 humanitarian
response;
The evaluation has been conducted in
• UNICEF Syria cluster coordination
accordance with the United Nations
leads responsible for contributing to
Evaluation Group (UNEG) ethical guidelines
the United Nations-led humanitarian
for evaluation and the UNICEF ethical
response in Syria;
standards for research and evaluation.4
• The emergency management team The proposed evaluation approach and
(EMT) chaired by the global related tools were reviewed and approved
emergency coordinator (GEC) for the by an independent ethical review board,
Syria crisis. ensuring proper protocols were in place
for informed consent, data protection, etc.
Beyond UNICEF and its immediate stake- Views expressed are not attributed to the
holders, including its donors and Executive individuals or organizations concerned,
Board, the report should be of interest to other than to distinguish views expressed
all actors who share responsibility and by internal (UNICEF) sources from those
concern for the welfare of crisis-affected expressed by external sources. The type of
communities in Syria. Ultimately, the evalu- organization is sometimes noted (e.g., “a
ation is intended to benefit people affected major donor said…”) but the organization
by the crisis, and above all the children of itself is not named (except for some
Syria. government authorities).
4 United Nations Children’s Fund, ‘Procedure on Ethical Standards in Research, Evaluation, Data Collection and Analysis’, UNICEF, New York, 2021.
Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the Level 3 Humanitarian Crisis in Syria 6
Data collection and analysis Key informant interviews5
Documentation The evaluation team relied heavily on KIIs
to inform the analysis. Key informants
The team conducted an extensive
were identified initially through a
document review of publicly and non-
mapping exercise that took place during
publicly available material that informed
the inception phase; subsequently, a
the analysis. This included documentation
snowballing approach was used to
produced by UNICEF such as planning,
identify relevant individuals. In total, the
monitoring, and reporting documentation
evaluation team carried out 185 informant
(Humanitarian Action for Children reports,
interviews. In order to situate UNICEF
situation reports, etc.), strategies, reviews,
work within a wider context and in keeping
studies, presentations, partnership
with the strategic nature of the exercise,
documents, evaluations and meeting
the evaluation team interviewed slightly
minutes. Among the external sources
more external stakeholders than UNICEF
consulted were United Nations-compiled
staff. External stakeholders included
planning and needs assessment documents
staff from United Nations agencies, local
(HRPs, Humanitarian Needs Overviews)
and international non-governmental
and a range of reviews, evaluations,
organizations (NGOs), donors, and
studies and articles concerning the crisis.
government authorities in various
The document review was used as a key
ministries and directorates. The team
source in its own right as well as a basis for
interviewed UNICEF staff from field offices
triangulating information collected in key
across Syria, the Syria country office, the
informant interviews (KIIs).
Gaziantep outpost office and MENARO as
well as from headquarters offices in New
The evaluation team also compiled and
York, Geneva and Copenhagen. Almost half
analysed information from UNICEF internal
the interviewees were located in Syria; the
reporting systems. Most notably, the
others were split evenly among Jordan,
analysis of programme coverage used
Türkiye and elsewhere. See Figure 2 below
baselines, targets and results for various
for a breakdown of profiles and locations.
indicators taken from cluster reports and
from the organization’s humanitarian
performance monitoring reports.
5 In line with the confidentiality protocol developed during the inception phase, all key informant names were anonymized and stored according to coding
system in a secure repository. Upon completion of this exercise, these notes will be destroyed.
Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the Level 3 Humanitarian Crisis in Syria 7
Figure 2: Profile and location of interviewees
Profile of Interviewees Location of Interviewees
UNICEF
Syria
Government
Jordan
INGOs
TTuürrkkeiyye
NGOs
Other
UN Agencies
Field visits The evaluation team was usually
accompanied by UNICEF staff, who
Field visits covered fifteen project sites
provided valuable information about the
across Syria, in Damascus, Duma,
nature of and challenges involved with the
Aleppo, rural Aleppo and Deir-ez-Zor.
project. On site, the team interviewed those
The visits, which covered all sectors of
involved in the project, such as hospital
UNICEF programming, included schools,
administrators, school principals and
hospitals, clinics, community centres
teachers, heads and staff of community
for adolescents or for children with
centres, water engineers, NGO staff and
disabilities, child-friendly spaces, as well
volunteers.
as water and sanitation projects. The
locations and types of interventions were
identified by the evaluation team and Online surveys
selected in consultation with SCO. It was The evaluation team administered two
not possible to visit programme sites in anonymous online surveys, one for UNICEF
non-government-controlled areas of the staff involved in the response and one
northwest (NWS) or northeast (NES), nor for UNICEF implementing partners. The
(for operational reasons) was it possible to surveys provided an opportunity to collect
visit the UNICEF field office in Qamishli. information about the perceptions of those
the team was unable to interview.
Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the Level 3 Humanitarian Crisis in Syria 8
The survey for staff was completed by
119 respondents from field offices in
Syria, SCO, the Gaziantep outpost office,
MENARO, and headquarters locations.
The survey consisted of 13 substantive
questions, eight of which were open-ended.
This gave staff a chance to explain their
views in detail and provided the team with
rich detailed qualitative information. The
results of the survey were coded, sorted
and analysed.
The survey for partners was administered
in Arabic and English. It was sent to all
implementing partners that have active
Evaluability and evaluation limitations
agreements with either UNICEF Syria
country office or Gaziantep outpost Some of the limits to evaluating the
office. Approximately 60 per cent of those UNICEF response in Syria come from the
contacted responded. The survey consisted lack of reliable data concerning needs
of 14 substantive questions, nine of which and priorities across different parts of the
were open-ended, which allowed the team country, as well as data gaps concerning
to collect detailed information. The survey UNICEF programming and operations. The
results were translated, coded, sorted and datasets are sometimes divided between
analysed. Government of Syria-controlled areas
(GCAs) and non-GCAs, and in many cases
A more detailed description of the are based on different indicators. In other
methodology can be found in the inception cases, it was not possible to establish
report. The information collected by the a geographic breakdown within larger
methods outlined above was organized (WoS/SCO) datasets. The nature of the
by evaluation question and analysed data makes it difficult to compare across
accordingly. Two debriefings-cum-early regions, and more generally to assess
findings workshops were held, one in how well targeted, prioritized and effective
Damascus and one remotely, which UNICEF interventions have been. These
provided an opportunity for those involved limitations are analysed in the following
in the response to provide feedback on the sections, particularly section 4. For some
initial findings. parts of the programme, most notably
Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the Level 3 Humanitarian Crisis in Syria 9
in NES, the lack of available data over and NES. For these it has been reliant on
the evaluation period had a significant interviews with staff working ‘remotely’,
impact on the overall evaluability of that mostly through NGO partners in NWS;
component of the programme. staff working directly and with partners
out of the Qamishli field office in NES;
The ‘hybrid’ nature of the UNICEF and (mostly remote) consultation with
programme introduced another partners and others working in these areas.
complication. The evaluation had to Access to parts of Syria under government
consider the organization’s approach and control was not significantly constrained,
performance across at least three distinct so a fair degree of direct observation and
geographic and humanitarian contexts discussion with partners was possible
(GCAs, NWS and NES) as well as across on a ‘representative sample’ basis. The
the whole of Syria. This includes work team was able to broaden its range of
within GCAs and that was conducted inputs from all areas through the use of
(largely remotely) cross-border as well online surveys of staff and partners, but
as ‘cross-line’ or ‘cross-zone’. There the nature of the evaluation was such
are a number of evaluability challenges that no other primary data collection
related to this. Some relate to the lack was possible beyond these and KIIs. This
of a clear overarching strategy for the inevitably limited the extent to which the
humanitarian response: neither the 2016 evaluation could draw firm conclusions on
country programme document (CPD) nor the effectiveness and quality of UNICEF
the more recent draft CPD articulate the interventions.
UNICEF strategy for this component of
its work, which in practice makes up the Significant UNICEF and partner staff
great majority of its work in Syria over turnover since 2018 across all offices and
the evaluation period. No explicit WoS hubs meant that not all interviewees had
strategy exists and the programme logic for institutional memory of how the response
humanitarian interventions is not always had evolved during the evaluation period.
clear. This led to a relative bias in evidence
towards the more recent part of that period,
Other limitations on evaluability are more although the evaluators concluded that
typical of contexts such as this, including such evidence often had greater relevance
limits on access, time and resources. to current challenges – and that this was
With respect to access, the evaluation consistent with the intention of putting
team was not able to access areas in non- particular emphasis on more recent
government-controlled parts of NWS experience.
Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the Level 3 Humanitarian Crisis in Syria 10
1.4 Evaluation questions A. Evolution of Syria context, priority
issues for children, operating context
The evaluation team devised a framework (Questions of appropriateness and
relevance of UNICEF response)
of guiding questions for the evaluation,
building on those in the ToR. These
B. UNICEF strategy, needs assessment,
provided the basis for informant interviews
planning and programme design
and documentary analysis. Together
(Relevance, appropriateness, coverage,
with sub-questions, criteria and potential
equity, coherence)
evidence sources, they are set out in full in
the evaluation matrix in Annex 2. Below,
C. Programme performance and impact
we list the main headings and related
(Quality, results, effectiveness)
evaluation criteria.
D. Partnerships, coordination and
Overall evaluation questions: collaboration
(Coverage, external coherence, connected-
How well has UNICEF served the best
ness, efficiency)
interests of children (short- and medium-
term) across the whole of Syria since
E. Management, operations and support
2018? Has it found the right roles for
functions
itself, overall and by sector? What has
(Efficiency and control)
been the main added value of UNICEF
interventions? What can be learned
F. Cross-cutting issues
from this for the future of UNICEF work
in the country, region and globally?
Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the Level 3 Humanitarian Crisis in Syria 11
2
THE SYRIA CRISIS AND
THE HUMANITARIAN RESPONSE6
2.1 The Syria crisis and its communities and institutions; and on the
effects related humanitarian interventions by
UNICEF and others. We also consider some
of the key factors in the wider development
The timeline in section 1 above shows
context; and we briefly review the context
some of the key humanitarian milestones in
for the sectors with which UNICEF is most
the course of the Syria crisis since 2011. In
concerned: health, nutrition, water, sanita-
the rest of this section, we highlight some
tion and hygiene (WASH), child protection,
of the main features of the Syria context
education, adolescent development and
as they bear on the immediate well-being
participation (ADAP) and social protection.
and security of children and their families;
on the prospects for recovery of families,
6 This section covers evaluation questions A.1 How has the general Syria country context evolved over (i) the decade 2011–2021, (ii) evaluation period
(2018 to date)? A.2 How has the humanitarian context evolved, specifically for children and women? A.3 How has the context for humanitarian
intervention by international and national/local organizations evolved since 2018? A.4 What have been the main operating challenges for UNICEF and its
partners?
Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the Level 3 Humanitarian Crisis in Syria 12
The impact of conflict and economic the extent of the displacement crisis, as
collapse many Syrians have been displaced multiple
times. The graph below shows the total
Although the figures are difficult to verify,
number of people displaced at the end
it is estimated that since the conflict began
of each year (in orange) and the number
over half a million people have been killed,
displaced in each year (in blue).9 Repeated
over 350,000 of whom were civilians.7 The
displacement explains the relatively steady
United Nations has verified that nearly
total number of displaced people. Every
12,000 children have been killed or injured
year, since 2012, between 1 million and 3.5
in Syria, although the real figure is likely
million people have been displaced. The
much higher.8 There have been attacks on
effect on families, communities and the
civilians and medical personnel, reports of
social fabric and cohesion of the country is
torture, kidnappings, summary executions
incalculable.
and the use of chemical weapons. More
than two-thirds of basic infrastructure has
been damaged and targeting of civilian in-
frastructure – including markets, hospitals,
Figure 3: Internal displacement in Syria,
schools and residential areas – has been 2011–2020
regularly reported, particularly in northern
New IDPs and Total IDPs
Syria.
8
The crisis is estimated to have displaced
more than half the population, internally
6
and externally. Since 2011, almost a third
of Syrians – 6.8 million – have sought 4
refuge outside Syria and around 5.6 million
Syrians are hosted by countries in the 2
region. There have also been enormous
displacements within Syria. According to 0
the United Nations High Commissioner for
2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020
Refugees (UNHCR), 6.7 million people are Total IDPs New IDPs
currently displaced, but this figure hides
7 Statement by Michelle Bachelet, United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, September 2021.
8 United Nations, ‘Syria War: Average of one child injured or killed every eight hours over past 10 years’, https://news.un.org/en/story/2021/03/1087212.
9 United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, Humanitarian Data Exchange, Geneva, https://data.humdata.org/dataset/id
mc-idp-data-for-syrian-arab-republic.
Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the Level 3 Humanitarian Crisis in Syria 13
The Syrian economy has been devastated from 34 per cent in 2007 to 85 per cent in
by years of conflict. Destruction of infra- 2015 and 90 per cent in 2021.13 This has
structure and prevailing insecurity have both short- and longer-term implications.
made most of the country economically Some of the more acute aspects of this
unviable, and key sectors like agriculture are considered below, in terms of loss
and mineral extraction have shrunk of livelihoods and the ability of families
dramatically.10 One result is a dramatic loss to meet their basic needs. At the macro-
of employment opportunities for millions economic level, the collapse of the
of Syrians, including older adolescents and economy and the impact of sanctions have
young adults. Fuel and electricity shortages had profound fiscal as well as monetary
have negatively impacted households, as impacts (the collapse in the value of
well as health services, water services and the currency), including impacts on the
the agricultural sector. Since late 2020, low ability of the Government of Syria (GoS)
levels of rainfall contributed to significant to generate adequate revenue to invest
crop failures, particularly in the northeast, in essential services. This is reflected in
which produces around 60 per cent of the the ever-smaller government social sector
country’s wheat and barley.11 Insufficient budgets, meaning less funding for social
water for irrigation jeopardizes the income support programmes like fuel and food
of vulnerable families who are at risk of subsidies and for the wages of public
sliding further into poverty and exacerbates employees, who make up a third of the
the risks for gender-based violence and workforce.14
poor health.
In the last two years, the economic
Overall, the past decade of conflict has situation has deteriorated further due to
seen the impoverishment of much of the the ongoing economic crisis in Lebanon, a
population of Syria. Poverty levels12 rose financial centre for Syria. This has caused
10 Economist Intelligence Unit, Country Report, June 2022.
11 United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, ‘Syrian Arab Republic: Euphrates water crisis and drought outlook as of 17
June 2021’, Geneva, June 2021. Available at https://reliefweb.int/report/syrian-arab-republic/syrian-arab-republic-euphrates-water-crisis-drought-out
look-17-june-2021.
12 In Syria’s context, overall poverty is defined as the share of the population whose per capita expenditure is less than the cost of food and a reason
able minimum expenditure on non-food items.
13 Syrian Centre for Policy Research, ‘Confronting Fragmentation’, February 2016. World Food Programme, ‘Hunger, Poverty and Rising Prices: How one
family in Syria bears the burden of 11 years of conflict’, WFP, Rome, November 2021, https://reliefweb.int/report/syrian-arab-republic/hunger-pover
ty-and-rising-prices-how-one-family-syria-bears-burden-11#:~:text=This%20year%2C%2090%20percent%20of,to%20meet%20their%20basic%20
needs.
14 Christou, W. and K. Shaar, ‘2021 Budget Reveals the Depth of Syria’s Economic Woes’, Atlantic Council, December 2020, https://www.atlanticcoun
cil.org/blogs/menasource/2021-budget-reveals-the-depth-of-syrias-economic-woes/.
Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the Level 3 Humanitarian Crisis in Syria 14
the Syrian currency to lose much of its Taken together, the factors outlined
value against the US dollar, leading to above mean that Syria has suffered not
soaring prices for food, fuel and other just a humanitarian but a development
critical items.15 The cost of basic staples catastrophe, and this has profound
has increased much faster than household implications for the medium- and longer-
incomes, causing many families to adopt term well-being and development of
negative coping mechanisms, including children and adolescents in Syria. What
child labour, early marriage and skipping or was a ‘lower-middle-income’ country only
reducing meals. Similarly, the more recent a decade ago, with relatively strong health,
depreciation of the Turkish lira against the educational and social systems, is now
US dollar has increased the cost of living a ‘low-income’ country with a collapsed
in the northwest.16 It has been estimated economy, over half of whose population
that the regional economic downturn has is displaced either internally or externally
reduced remittances sent to Syria by up to (as refugees), and many of whom have lost
50 per cent.17 their former livelihoods. The loss of human
capital is incalculable, but already shows
The economic impact of sanctions on itself in the severe shortage of trained
Syria has been severe. The country has professionals in the health, education and
been under sanctions for several years, other sectors. More generally, the social
but in 2020 sanctions were expanded fabric of the country has been torn in ways
with the passage of the Caesar Act in that may take generations to repair.
the United States. The act dramatically
increases the authority of the United States Humanitarian consequences for children
to sanction businesses, individuals and and their families
government institutions for economic
In 2016, the conflict was much more
activities that support the Government of
active across multiple fronts, and far more
Syria, particularly in the areas of oil, gas
people were suffering the direct effects of
and reconstruction. Notably, the act gives
war, including exposure to violent attack
the United States the authority to sanction
and bombardment, loss of homes and
third-country actors who engage in such
property, displacement, denial of access
activities.
to assistance and so on. Aid workers
15 Reuters, ‘Syrian Pound Hits New Low in Contagion from Neighboring Lebanon’s Currency Crisis’, March 2021, https://www.reuters.com/article/syr
ia-economy-pound-int/syrian-pound-hits-new-low-in-contagion-from-neighboring-lebanons-currency-crisis-idUSKBN2AV1UI.
16 Reuters, ‘Turkish Lira Slump Hits Displaced Families in Syria’s Northwest, December 2021, https://www.reuters.com/world/middle-east/turkish-li
ra-slump-hits-displaced-families-syrias-northwest-2021-12-09/
17 United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, ‘Humanitarian Response Plan for the Syrian Arab Republic, 2021’, Geneva, 2021.
Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the Level 3 Humanitarian Crisis in Syria 15
and aid convoys were directly attacked,
as were civilian institutions like schools
and hospitals. Gaining secure access to
‘hard-to-reach’ and besieged populations
was still the key humanitarian challenge
for international actors.18 Needs and
vulnerabilities related as much to the direct
effects of conflict as the indirect effects,
and the protection agenda extended to
the entire civilian population of Syria, with
widespread violations of international law.
The scale of humanitarian needs in Syria
today remains enormous. Although the particularly for over two million people in
current humanitarian situation in Syria is 1,760 informal settlements and planned
different in kind to that in 2016, the scale camps, often hosted in inadequate
of the crisis is comparable. Some 13.4 shelters and with limited access to basic
million people were estimated to be in services. Households in overburdened
need of humanitarian assistance in 2021, host communities and those who have
including 6.6 million children.19 These returned to their – often destroyed – places
figures are around 20 per cent higher than of origin continue to face major challenges
those from 2020 and comparable with in meeting their most basic needs”.20 But
those from the period 2016–2017. The it goes on note that is the ‘vulnerable
figure for 2022 is 14.6 million, an increase residents’ category – those that have not
of 1.2 million from 2021, and the profile been recently displaced – that shows
of those in need continues to evolve. As the greatest increase in humanitarian
the Humanitarian Needs Overview (HNO) needs, revealing the impact of economic
for 2022 describes: “Long-standing needs deterioration in areas historically less
of an estimated 6.9 million [internally directly affected by hostilities and
displaced persons] remain staggering, displacement.
18 The lack of access was so severe that the UN ERC reported in early 2016 that “[in 2015] the UN only delivered humanitarian assistance to less than
10 per cent of people in hard-to-reach areas and only around one per cent in besieged areas”. Statement of Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator Stephen O’Brien statement to the London Conference on Syria, January 2016.
19 United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, ‘Humanitarian Needs Overview for the Syrian Arab Republic, 2021’, Geneva, 2021.
20 United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, ‘Humanitarian Needs Overview for the Syrian Arab Republic, 2022’, Geneva, 2022,
p.8.
Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the Level 3 Humanitarian Crisis in Syria 16
The United Nations assessment of the in need. Within the category of ‘people
number of people in need of humanitarian in need’ of humanitarian assistance and
assistance over time is shown in Figure 4 protection as understood in the HRP, five
below. By the end of 2013, more than half different levels of severity are recognized,
of all Syrians inside the country were in from ‘minimal’ (level 1) and ‘stress’ (2) to
need of humanitarian aid. Although the ‘severe’ (3), ‘extreme’ (4) and ‘catastrophic’
total number of people in need started (5). All but 5 per cent of the population
to decrease in 2018, that trend has since were assessed to be in the top three
reversed, so that today close to 75 per cent categories in 2021.21
of the population is assessed as being
Figure 4: Number of people inside Syria in need of humanitarian assistance
People in Need by Year
2012 – 2021
12.2 13.5 13.5 13.1 13.4
10.8 11.7
9.3 8.7 5.6 11.06 6
5.7
5
6.8 4.65
4
2.5
1
SHARP 2012 SHARP 2013 SHARP 2014 SRP 2015 HNO 2016 HNO 2017 HNO 2018 HNO 2019 HNO 2020 HNO 2021
People in need (in millions) People in extreme and catastrophic need (in millions)
Source: HRP 2021
21 HNO 2021; HNO 2022.
Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the Level 3 Humanitarian Crisis in Syria 17
Figure 5: People in need in Syria
Children and women are generally the (the 1.7 million people living in camps are
worst affected by the crisis, and they con- almost entirely aid dependent) but this
stitute around 80 per cent of those living is now a more generalized phenomenon
in internally displaced person (IDP) settle- across the population. Levels of both
ments. Older people and those living with chronic and acute malnutrition among
disabilities are among the other key groups children are thought to be rising as a result,
of humanitarian concern, along with dis- though recent nutrition survey data are
placed people generally. lacking.
Food insecurity makes up a large and Health vulnerabilities are high across all
growing proportion of needs. In 2021, an of Syria, in part because of major damage
estimated 12.4 million people in Syria were to the health care system from years of
thought to be food insecure, the highest conflict. By 2019, just about half of the
level ever recorded in the country, up pre-conflict number of health facilities
from 7.9 million in 2020. Food insecurity is were functional, with the northeast of
particularly high among IDP populations Syria being hardest hit; furthermore, an
Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the Level 3 Humanitarian Crisis in Syria 18
estimated 70 per cent of trained health with women and girls representing more
care workers have been lost to the system. than 70 per cent of the total (72 per cent in
From 2020, an already greatly weakened 2019).23
and fragmented system was put under
further strain by the coronavirus disease Prior to the conflict (2011), water and
2019 (COVID-19) pandemic. Areas of sanitation indicators in Syria were
high population density, such as informal comparable with other middle-income
settlements, IDP camps and collective countries in terms of access to improved
shelters, are at high risk for disease water sources, sanitation and sewage
outbreaks. A decline in coverage of routine systems. The conflict dramatically
immunization through the Expanded affected the WASH infrastructure and the
Programme of Immunization (EPI) during functioning of the related systems. Now
the conflict years was evidenced by a over 7 million people are highly dependent
resurgence of polio in 2013 and 2017, as on emergency WASH assistance, including
well as in frequent measles outbreaks. 1.9 million people living in IDP sites that
Although these have been successfully require full provision of WASH services for
contained, EPI coverage, particularly health and survival. Currently, around 42
outside GCAs, remains significantly lower per cent of households rely on alternative
than before the conflict. While overall rates water sources such as water trucking and
are reported to be reasonably good (around wells. At least half of the sewage systems
70 per cent), they are said to be much lower are not functional and around 70 per cent
in NES and Aleppo. Data on these and of the sewage is discarded untreated.
other health indicators (e.g., mental health) The lack of electricity in large parts of the
are scarce. country has been a major constraint on
WASH systems and is directly correlated
The number of people in need over the with the decrease of water distributed.24 As
period 2018–2021 has ranged between 11.3- in the health sector, loss of skilled human
13.2 million people for the health sector resources has had a major adverse impact.
and 4.6-4.9 million people for nutrition,22
22 HRPs 2018–2021.
23 United Nations Children’s Fund, ‘HRP Sector Plans 2019: Provision of primary health care services for vulnerable children and women in Syria’,
UNICEF, New York, 2019.
24 According to the 2022 HNO, electricity is at 15 per cent of what it was before the onset of hostilities in 2011.
Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the Level 3 Humanitarian Crisis in Syria 19
The number of people in need for the teaching staff27 has been compounded
WASH sector during the period 2018–2021 by the irregular (and low) payment of
has ranged between 10.7-15.5 million qualified teachers, limiting the quality and
people,25 with a spike in 2019 reflecting provision of education. As a result, 97 per
increased hostilities and consequent new cent of children in Syria, who comprise
displacements. In 2021, the worst drought almost half the affected population, are in
in 70 years put an even greater strain need of emergency education assistance.
on available water sources, particularly In 2020, an estimated 2.45 million children
in northeast Syria and parts of Aleppo were out of school and 1.6 million children
Governorate. As the HNO 2022 describes were at risk of dropping out.28 Children
it, “historically low water levels in the in areas with high rates of IDPs have less
Euphrates River have not just reduced access to education than those in other
access to water for drinking and domestic parts of the country, and new waves of
use for over five million people, but displacement in 2019–2020 put further
also triggered substantial harvest and pressure on education facilities already
income losses, decreased hydroelectricity overstretched by earlier displacements.
generation, an increase in water-borne There is a sharp drop in attendance for
diseases, and additional protection adolescents due to the lack of access
risks. In the mid- to long-term, these to secondary and vocational education.
developments are expected to have serious Combined with deepening poverty, this has
and cumulative impact on health, food fuelled harmful coping mechanisms, and
insecurity, malnutrition rates, as well as the child labour (including its worst forms) is
protection environment, with potentially reported in all governorates. The COVID-19
irreversible consequences”.26 pandemic has further exacerbated the
situation. More generally, response to
The conflict has had a devastating impact education needs is complicated by the
on access to education. More than one existence of different systems in different
in three schools have been damaged, areas of control, as well as by the politics
destroyed, are no longer accessible or are surrounding the education agenda.
occupied (often by IDPs). Loss of qualified
25 HRPs 2018–2021.
26 HNO 2022, p.8.
27 In 2019, over 140,000 teachers and education personnel were no longer in their teaching posts.
28 In 2020 and 2021, COVID-19 exacerbated the risk of dropping out and threats faced by students in attending schools.
Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the Level 3 Humanitarian Crisis in Syria 20
Between 2018 and 2021, there were on violations remain a significant concern,
average around 6 million children in need including in areas where hostilities have
of child protection services, including 95 declined. Children in Syria are still at risk of
per cent of those living in areas ranked being killed or injured, recruited and used
as high severity locations.29 Psychosocial in hostilities, tortured, detained, abducted
distress among children, though hard and sexually abused. Children of foreign
to quantify, has been a persistent issue nationals housed in Al-Hol and Roj camps
throughout the evaluation period. In are a group of particular concern.
the earlier part of this period, the direct
effects of conflict – including widespread There are 4.6 million adolescents (ages
violations of humanitarian law and human 10-19) in Syria, representing 22.5 per cent
rights – gave rise to particular protection of the total population. The unemployment
concerns for children and the wider civilian rate among older adolescents is estimated
population. But armed conflict, economic to be close to 75 per cent and is significant-
deterioration, displacement and the ly higher among girls. There are strong
COVID-19 crisis have all had an impact and links to both the education and child pro-
have disproportionately affected girls and tection agendas here: with an uncertain fu-
women in Syria. Rates of gender-based ture and limited opportunities, adolescents
violence and violence against children are have grown increasingly disillusioned, frus-
reported to be high.30 Grave child rights trated and disempowered. Adolescent boys
29 HNO 2021.
30 HRP 2021.
Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the Level 3 Humanitarian Crisis in Syria 21
Gender-based violence continues to be a real and persistent threat in the lives of many
women and girls. The continuation of armed hostilities significantly restricts women’s and
girls’ freedoms, such as freedom of movement and the ability to seek employment, protection
services, healthcare, information, and assistance, trapping them in cycles of vulnerability and
abuse. Inequitable gender norms which relegate women and girls to positions of subordination
and justify the use of violence against them persist across Syria.
Humanitarian Needs Overview 2022, p.8
are at a substantial risk of being killed and/ social capital will be a far greater and more
or injured or being exploited and involved lasting challenge than reconstructing the
in child labour. Adolescent girls are partic- physical infrastructure.31 In the meantime,
ularly at risk of child marriage and other the acute macro-economic crisis facing the
forms of exploitation and gender-based country is reflected at the level of house-
violence, including sexual violence. Many hold economies. According to a recent
adolescents and youth are reported to study, the average price of items in Syria
resorting to negative coping mechanisms is now 17 times higher than their value in
such as joining extremist organizations, 2010, and food and beverage prices are 20
crime, trafficking and substance abuse. times higher than their value in 2010.32 The
decline in the living standards of people in
With regard to social protection, the needs Syria is evident in the dramatic rise in pov-
far outstrip available resources through erty levels noted above.
either government or aid mechanisms.
Nearly ten years of crisis have had a dev- Prior to the crisis, the social protection
astating impact on Syria’s economy and system in Syria, although it did not provide
social fabric, and the effects of the cri- universal coverage, consisted of free health
sis on human lives profoundly affect the care, old age pensions, disability pensions,
prospects for longer-term recovery of the survivors’ pensions, employment injuries
country. Rebuilding Syria’s human and and social assistance programmes. Since
31 Gobat, J. and K. Kostial, ‘Syria’s Conflict Economy’, working paper WP/16/123, International Monetary Fund, Washington, D.C., June 2016.
32 Mehchy, Z and R. Turkmani, ‘New Consumer Price Index Estimates for Syria Reveal Further Economic Deterioration and Alarming Levels of Humani-
tarian Need’, conflict research programme policy briefing, London School of Economics and Political Sciences, London, January 2020.
Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the Level 3 Humanitarian Crisis in Syria 22
the onset of the crisis, the significant Overall, the situation in most parts of the
downscaling in the government social country has become less volatile since
welfare programmes – as a result of fiscal 2018. Yet the humanitarian situation
pressures – has led to a further lack of continues to be severe, particularly in
support for many vulnerable children NWS and NES, but also in areas like rural
and families. People with disabilities Damascus, Homs and Aleppo.34 One
are among the most vulnerable sections key difference between 2016 and the
of the population, both socially and present is in the extent of humanitarian
economically.33 access, i.e., the ability of affected people
to access assistance and protection from
The fragmentation of Syria: Addressing humanitarian agencies (national and
multiple crises international). The access situation has
Although the government has regained improved substantially since 2018 with
much of Syria’s territory since 2016, the relative stabilization of the conflict, the
it remains a divided country. With the ending of sieges and the opening-up of
consolidation of territorial control by the previously ‘hard-to-reach’ areas. Greater
government and opposition factions, the stability and improved security have
crisis in Syria now extends across three allowed more consistent access to most
main zones of control. As a result, it cannot areas, both GCAs and non-GCAs – the latter
truly be described as a single ‘crisis’ but supported through cross-border and cross-
has to be understood across at least three line or cross-zone operations. However,
distinct crisis contexts: Government- the 2020 closure of the authorized crossing
controlled areas (GCAs) and the two main point from Iraq and the bureaucratic and
non-government-controlled areas (non- logistical demands of supplying cross-
GCAs) in NWS and NES. Although there zone now pose additional challenges to
are multiple common features across all of the provision of support to people living
these ‘sub-crises’, including more recently in NES, including routine immunization
the threat of COVID-19, they pose different and vaccination campaigns (COVID-19 and
threats to the populations concerned and other).
different challenges for those seeking to
respond to them.
33 UNICEF sector plans, HRP 2019; United Nations Children’s Fund, ‘Social Policy: Cash transfer programme for children with disabilities’, UNICEF, New
York, 2019.
34 United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, ‘Syrian Arab Republic: 2021 Needs and Response Summary’, Geneva, February
2021.
Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the Level 3 Humanitarian Crisis in Syria 23
A common factor between the different – and particularly on the service delivery
areas – apart from general impoverishment capacity of civil society (national and
– is the loss of access to basic services. international NGOs). These in turn depend
While this is hard to quantify, there is a on international funding and (for NES) on
key difference in this respect between securing permissions from the governing
GCAs and other areas, namely that authorities.
government services have largely ceased
to be provided in the non-GCAs and are The non-GC areas of both NWS and NES
having to be substituted mainly through are vulnerable in part because of political
a combination of NGOs supported by uncertainty, the situation being contingent
United Nations agencies and recently in part on choices made by foreign powers
established authorities, which often as well as by the GoS and the United
lack capacity and experience. Perhaps Nations Security Council. The non-GCAs
most significant here is the loss of of the northwest in particular are highly
professional human resources, including volatile and unstable, and uncertainty over
health personnel. These authorities have the future of the remaining border crossing
at present neither the capacity nor the at Bab al-Hawa compounds this situation
resources to substitute effectively for (see next section). With the potential for
services that had been provided by the new movements of refugees and IDPs into
relevant government ministries. Service and out of both of these areas, contingency
provision is heavily dependent on supply planning and flexibility of approach remain
through United Nations agencies – cross- essential.
border into NWS and cross-zone into NES
Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the Level 3 Humanitarian Crisis in Syria 24
There are further key differences between The northeast of the country, already
NWS and NES. These relate partly to relatively under-developed compared to
different needs and vulnerabilities and other parts of Syria, suffered particularly
partly to the capacity to meet those high levels of damage in cities like Ar-
needs and the different modalities by Raqqa and Deir-ez-Zor as well as large-
which humanitarian support is provided. scale displacement and loss of professional
The northwest has suffered some of the capacities. Supporting displaced people
most severe effects of conflict over the in severely overcrowded (and politically
evaluation period (see Box 2), resulting in charged) camps like Al-Hol poses a
repeated mass displacements. This has left particular set of challenges. The closure
a high proportion of the population in non- of the authorized crossing point from
government areas homeless and highly aid Iraq (Al-Yarubiyah) in January 2020 left
dependent, with little short-term prospect the humanitarian operation weakened,
of being able to return home. Services are with United Nations agencies only able to
largely dependent on aid organizations provide support cross-zone from GCAs.
supported cross-border from Türkiye.
Box 2: Recent humanitarian context in northwest Syria
Much of the northwest of Syria is outside the control of the government. Today, there are an estimated 4.4
million people in need of humanitarian assistance in northwest Syria. Some 2.8 million people are displaced,
of whom 1.7 million are in IDP sites.* In 2020 alone, the camp coordination and camp management cluster
tracked over 2 million movements.
More than 1 million children are estimated to be out of school (out of a population of 1.7 million school-
aged children), a sharp increase from 2019. Many schools have been destroyed or damaged – 47 in 2020
alone – and a third of the teachers have not been paid in over a year. Global acute malnutrition rates have
consistently deteriorated among children under five.** This part of the country is highly dependent on
humanitarian aid.
* United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, ‘Situation Report May 2022’, Geneva,
https://reliefweb.int/report/syrian-arab-republic/north-west-syria-situation-report-17-may-2022
** Standardized Expanded Nutrition Survey (SENS), Idlib & Aleppo Governorates, northwest Syria, report 18 June 2021
Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the Level 3 Humanitarian Crisis in Syria 25
Box 3: Recent humanitarian context in northeast Syria
Before the war, Ar-Raqqa, Al-Hasakah and Deir-ez-Zor had the most significant incidence of poverty
nationally. Today, the humanitarian needs are acute. Much of the population in the northeast is internally
displaced and most IDPs have been displaced for more than four years. Because host communities are
overcrowded with limited access to services, many have been forced to resort to camps or informal
settlements. But camps too are overcrowded and facing serious capacity issues. Many captured
members of Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (Da’esh), including third-country nationals and children,
are imprisoned or held in camps in the northeast. Other challenges in the region include ‘brain-drain’ and
the presence of Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (Da’esh) sleeper cells.
Water scarcity now poses a major risk in the region. In 2021, the hydroelectric potential of the Tishreen
and Tabqa dams, two of the most significant reservoirs in Syria, significantly diminished, resulting in
power blackouts. Three million people in the northeast, as well as hospitals and other vital infrastructure,
rely on electricity from these dams and many more depend on water pumped by the power of the dams.
Areas in the northeast are at heightened risk of disease outbreaks due to the frequently interrupted water
supply. According to the World Health Organization, only 1 out of 16 public hospitals in the northeast is
fully functioning while other hospitals are either partially functioning or not functioning at all.
2.2 The international Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA). The HRPs
humanitarian aid context detail how the United Nations and its
since 2018 international and national partners
intend to respond to the priority needs
of the Syrian population. Because it was
The role of UNICEF in Syria must be
difficult for humanitarian actors to access
understood in the wider context of the
territory that was under the control of the
international community’s efforts to
opposition, in July 2014, the United Nations
assist Syrians. From 2011 onwards, the
Security Council (UNSC) unanimously
previous development-oriented United
passed Security Council Resolution (SCR)
Nations programme (see section 3) has
2165. This resolution authorized the
been replaced by successive humanitarian
United Nations to deliver cross-border
response plans coordinated by the United
humanitarian aid through four points
Nations Office for the Coordination of
Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the Level 3 Humanitarian Crisis in Syria 26
in Jordan, Türkiye and Iraq without the Today, the WoS system is still in place.
consent of the Syrian government.35 This Although initially set up to coordinate the
led to the creation, in 2015, of the ‘Whole work across multiple hubs, it now facilitates
of Syria’ (WoS) approach, a framework for cluster/sector coordination between three
coordinating aid to both the opposition hubs: (i) Damascus, (ii) Cross-Border
and Government of Syria-held territories, NW Syria and (iii) the NES Forum. The
designed to help harmonize strategy, three are coordinated for delivery of the
planning and advocacy across the entire HNO and HRP – in other words, for needs
response, based on information-sharing, assessment and for overall planning and
‘joined-up’ needs assessment and joint fundraising for the Syria response.
analysis. Central to this has been the
attempt to ensure that major gaps in the Syrians are thus reached with humanitarian
response are avoided, areas of unmet aid in various ways. To service populations
need are addressed, and overlapping or in the non-GCAs of NWS, many United
conflicting programmes avoided. Nations agencies have established offices
in Gaziantep, Türkiye. While United Nations
In January 2020, the Security Council staff generally do not cross into Syria
passed SCR 2504, which authorized cross- from Türkiye, they work with partners with
border work via only two of the four presence in NWS to provide humanitarian
crossing points – Bab al-Salam and Bab aid. For the first time since 2017, in August
al-Hawa, both in Türkiye – for a period of 2021, the World Food Programme (WFP)
six months. The effect of the closure of completed a cross-line delivery of food
the border crossing at Al-Yarubiyah, at aid, and UNICEF has since provided cross-
the Iraqi border, led to major coordination line support for WASH services through a
challenges and weakened an already weak partnership with the private sector. In order
healthcare sector – just before the advent to service non-GCAs of NES, several United
of COVID-19. Later that year, authorization Nations agencies based in Damascus work
was further limited to just one crossing cross-zone. Additionally, there are many
(Bab al-Hawa), and a decision is pending in international NGOs (INGOs) that operate
mid-2022 on whether to further to extend with partners in these areas without
that authorization.36 permission from the Syrian government.
35 Bab Al-Salam, Bab Al-Hawa, Al-Yarubiyah and Al-Ramtha.
36 A decision on this has in fact now been made, with the passing of Security Council Resolution 2642 (2022), which extends the mandate to at least 10
January 2023. http://unscr.com/en/resolutions/2642
Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the Level 3 Humanitarian Crisis in Syria 27
They are coordinated through the NES there are communities and enclaves that
Forum and a series of working groups have remained difficult to reach owing to
in a system that mirrors the standard administrative impediments and security
humanitarian architecture usually led by approvals.
OCHA.
As a result of these access challenges, the
Insecurity remains a key limiting factor on quantity and quality of reliable data on key
access for aid organizations. The United humanitarian indicators are poor. The data
Nations and NGOs implement programmes used to inform the HNOs and subsequent
in areas affected by frequent armed programming are based on annual
clashes, air strikes and regular exchanges needs assessments,37 but many of those
of indirect artillery fire and other types of interviewed for this evaluation stated that
attacks by or among parties to the conflict. figures presented in the HNO are known
Humanitarians also operate in areas highly to be weak and unreliable.38 Obtaining
contaminated with unexploded ordnance, permission to undertake large-scale data-
landmines and other explosive remnants collection exercises has been challenging,
of war. Since the beginning of the conflict, although UNICEF is currently planning a
hundreds of humanitarian workers have multiple indicator cluster survey with the
reportedly been killed. GoS.
Besides the very limited access of the For political reasons, the largest donors
United Nations in non-GCAs of NWS, to the HRP have put conditions on how
its access is restricted in other parts of the funding provided to United Nations
Syria. Ruhkban, an area on the Jordanian agencies and their international and
border, has not been accessed by the national partners can be used. The
United Nations since September 2019. United States and the European Union
The United Nations also does not operate (EU), in common with most donors, are
in north-central Syria, which is controlled committed to the approach set out in
by Turkish authorities. Within GCAs, the Parameters and Principles of United
37 Humanitarian Needs Assessment Programme, HNAP.
38 KIIs with staff from UNICEF, other UN agencies and NGOs. All of those consulted noted the weaknesses of the HNAP process and the need for a
more substantial and reliable process.
Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the Level 3 Humanitarian Crisis in Syria 28
Nations Assistance in Syria.39 This limits questioning of the neutrality of the [United
support provided through the HRP to ‘life- Nations] inside Syria by some donors”.
saving and basic needs’ and blocks support Although a certain proportion of UNICEF
to ‘reconstruction’ pending a political funding for Syria remains unearmarked,
settlement. donor conditionalities and earmarking of
contributions have restricted UNICEF work,
The factors above have a direct bearing programmatically and geographically.
on the ability of UNICEF to operate in the Apart from the potential impact on
Syria context. The most recent UNICEF impartial aid delivery, this results in “high
resource mobilization strategy states that transaction costs with complex contribution
the organization is challenged by the management and frequent requests for
“highly political nature of the conflict and information and detailed reporting”.40
Box 4: Overview of UNICEF response to the crisis 2018–2021
The organization’s approach to the WoS agenda has been to operate from two external hubs in
addition to the Syria country office in Damascus and its six field offices in Homs, Aleppo, Qamishli,
Deir-ez-Zor, Tartous and rural Damascus. From Gaziantep, it has managed and coordinated cross-
border responses into non-GCA NWS. Before the UNSC-authorized crossing from Iraq closed in
2020, UNICEF coordinated the cross-border response into NES from MENARO in Amman, Jordan.
Today, a team in MENARO coordinates the UNICEF WoS response, including work managed from
both Damascus and Gaziantep.
Since 2018, UNICEF has spent over $900 million on its response in Syria. The majority of funds
(between 71 and 78 per cent between 2018–2021) have been managed by the SCO. The Gaziantep
office has managed 16-24 per cent of the annual budget over the same period. In 2018 and 2019,
MENARO managed 8-9 per cent, and since 2020, 1 per cent.
39 https://www.kommersant.ru/docs/2018/UN-Assistane-in-Syria-2017.pdf. In practice, the US and EU are reported to have been reasonably flexible in
their assistance, within the parameters and principles (correspondence with UNICEF staff).
40 United Nations Children’s Fund, ‘UNICEF Partnership and Resource Mobilization Strategy’, UNICEF, New York, 2021, p.18.
Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the Level 3 Humanitarian Crisis in Syria 29
snoillim
DSU
Funding available by office, 2018 – 2021
300
250
20.1 2.0 2.5
200 52.4 12.7
34.9 53.2 51.8
150
100
176.4 167.2 163.2
166.3
50
0
2018 2019 2020 2021
Syria Country Office Gaziantep Outpost Office MENARO
Funds available by sector for WoS 2018 – 2021 (USD millions)
ADAP
Cash transfer
NFI
Child protection
Education
WASH
Nutrition
Health
- 50,000,000 100,000,000 150,000,000 200,000,000 250,000,000 300,000,000
In percentage terms, this equates to WASH 30%; education 27%; health 11%; child protection 10%;
nutrition 7%; NFIs 7%; cash transfers 4%; ADAP 4%
Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the Level 3 Humanitarian Crisis in Syria 30
3
UNICEF ROLE AND STRATEGY IN
RESPONSE TO THE SYRIA CRISIS
3.1 The organization’s evolving DAF) for 2007–2011, aligned with Syria’s
role and strategy41 tenth five-year national plan. Syria was re-
portedly on track to achieve the Millennium
Development Goals by 2015 and the UNCT
The UNICEF role in Syria has to be under-
had developed a second UNDAF for the
stood in the wider context of the role of the
period 2012–2016. However, the outbreak
United Nations and members of the United
of conflict halted the implementation of
Nations Country Team (UNCT). Before the
this framework, and instead, the 2007–2011
conflict began in 2011, the UNCT was com-
UNDAF was extended year by year.42 From
ing to the end of the first United Nations
2011 onward, the development-oriented
Development Assistance Framework (UN-
41 Evaluation question B.1 Has UNICEF found the right role for itself in Syria over the evaluation period? How well did its strategy support this?
42 The UN’s work is now guided by the UN Strategic Framework for Syrian Arab Republic 2022–2024 (published March 2022).
Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the Level 3 Humanitarian Crisis in Syria 31
United Nations programme was replaced in February 2022, and it remains the
by successive humanitarian response Executive Board-approved framework for
plans.43 In compliance with SCRs 2165 UNICEF work in Syria, pending approval
(2014) and 2191 (2014), the Syria strategic of a new CPD. This in turn depends in part
response plan of 2015 factored in cross- on approval of a new strategic framework
border and cross-line humanitarian for the United Nations as a whole.
assistance in the context of a WoS
approach. In 2019, SCO started work on a new CPD
for the period 2021–2023, again covering
In common with the other United Nations only the part of the country under GoS
agencies, from 2012 UNICEF shifted its control. The new draft CPD (June 2020)
focus to the humanitarian response.44 In signalled an intended strategic shift away
2015, the SCO developed a new country from a predominantly (humanitarian)
programme for the period 2016–2017, service delivery role toward more focus on
focusing on resilience and capacity- sustainable solutions, restoration of basic
building in tandem with humanitarian services, social protection and building
response. This was subsequently extended local capacities and resilience. “The
and revised several times, most recently
Box 4: Extracts from the UNICEF CPD for 2016–2017 (p. 3)
“A key lesson [from the past four years] has been the centrality of capacity development of partners
and institutions, even in the midst of crisis; building the capacity of public service delivery systems
thus remains a core strategy in the proposed country programme. The dislocation and ‘brain-drain’
of professional service providers and managers in all the key social sectors, as well as damaged
infrastructure networks, have substantially weakened the functionality of public services. … Over
the next two years, UNICEF programming will address immediate needs while also focusing on
interventions that enhance the resilience of families, communities and systems”.
43 Syria Humanitarian Assistance Response Plans (SHARP) 2012–2014; HRPs 2015–2021.
44 UNICEF emergency programming in Syria is set out in the Humanitarian Action for Children appeal, which is published every year and aligns with the
OCHA-led HRP for Syria. It focuses primarily though not exclusively on life-saving activities and covers all of Syria, including cross-border and cross-line
programming. The HAC is funded by other resources, emergency (ORE) which over the past four years has made up more than 85 per cent of the
funding for UNICEF work in Syria.
Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the Level 3 Humanitarian Crisis in Syria 32
need to restore services, expand social and development across different parts
protection and rebuild community capacity of the country, within and beyond the
and social cohesion while responding to government’s control.
humanitarian imperatives emerged as a key
lesson to ensure cost-effective delivery of The non-government-controlled areas of
basic services at scale, given the protracted Syria, although they have shrunk overall
nature of the crisis. Hence, the country in the past few years, remain of grave
programme gives greater emphasis to humanitarian concern, with regard to both
more sustainable solutions through both the displaced and settled populations.
humanitarian responses and development While the areas outside government
programming.”45 This draft CPD is control in northeastern Syria have
supported by programme strategy notes remained largely unchanged over the
(PSNs) for each sector of intervention. evaluation period, those in the northwest
have shrunk, with the population living
As a result of the above, UNICEF work in in ever-more crowded conditions. How to
Syria continued over the evaluation period treat these populations within a ‘whole of
to be based on the 2016 CPD, although Syria’ paradigm has been a contentious
it has evolved in various ways since that issue throughout the conflict, and even
time. Both the 2016 CPD and the new within the United Nations family, the
draft CPD reaffirm its core humanitarian various agencies have found different
commitments. However, CPDs provide solutions. The UNICEF WoS approach
only a limited strategic framework for the devised in 2015 gave responsibility for
humanitarian work itself, which constitutes sector/cluster coordination and support to
the majority (around 85-90 per cent) of cross-border operations in areas beyond
UNICEF funds spent in Syria. The new government control to a dedicated team
draft CPD clearly reflects a situation that in MENARO (see section 6). Although a
has evolved greatly since 2016 and indeed comprehensive strategy for the response
over the course of the evaluation period. in the whole country – GCAs and non-
What it reflects less clearly is the extent GCAs – was supposed to be developed, this
and severity of the short- to medium- did not happen.46 Since the closure of the
term threats to children’s well-being border crossing from Iraq and the passing
45 United Nations Children’s Fund, Draft Syria Country Programme, UNICEF, Damascus, paragraph 19.
46 According to several of those interviewed, this lack of a common strategy and understanding of the approach, coupled with the need to limit
interactions between the UNICEF offices in Damascus and Gaziantep for sensitivity reasons, exacerbated the sense of dichotomy between the two.
As a consequence of this, several responders in Damascus affirmed that they had “no idea” about the details of the parallel programmes in the north
and questioned the current structure.
Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the Level 3 Humanitarian Crisis in Syria 33
of responsibility to the Damascus office for frontline health workers”.48 This arguably
managing and supporting programmes in represents the dominant challenge for
NES, the current UNICEF WoS structure is UNICEF and others: how best to address a
under active review.47 sudden and massive development deficit
using limited humanitarian funding and
The role of UNICEF in Syria remains approaches.
essentially a humanitarian one. However, it
is increasingly concerned with putting the The ‘strategic shift’ proposed by SCO
provision of basic services for children on a rightly addresses this sustainability
more sustainable footing and with building challenge. However, in the view of the
‘resilience’, at least at the local level. Given evaluators, what is required is an evolution
the protracted nature of the crisis, and of the UNICEF approach in the direction
the decline in donor willingness or ability suggested below. The agency is committed
to fund even some core humanitarian to delivering on its Core Commitments to
responses, the humanitarian and system Children in Humanitarian Action (CCCs).
recovery agendas are arguably inextricable Across Syria as a whole, and depending
from each other. Yet securing funding on the specific context, this requires
for this approach – let alone anything a balance between continued direct
more like real system strengthening – is engagement (with partners) in essential
proving difficult in the current donor service delivery, shifting as far as possible
climate. As the progamme strategy note to more sustainable modes of delivery, and
for health and nutrition notes: “The large- support to – or at least complementing of –
scale reconstruction and rehabilitation the relevant official mechanisms of service
of damaged health facilities is crucial to delivery. Risk communication and related
improvements in access and utilization of policy and advocacy work are the essential
health services. Without a major infusion complement to this, and UNICEF has a
of external resources, linked to the broader unique role to play in this regard.
geopolitical context, the prospects of
significant reconstruction and rehabilitation
are slim. The same logic applies for the
recruitment, motivation and retention of
47 A decision on its future had yet to be taken at the time of writing.
48 United Nations Children’s Fund, ‘UNICEF Syria Programme Strategy Note: Health and nutrition, 2021–2023’, UNICEF, Damascus, 2021, p.13.
Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the Level 3 Humanitarian Crisis in Syria 34
3.2 How should the UNICEF border from Iraq. There is a high degree
role in humanitarian action of uncertainty about future scenarios in
be understood? the non-GCAs, in NWS in particular.
Readiness to respond and contingency
planning are essential requirements for
Given the context above, the evaluation
the UNICEF approach.
team’s understanding of the UNICEF role
as part of the international humanitarian
(ii) To help ensure the well-being and
response in Syria since 2018 might be
effective protection of children and
summarized in the following terms:
their families within government-
controlled areas of Syria. The
(i) To help protect and meet the basic
humanitarian agenda in GCAs is itself
needs of children and their families
very large, for the reasons outlined
living outside areas of government
above. As the ‘severity of needs’ map in
control and hence largely out of
section 2.1 shows, levels of need are
reach of government services. This
high almost throughout (the coastal
includes (a) those living in NWS, under
areas are rather less affected), including
multiple administrations, supported by
in large parts of rural Damascus. This
humanitarian services coordinated and
relates partly to destruction of homes
supplied cross-border from Türkiye; and
and public infrastructure in cities like
(b) those living in NES in areas outside
Homs, Hama and Damascus, with large
government control and largely beyond
numbers remaining displaced from their
the reach of government services,
home areas and many having lost their
supported by United Nations agencies
livelihoods. Acute poverty is a common
from GCAs and by NGOs with bases
denominator for those in most need.
in Kurdish-controlled areas and cross-
Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the Level 3 Humanitarian Crisis in Syria 35
As noted above, UNICEF currently lacks Clearly, these agendas overlap. For
a coherent strategic framework for the example, damaging coping strategies
humanitarian work that makes up the like child labour relate to both B and C.
bulk of its work across the whole of Education could be included in agenda B as
Syria. Essentially ad hoc and reactive well as C. These agendas are also causally
approaches have been adopted to the inter-related, and failure to address one
evolving situation in the three main crisis risks exacerbating the others. In particular,
areas over the past few years. This is failure to address issues in Agenda B can
understandable in the context of a rapidly precipitate an emergency falling under
evolving geopolitical situation. It is less Agenda A. These agendas are not based
understandable in the current climate, on particular response modalities – or
which is more stable. The evaluation on sometimes loosely-defined concepts
finds that this has been a weakness of like resilience and early recovery – but
the response and contributed to a lack of on what we understand to be the short-
coherence and consistency in prioritization. to medium-term priorities for children
across the whole of Syria. This could be
In order to evaluate UNICEF performance, described as a ‘humanitarian plus’ agenda
the team’s analysis distinguishes different and includes efforts to ensure sustainability
kinds of threats to children in Syria and and continuity of essential services, as
related response agendas. Based on this well as support to the related systems and
analysis, we propose a scheme of three capacities at all levels (as highlighted in the
priority agendas for children, which CPD).
are inter-related but distinct. These are
illustrated in Figure 6 below. The first
(Agenda A) is where the humanitarian
imperative is clearest: it concerns specific
emergency or high aid-dependency
situations that pose severe, acute threats
to child health, well-being and safety. The
second (Agenda B) relates to less acute but
widespread, severe and persistent threats
to child health, security or well-being. The
third (Agenda C) concerns critical threats
to child development and life chances,
including lack of access to basic education
and lack of opportunities for adolescents.
Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the Level 3 Humanitarian Crisis in Syria 36
Figure 6: Defining the humanitarian (+) agenda for UNICEF in Syria
Three priority agendas for children in Syria Related response approaches – and issues arising
AGENDA A
Responding to specific emergency (or high Agenda A typically requires relief
dependency) situations that pose severe, interventions and direct service delivery.
acute threats to child health, well-being and Timing is often critical here. Have UNICEF
safety (severity 4-5). Including acute food and its partners been as responsive as they
insecurity / acute malnutrition, water crises need to be in these cases? In GCA/non-
in NES, new displacements, acute CP issues, GCA? Has that response been proportional
EiE, epidemic surveillance and response, need to need? How well prepared are UNICEF
for targeted NFI/cash winter support. Building and its partners for new emergencies
critical risk awareness. ‘Aid economy’ and IDP (contingency, etc.)? Given the protracted
high aid dependency in large parts of NWS & crisis and numbers in high aid dependency,
NES. has UNICEF found ways to transition to
more sustainable service provision for this
AGENDA B category (e.g., in IDP camps)?
Responding to less acute but more wide-
spread and persistent threats to child health,
security or well-being. This includes much
Agendas B and C by their nature
of the CP agenda (e.g., rising child labour),
demand something more sustainable,
chronic malnutrition, general WASH, EPI and
more scalable, and capable of being
access to health care, SP/welfare support to
systematized and locally or nationally co-
families and the most vulnerable e.g., disabled
designed and ‘owned’. They require support
children. Building IYCF and public health
to basic services and prevention of system
understanding. Taking account of actual and
collapse, including though area-based
potential IDP returns.
approaches and multi-party initiatives. In
GCA, this needs to work with / supplement
AGENDA C / complement GoS systems (local/national),
subject to funding conditionalities and
Preventing irreversible damage to child and
GoS permissions. In other areas, it needs
adolescent development and life chances for
alternative approaches to sustainability and
which there is a limited window of opportunity
ownership. How well has UNICEF been able
to respond. Including education access
to address these agendas and navigate /
and quality issues (teacher training, etc.),
expand the space to work? Has it engaged
curriculum development (e.g., Curriculum
appropriately and effectively in related
B), ALP/SLP. In ADAP, skills, employment and
upstream policy work?
meaningful engagement in society. Providing
opportunities, building social cohesion.
Note: These agendas overlap and are causally inter-related.
Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the Level 3 Humanitarian Crisis in Syria 37
Taken together, these three agendas This would help provide an overarching
constitute an extended humanitarian framework for its decisions about
agenda for UNICEF in Syria, characterized humanitarian priorities and the relationship
by the urgency, scale and severity of the between them, as well as a programmatic
threats involved. Each agenda requires and policy bridge through recovery to
a different response approach. The first future development priorities. It might also
typically requires (sustained) direct help in communicating to others, including
service delivery. The second and third donors, the sense of priority attached
require support to basic service provision to these child-focused agendas that are
and prevention of system collapse. The sometimes treated as beyond the strictly
challenge here is to achieve scale, quality humanitarian priorities but which the
and complementarity of services, which is evaluators believe need to be treated with
increasingly likely to require area-based, equal urgency.49
multi-sector and multi-agency approaches.
In GCAs, such approaches need to Whatever framework it adopts, we
supplement and complement service believe UNICEF needs a realistic common
provision through the GoS and locally- planning framework against which to make
run systems. In other areas, alternative decisions about priority interventions in
approaches to sustainability and ownership the face of access and resource limits.
are needed but are harder to identify in the This should help enable stronger multi-
current transitional contexts. sector approaches to be formulated, an
area which at the moment is less advanced
This classification, though clearly very than it should be (see next section). At
broad, has proved a useful analytical present, programme strategy is largely
tool for the evaluation. Essentially it is seen through the lens of individual sectors
concerned with identifying and addressing and the programme is essentially the sum
the short- to medium-term priorities for total of separate interventions, tending to
children, and the links between them. We lead to a ‘stove-piped’ programme and
believe that UNICEF could frame its current disconnected interventions. We suggest
and future agenda in similar terms in order that a multi-sector planning framework
to make sense of different kinds of needs could help to build coherence and deliver
and priorities across the whole of Syria. greater impact across the programme. One
49 The use of the term ‘humanitarian’ to cover this relatively broad agenda is consistent with the use of the term in HRPs. However, what matters is less
the terminology adopted than the approach, i.e., the focus on short- to medium-term priorities for children.
Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the Level 3 Humanitarian Crisis in Syria 38
practical starting point for this could be the limits on available funding and access) and
role of schools as platforms for protection, should help determine the phasing as well
health, nutrition and WASH interventions. as the combination of different components
within a given intervention. It should be
UNICEF itself recognizes the need for such practical and capable of being reviewed
integration, but lacks a clear framework for and revised as situations evolve, and
bringing these strands together. Related should specify how UNICEF interventions
to this, the evaluation finds that UNICEF supplement or complement those of
lacks a framework for decision-making others. With regard to policy and advocacy
that allows it to prioritize interventions objectives, these should be articulated and
within and across the three main crisis including in a rolling plan that is regularly
areas described in section 2. This should reviewed by managers.
be grounded in current realities (including
Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the Level 3 Humanitarian Crisis in Syria 39
4
EVALUATING THE UNICEF
PROGRAMME
4.1 Introduction as a whole, to identify overall patterns
and lessons, but also by sector and by
geographical area, since the answer to
For the purposes of this section, the
many of the evaluation questions require
UNICEF programme is considered to
distinctions to be drawn over time, place
consist of the range of sector-specific
and sector. They also require consideration
interventions conducted in its own
of the form of UNICEF engagement
name, through implementing partners
(support to direct service provision,
or in collaboration with other agencies
technical support, supply, policy/advocacy,
in response to the crisis in Syria since
2018.50 The evaluation has reviewed these etc.).
50 UNICEF system-wide roles, including its sector lead and coordination roles, are considered in section 5 below.
Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the Level 3 Humanitarian Crisis in Syria 40
To give structure to this enquiry, in this sec- part of Syria since 2018. This has been the
tion we consider questions51 concerning: most highly contested part of the country
and subject to high levels of insecurity,
the relevance and appropriateness of
which has prevented UNICEF staff from
the programme, relative to needs
being physically present or even (with
the coverage/proportionality of the
very limited exceptions) from visiting the
programme, relative to needs
area. Needs assessment and monitoring
the logic of the programme
have been extremely constrained as a
the balance and inter-sector result, with a high level of dependence on
coherence of the programme implementing partner self-reporting and
on third-party monitors. This has inevitably
the effectiveness and timeliness of
affected the organization’s ability to ensure
programme responses by UNICEF
the continued relevance, quality and
and partners
delivery of its programme interventions,
as well as their effectiveness and impact
In each case, the evaluators have attempted
– particularly since opportunities for
to assess the value of UNICEF programmes
accountability to affected populations
relative to the context and to the roles of
(AAP) and community engagement have
other actors.
been very limited. This has also been a
highly fluid context over the evaluation
With regard to the non-government-
period, with major movements of people
controlled areas of northwest Syria
(IDPs) and a correspondingly high level
(non-GCA NWS), UNICEF, in common
of Agenda A aid dependency. Given the
with other United Nations agencies, has
shrinking area of northwestern Syria
provided the great majority of its support
outside GoS control, around 4.3 million
cross-border from Türkiye, managed by
people have been concentrated in an ever-
the Gaziantep office52 and implemented
smaller area with a population density
through NGO partners able to operate in
around three times the Syrian average.
NWS. It is important to understand the
Around 2.8 million are IDPs, 1.7 million of
overall constraints of designing, managing
whom live in formal or informal camps.53
and accounting for a programme in this
51 These questions correspond with questions B2-5 and C1, 2 and 4 in the evaluation matrix.
52 The resourcing, functions and performance of the Gaziantep office are considered in section 6 below. We note here our finding that the Gaziantep
office has been seriously under-resourced in relation to its expected functions.
53 OCHA situation report, northwest Syria, May 2022, p.2.
Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the Level 3 Humanitarian Crisis in Syria 41
With regard to non-government-controlled Again, UNICEF has worked principally
areas of northeast Syria (non-GC NES), through local GoS-registered implementing
UNICEF, in common with other United partners in this area and in some cases
Nations agencies, has been unable (with with private contractors (WASH), but
limited exceptions) to provide cross-border the organization has over the evaluation
support to the area since the closure of period had limited means to assess
the Al-Yarubiyah crossing in January needs and monitor the delivery, quality
2020. While the level of support was not and effectiveness of its interventions.56
comparable in scale to that provided to UNICEF has also had significant policy
NWS, this was nevertheless a substantial and advocacy engagement with the
change, although its effects are hard to self-administration as well as the GoS
quantify.54 One effect is that United Nations concerning WASH (e.g., for the Alouk water
support for the ongoing NGO-led response system), child protection, social protection,
in NES, and the visibility of that response, education (curriculum, exams, etc.) for
has diminished overall even though the children in this area, and with multiple
NES Forum is treated as a ‘hub’ within the parties concerning the approximately
international response system. 27,000 foreign national children.57
UNICEF support to NES since 2020 has With regard to the majority of the country
been delivered cross-zone. It has largely that is now controlled by the government
been directed to the formal IDP camps (GCAs), UNICEF has faced different
and to the camps holding third-country constraints to programming. Access has
nationals who have been associated improved considerably over the evaluation
(directly or indirectly) with Islamic State in period, but over this period UNICEF has
Iraq and the Levant (Da’esh) (Al-Hol and been constrained in where it can work,
Roj), though efforts are being made to what it can do, and the partners with whom
extend this coverage to other non-GCAs, it can work. Some of those constraints
e.g., for WASH rehabilitation, in discussion come from government, though these are
with the self-administration and GoS.55 reported to lessening.58
54 UNICEF has not been able to provide the evaluators with data on the scale and nature of supplies and other support provided cross-border into NES
prior to 2020, nor has it been possible to get financial and other data on cross-zone supply provided since 2020. This is both a significant gap in man-
agement information and a limit on the evaluability.
55 In some cases, UNICEF has filled gaps when urgent intervention has been needed or in areas when access is provided only to UNICEF (e.g., Al-Roj
camp). It has also sometimes facilitated the distribution of kits of other agencies.
56 The situation with regard to monitoring in NES is now reported to be greatly improved (correspondence with SCO staff).
57 United Nations Children’s Fund, ‘Media Monitoring Snapshot: Foreign children In northeast Syria,’ UNICEF, New York, September 2021.
58 Correspondence with SCO staff.
Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the Level 3 Humanitarian Crisis in Syria 42
Others relate to the conditions attached modalities. Within this overall picture there
by donors to their funding for work in is considerable variation.
GCAs – and to the general limitations
imposed by the Parameters and Principles UNICEF work in northwest Syria (non-
of United Nations Assistance in Syria (see GCAs)
2.2.6), which is the key internal guidance
In areas of the northwest beyond
for operations in Syria. In particular,
government control, the evaluation
work related to reconstruction and to
found that UNICEF had overall found the
strengthening national systems has been
right roles for itself within the largely
restricted.59 The extent to which work can
Agenda A context (emergency and high
be justified under the heading ‘recovery’
dependency) that has characterized this
(included in the HRP) is unclear, though
region since 2018. These have included
there are signs of growing acceptance by
emergency WASH and health and nutrition
donors of work in this category.60
work (including COVID-19 vaccination),
as well as support to community and
centre-based child protection services.
4.2 Programme relevance,
With regard to the latter, UNICEF and its
appropriateness and
partners have successfully built resilient
adaptation to context61
community child protection mechanisms,
allowing IDPs continued support
The evaluation found that since 2018,
(including case management) despite
UNICEF has largely managed to implement
multiple displacements.62 There has been
programmes appropriate to the different
continuous engagement on the monitoring
contexts of both GCAs and non-GCAs
and reporting mechanism on grave
and to adapt its approach to changing
violations against children in situations of
circumstances over the evaluation period.
armed conflict (MRM), and more recently
More challenges were encountered in the
on children associated with armed forces
non-GCAs, partly due to the complexity and
and armed groups (CAAFAG), including
largely ‘arms-length’ nature of the related
ongoing negotiation of an action plan to
59 Although UNICEF managed to expand its basic rehabilitation work (WASH, education) in GCAs during the evaluation period.
60 KIIs with donors and with UNICEF SCO staff.
61 Evaluation question B.3 Has the UNICEF programme been relevant and appropriate to the evolving context? What has been the quality of UNICEF
needs assessment and situational monitoring?
62 KIIs with UNICEF staff in Gaziantep, UNHCR, UNICEF partners, child protection AoR members and coordinators.
Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the Level 3 Humanitarian Crisis in Syria 43
end child recruitment with parties listed programme and as cluster lead agency for
in the annexes of the annual Report of the education. Stronger and more consistent
Secretary-General on Children and Armed advocacy was required, including with
Conflict who are active in northwestern donors. Given this, and the relatively low
Syria. coverage of needs,64 education work in
NWS was found to be of limited relevance
Education in NWS has been more in relation to needs.
problematic and more limited in its
coverage and impact.63 While the focus Funding and delivery of a winterization
on Grades 1-9 (up to 14 years of age) has programme (non-food items) was
been understandable, there have been consistently late, making it less relevant
high levels of pre-adolescent dropout. as an intervention. This work was (rightly)
Despite successful distribution of self- phased out to focus limited resources on
learning materials and successful efforts other critical needs.
to negotiate for and provide multi-sectoral
support to children who have crossed lines With regard to adaptation to change,
to sit for exams, the lack of accreditation UNICEF has generally shown a strong
remains a key challenge. Together with degree of adaptability to the evolving
multiple displacements, the COVID-19 context in NWS, something that was
pandemic and the economic crisis, this has made necessary by the further mass
resulted in increasing numbers of children displacements of people in 2019–2020.
out of school and increasing trends of child The WASH response in particular involved
labour and child marriage. The education close attention by UNICEF and the
needs of children with disabilities (many wider cluster to displacement dynamics
with war-related disabilities) are largely not and identification of new informal IDP
met. settlements, working well with the camp
coordination and camp management
The evaluation finds that UNICEF could cluster to improve registration of IDPs in
have done more to highlight and tackle informal camps. Health and nutrition units
these deficits, both through its own were reportedly successful in shifting
63 In NWS, education is mostly considered non-formal (there is no internationally recognized accreditation system) and there is more space to navigate
donor conditionalities compared to GCAs. But the decision not to work with the relevant education authorities in NWS – apparently to ensure consis
-tency and equity of approach with the GCAs – exacerbated the disconnect between formal and non-formal programming and meant a loss of
opportunity to work on education quality.
64 HRP 2019, 2020, 2021 and UNICEF humanitarian performance monitoring 2019, 2020, 2021.
Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the Level 3 Humanitarian Crisis in Syria 44
patients away from the conflict-affected Gaziantep. In child protection, appropriate
areas in around 80 per cent of cases.65 Use efforts were made to strengthen the
of rapid response teams enabled nutritional technical capacities of partners and to build
surveillance together with health and a community of practice within the UNICEF-
nutrition awareness outreach. There was led area of responsibility (AoR), including
progressive improvement of the follow-up through training and guidance produced by
of under-5s moving between camps.66 the thematic working groups in the AoR.
The COVID-19 pandemic also required
considerable programme adaptation. The
evolution of communications for develop-
ment (C4D) into a risk communication and
community engagement (RCCE) approach
provided a strong baseline for the COVID
response.67 The education programme
was also reported to have been relatively
successful in adapting to COVID, shifting
to online modalities and remote teaching
and learning, together with extended use
of self-learning curricula and support to the
expansion of temporary learning spaces.
UNICEF and its partners have also made
UNICEF work in northeast Syria (non-
some progress towards sustainability,
GCAs)
even on Agenda A. This is most apparent
in the WASH response, which has UNICEF faced a challenging adaptation
increasingly shifted from water trucking of its programmes in the areas of the
to basic structural rehabilitation of piped northeast outside government control.
water systems since 2018, something Before 2020, most operations in NES were
fully endorsed by the WASH cluster in carried out cross-border and managed from
65 KIIs with UNICEF and partner staff in Gaziantep.
66 UNICEF country office annual reports 2019, 2020, 2021; KIIs with UNICEF staff and partners in Gaziantep.
67 Around 1.2-1.5 million people were reported to have been reached by SMS with COVID awareness messages.
Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the Level 3 Humanitarian Crisis in Syria 45
Amman, with very limited interventions WASH cross-zone interventions following
from Damascus and Qamishli. Following negotiations with the Ministry of Water
closure of the border to the United Nations Resources and the self-administration,
in January 2020, UNICEF phased out most with the WASH working group of the
of its Amman-led operations by June 2020 Forum kept in the loop; and more generally
(with some exceptions for child protection/ good communication between the WASH
CAAFAG), meaning UNICEF programming cluster and WASH working structures and
was now enabled entirely through the coordinators at all levels. On the other
Damascus and Qamishli offices through hand, UNICEF nutrition programming has
increased cross-zone operations. These been relatively weaker over the evaluation
remained limited in scale at the time of period – although recent progress suggests
writing, although access and scale of that UNICEF recognizes the scale and
operation are reported to be increasing.68 seriousness of the malnutrition agenda
While UNICEF is keen to expand these in this region and is now more fully
operations, the response of the various addressing it, particularly in Al-Hasakah
sections has been variable, with WASH and Ar-Raqqa.69 The evaluators observed
in particular showing intent and ability to a disconnect between the nutrition cluster
seek new opportunities, some other sectors and the NGO nutrition working group of
less so. These differences might be partly the NES Forum, and (crucially) gaps in the
explained by the differing attitudes of key supply of emergency nutrition products,
governmental counterparts at Damascus which is a UNICEF responsibility. While the
and governorate level to interaction with evaluation team recognizes the challenges
self-administration authorities, as well as to of providing nutrition supplies to INGOs in
collaboration with NGOs working through NES, these gaps remain concerning given
the NES Forum. the deteriorating nutrition situation.
The evaluation found positive examples of The child protection response in NES has
programme adaptation by UNICEF in non- been both appropriate and highly relevant,
GCAs in northeastern Syria. These included addressing grave violations, children
continued EPI coverage at relatively high deprived of liberty in camps and detention
levels cross-zone as well as in GCAs; facilities, third-country nationals,
68 Correspondence with SCO staff.
69 Correspondence with SCO staff; United Nations Children’s Fund, ‘Every Day Counts: Acute malnutrition in northeast Syria’, UNICEF, 2020. Progress
was significantly impeded in 2020 due to COVID-19, but accelerated in 2021.
Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the Level 3 Humanitarian Crisis in Syria 46
implementation of the action plan to coverage remains limited for a number of
end child recruitment signed with the reasons, including limits on supply and
self-administration, and the release and vaccine hesitancy.
reintegration of CAAFAG. UNICEF has done
well to support (from Amman) CAAFAG The evaluation concludes that effective
coordination capacity in the NES Forum adaptation to the changing context in NES
through the child protection working group. requires both continued dialogue with
With regard to third-country nationals and the self-administration and much better
‘best interest determination’ for children engagement with the NGOs working in
living in camps in NES, UNICEF did well the region, through the NES Forum and
to step up and take on an agenda that its working groups. There has been a
UNHCR sees as outside its mandate. history – and some continuing legacy – of
This was highly appropriate, and a good mistrust between United Nations agencies
demonstration of the unique role and and the international NGOs working in
value-added of UNICEF in defending non-GC NES. However, the NGOs are the
children’s rights. major providers of services in this region,71
and UNICEF should not let this history
In some sectors, however, UNICEF has not deter it from collaboration, which remains
been able to achieve the reach that might essential. Some sectors did much better
be expected. Work on social protection in this regard than others: the examples
in northeastern Syria has been limited of WASH and child protection in particular
to areas under government control, and demonstrate that such collaboration is both
even there has been affected by the possible and effective.
lack of suitable implementing partners.
In education, while excellent policy UNICEF work in government-controlled
and advocacy work has been done on areas
curriculum and accreditation, support to
Agenda A (‘emergency’) interventions
basic education provision has been limited
in GCAs are limited to a few IDP camps
to camps and to government-controlled
in the north of the country and ad hoc
enclaves.70 In health, COVID-19 vaccination
interventions in case of sudden crises.
70 As in NWS, UNICEF has largely not engaged with the ‘formal’ education system in self-administration areas of northeastern Syria. But is has provided
support through its partners to self-learning through provision of materials to home-based community schools and some local authority schools.
71 With an estimated aggregate annual budget estimated around $300 million (KII UNICEF SCO).
Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the Level 3 Humanitarian Crisis in Syria 47
Maintaining a solid field operations and Ministry of Health systems, and to key
emergency unit in Damascus with flexible hospitals and health facilities (technical
funding has strengthened SCO capacity support, material and capacity-building);
to adapt to sudden events. The need for light rehabilitation of schools (related in
this type of support is likely to continue, part to enabling the return of IDPs and
especially if the SCO takes on more refugees) and back-to-learning campaigns;
responsibility for NWS. and support to child-friendly spaces and
ADAP centres (although the latter have
Related to this, increasing engagement been limited in impact due to weak social
with government counterparts and local security systems for case management and
administrations has allowed UNICEF to a lack of work opportunities). The social
consolidate a progressive shift toward a protection programme, though relatively
recovery strategy, tackling Agendas B and C limited in scope, developed a support and
(basic service strengthening, rehabilitation, case management system for children with
etc.) while responding to emergency disabilities. While not yet fully sustainable,
needs as necessary. This approach is this project has been greatly appreciated by
appropriate given the relative stability of beneficiaries and local administrations and
the environment of GCAs, and it reflects offers scope for further development.
the widespread and persistent nature of
the threats to children in these areas and
the corresponding need for approaches
that go beyond relief and service delivery.
However, the scale of destruction of
systems and infrastructure – and of the
economic collapse and loss of professional
workers – can make any intervention by
UNICEF seem like a drop in the ocean.
The evaluation found many examples of
appropriate and increasingly sustainable
UNICEF recovery and rehabilitation
interventions in GCAs. These included
WASH interventions in Deir-ez-Zor
(pumping stations, piping systems, sewage
systems); support to primary health care
and community-based management of
acute malnutrition centres linked with
Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the Level 3 Humanitarian Crisis in Syria 48
Donor conditionalities on funding in GCAs school rehabilitation and reconstruction
are reported to have heavily constrained (due to donor ‘redlines’) and quality of
work in education, social protection and teaching and learning (including teacher
ADAP in particular. In education, UNICEF capacity development and assessment
uses its own funds to support engagement of learning outcomes). This has resulted
with the Ministry of Education on key in a de facto parallel system of education
issues such as the transitional education in which children complete Curriculum
sector plan, 2020–2022,72 the school B studies and register for exams but are
integrated management information unable to transition into the formal system,
system, revising and alignment of curricula and so remain in the Curriculum B learning
(Curriculum B73 and the self-learning pathway.
programme) and teacher training on
child protection and psychosocial support With regard to child protection, the
(PSS) issues. Some minor rehabilitation evaluation found an appropriate focus on
of schools and provision of temporary mental health and psychosocial support
teaching spaces is allowed by some (MHPSS), but one that had limited reach
donors. and was heavily reliant on the technical
capacity of implementing partners. More
The evaluation found that, largely as a work is needed to grow the network of
result of these constraints, the education child protection organizations that could
response in GCAs has been based largely help expand the reach of such services.
around an ‘education in emergencies’ With respect to case management, a basic
(EiE) model concentrated on non-formal system exists, but efforts are required to
education. In the context of such massive address difficult child protection cases
and chronic deficits, this is not an adequate (those involving the judicial system). In
approach. While work on curriculum addition, UNICEF continued to engage on
development and self-learning has been the MRM-CAFAAG advocacy agenda with
remarkable and has helped to keep the the GoS and to document grave violations
response relevant to the needs of children, against children while co-chairing the
some key components are missing: (full) country task force on the MRM.
72 A comprehensive sector analysis which proposes an overarching, gender-sensitive education sector policy for 2020–2022.
73 Curriculum B is an accelerated learning programme recognized by the MoE which allows reintegration in the formal education system and access to
official exams and accreditation.
Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the Level 3 Humanitarian Crisis in Syria 49
Child protection issues were found to is best described as ad hoc, reactive and
have been very well integrated into opportunistic, both in areas covered by
the education programme, thanks to the CPD and more generally across WoS.75
an introductory child protection and While this is understandable, the lack of a
psychosocial support training to teachers unifying UNICEF humanitarian strategy has
(one area of teacher training allowed been a significant gap and appears even
by donors). That said, after ten years of more so as the situation has stabilized.
the crisis, a one week training on child The 2016 CPD lacked supportive PSNs, but
protection is very limited. Although work with the drafting of a new proposed CPD
is beginning on violence against children, for 2021–2023, PSNs have been prepared.
this has not been adequately tackled While these remained provisional over the
to date and needs urgent action. The evaluation period, pending approval of
evaluators expected to find more emphasis the new CPD, they give a clearer window
on this subject in schools, alongside into UNICEF thinking on sector-specific
peacebuilding, given the synergies with programme strategy and logic.76 Their
education. provisional nature reflects the fact that in
many respects, the conditions necessary
to implement them are not yet in place,
4.3 Programme strategy, logic
but they provide a clear articulation of the
and consistency with the
intended direction for the programme.
CCCs74
Different approaches to strategy have
Programme strategy and planning been taken across the three crisis areas.
As described in the previous section, the The sector strategies set out in the PSNs,
2016 CPD has been rolled over year after while designed to support the CPD, are
year, while the situation in the country has more obviously tailored to the context
changed dramatically and the programme of government-controlled areas of Syria
has in practice been continually adapted. and the relatively stable areas in which
The approach to strategy over this period the relevant government ministries and
74 Evaluation question B.2 Has UNICEF programme logic been clear, cogent and based on realistic assumptions? Has the programme been internally
coherent, and harmonized between GCAs/non-GCAs?
75 This approach tended to characterize the strategies of individual sectors, e.g., ad hoc strategies were developed by the WASH cluster in Gaziantep
(WASH cluster strategic operation framework) and by CP (AoR WoS operational strategy).
76 More recently (2022), UNICEF SCO has developed sector-specific ‘think pieces’ to support its proposed strategic shift. These summarize its
approaches and interventions to date and articulate a forward agenda to 2024.
Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the Level 3 Humanitarian Crisis in Syria 50
local authorities have responsibility for A context, the strategy has been largely
delivering essential services for children. defined by individual sectors, using an
The programme for GCAs is developed, emergency logic. The evaluation found
authorized and implemented in close this to be largely consistent with the CCCs.
coordination with the GoS and the key The lack of a formal overarching strategy
ministries. While emergency response for the cross-border programme in NWS
capacity is maintained within the office, has been partly compensated for by joint
such response has progressively decreased operational planning (JOP) meetings. But
and represents a relatively small part of the combination of mass displacements
UNICEF current interventions in GCAs, in 2019–2020 and the advent of COVID-19
although maintaining such emergency in March 2020 have meant that the
response capacity is essential given the programme in this area has by necessity
likely increase of SCO responsibilities in been largely reactive in nature. The need
NWS. This leaves a gap in the logic and to be highly adaptable remains, and the
planning for the current situation in GCAs, potential loss of the cross-border modality
in which the conditions largely do not exist in 2022 has meant that UNICEF and
to implement the PSN strategies, but where others have more recently had to focus on
the situation does not fit the ‘standard’ contingency planning for this region (see
humanitarian model. below). As this situation becomes clearer,
UNICEF will need a more settled plan for
The humanitarian situation in non- meeting the priority needs of children in
government-controlled areas of NWS this area.
and NES better fits the standard model,
particularly with regard to highly aid- The WASH response highlights the various
dependent displaced populations. Yet no factors affecting the organization’s ability
clear overall strategy has been articulated to shift from predominantly Agenda
for these specific contexts or for related A interventions to recovery and basic
cross-border and cross-zone or cross-line rehabilitation in different parts of the
support, and this is a gap that needs to country (GCAs and non-GCAs). While
be filled. Particularly in NES, the ad hoc UNICEF WASH in both Gaziantep and
approach to work in these areas can no Damascus has tried to progressively shift
longer be justified in what has become a to more sustainable interventions, this was
relatively stable and protracted situation. only partially possible in context of high
levels of acute need in NWS. Here, water
For non-GC areas of NWS, in what again trucking, solid waste management and
has been a predominantly an Agenda provision of hygiene kits still represent a
Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the Level 3 Humanitarian Crisis in Syria 51
large part of the programme. The shift has i. Stronger inter-sectoral programming
been much more evident in GCAs, where for children, including adolescents,
UNICEF works in close coordination with who have missed education and
the Ministry of Water Resources to identify other opportunities due to crisis and
priority basic rehabilitation interventions. displacement
While these are greatly appreciated and
ii. Trilateral linking of development,
largely sustainable, they still represent
humanitarian and social cohesion
a small contribution to a much bigger
programming
agenda. In NES, while ensuring continued
iii. More system-building approaches
support to the IDP camps (Agenda A),
that increase equity and resilience
the WASH programme has been quite
and reduce longer-term vulnerability
proactive in trying to expand its cross-zone
of the poorest children and their
operations to address basic rehabilitation
families
in areas under control of the self-
iv. Supporting design and
administration.
implementation of social protection
UNICEF programme logic systems that address multiple
vulnerabilities.
The 2021–2023 PSNs follow the logic of
the CPD in being geared toward support
While the first and fourth of these
for ‘building resilience’. Each contains a
appear to be appropriate to context and
common statement of strategic intent,
consistent with the prevailing priorities
which starts with commitments about
(as described in section 3), the second
which there could be little debate, such
and third are harder to make sense of in
as more convergent programming, multi-
the current context. There is little short- to
factor behavioural change strategies, use of
medium-term prospect of development
evidence to inform policy and programmes,
programming (or funding) as it is normally
etc. They go on to say:77
understood, although social cohesion
can and should be a priority across the
While continuing to fulfil the Core
whole programme. System-building, while
Commitments to Children in Humanitarian
clearly needed, depends at the macro
Action, the three-year country programme
level on conditions that are not currently
will evolve to:
77 Text taken from the document Syria WASH PSN Final Draft, undated. The other draft PSNs use similar wording.
Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the Level 3 Humanitarian Crisis in Syria 52
in place either in terms of funding or (in currently framed) is premature in some
many cases) the readiness of authorities respects and does not address the variety
themselves to (re-)build systems. Micro- of contexts and capacities across the
and local system-building – and the whole of Syria. For the foreseeable future,
prevention of system collapse – may be perhaps at least to the end of 2023, the
all that is feasible and appropriate in the commitment to fulfilling the CCCs is likely
shorter term. Related to this, the longer- to dominate UNICEF time and available
term reduction of vulnerability, while a resources, complemented by increasing
laudable goal, inevitably takes second efforts to ensure the sustainability of
priority to the immediate vulnerabilities of Agenda A interventions and the scale of
the prevailing crises. work on Agendas B and C.
The PSNs provided an essential A review of the assumptions underpinning
complement to the agenda set out in the the associated theories of change (ToCs)
draft CPD and help to make sense of that in the PSNs tends to reinforce this view.
agenda. This evaluation fully supports To take the example of the WASH PSN,
the move towards sustainability, but the ToC in this case (see Box 5) is fairly
it concludes that this agenda (as it is straightforward:
Box 5: Extract from the WASH PSN
The UNICEF theory of change under this programme component is as follows:
If the WASH enabling environment is strengthened; if water and sanitation systems are restored
to provide basic and equitable WASH services; if sector resilience is strengthened to ensure
continuity of WASH services; and if WASH services are provided in humanitarian settings; then
more children and people in Syria will have access to safe, affordable and sustainable water,
sanitation and hygiene services.
Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the Level 3 Humanitarian Crisis in Syria 53
The argument here is roughly: ‘if we help Gradual replenishment of sector
restore systems and provide more services, human resources;
more children will have access to services’.
Some level of humanitarian needs
That may be true, although of course (apart
will continue.
from barriers to access) the question of
coverage will largely determine how many
Most of these assumptions have not held
of those in need actually benefit. The
true in practice. The final assumption, while
PSN recognizes the challenge and states
valid, greatly understates the scale of the
that “UNICEF will support the gradual
humanitarian challenge as it is understood
resumption of reliable water and sanitation
here. The evaluation suggests that, across
services, starting with urban centres for
all the PSNs, the assumptions need to
at-scale impact and at a later stage in the
be reviewed and the strategy revised
rural areas”. This provides an essential
accordingly. For example, in the education
qualification to the more ambitious
sector, the strategy is based on (among
outcome statements, and the evaluation
other assumptions) the “availability of
concludes that a greater degree of real-
qualified teachers”. But given the huge loss
world focus across all the sectors would
of effective teaching capacity – partly due
help to make the sector strategies a more
to the economic situation – this is evidently
realistic basis for programming.
not a reasonable assumption, especially in
the short-term.
The related statement of assumptions in
the WASH PSN reads as follows:
The education PSN also contains the
The economic situation of the following statement: “Although many signs
country will gradually improve; point to more stability and transitioning
into recovery and reconstruction, there will
Gradual increase in government
be need for the development and review
expenditures in WASH services;
of education contingency plans to cater to
Internally displaced persons will
the education needs of children affected by
gradually return to their areas of
hostilities”. This appears to treat ‘children
origin;
affected by hostilities’ as a special sub-
Refugees will begin returning to
group, when in fact the great majority
Syria;
of children in Syria (and their education
Communities will support restoration prospects) have been affected by hostilities.
of waste management and proper The analysis does not always seem to
hygiene practices; recognize the catastrophic nature of the
change the conflict and its aftermath have
brought to the country.
Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the Level 3 Humanitarian Crisis in Syria 54
Outcomes and results structures areas of the northeast now lying with SCO
through a cross-zone modality. The latter
The PSNs set out the results frameworks
agenda is not specifically articulated in the
(outcomes and outputs) for each sector.
framework, but we suggest it should be,
By way of illustration, Box 6 shows
given the scale and specific nature of the
the framework for education, split
educational deficits in NES (comparable to
between SCO and MENARO/Gaziantep
those in NWS).
responsibilities. These reflect the different
perspectives from the different hubs,
The difference in language is striking, the
with the former more focused on policy
work in non-GCAs being framed in terms
and institutional capacities to address
of addressing critical deficits through
widespread educational deficits (including
humanitarian action, while the work in
basic access), the latter exclusively focused
GCAs is presented in more policy and
on delivering EiE (Agenda A) in the non-
systems language. In reality, we suggest,
government-controlled parts of Syria. This
both approaches are necessary and
‘humanitarian delivery’ support is framed
should be understood within an expanded
as a complement to SCO-led operations
humanitarian agenda – though a different
and is currently largely restricted to
balance of approaches is likely to be
cross-border support via Gaziantep –
needed across the different contexts.
responsibility for humanitarian support (EiE
in this case) to non-government controlled
Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the Level 3 Humanitarian Crisis in Syria 55
Box 6: UNICEF results structure for education PSN
Government-controlled areas (from SCO 2016 results framework)
Outcome 3: School-age girls and boys, especially the most vulnerable, benefit from inclusive
quality pre-primary, basic, secondary and non–formal education
Output 3.1 Policies, strategies and guidelines are available for efficient management and
delivery of inclusive quality education
Output 3.2 Institutional capacities at national and governorate level are enhanced to ensure
emergency preparedness and response in education
Output 3.3 Equitable access to quality education opportunities provided
Output 3.4 Education sector coordination
Output 3.5 Availability of adequate technical expertise to support the programme delivery
and the office management.
Non-government controlled areas (from MENARO 2019 results framework)
Outcome 4: MENARO delivers timely, equitable and principled humanitarian action as a
complement to country office-led operations where required, including through the cross-border
component of the Syria programmes as part of the Whole of Syria response.
Output 6 (Amman) Syria’s conflict-affected population have their critical education needs
met, in line with the HRP and as part of the UNICEF JOP
Output 12 (Gaziantep) Syria’s conflict-affected population have their critical education needs
met, in line with the HRP and as part of the UNICEF JOP.
Programme alignment with the CCCs where the Agenda A component of the
programme is dominant. Broadly speaking,
In general, the evaluation found good
all sectors developed their respective
alignment of the humanitarian components
interventions around the CCC structure,
of the programme with the CCCs, but
with only nutrition limiting its focus to
this varied by sector and by location.78
children under five and their mothers.
Alignment has been most evident in NWS,
78 An in-depth analysis of this alignment began during the inception phase of this evaluation and was re-assessed during the field missions to Türkiye,
Jordan and Syria.
Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the Level 3 Humanitarian Crisis in Syria 56
In some cases, the intent of the programme work in NWS is inherent in the nature
has run ahead of the ability to deliver of that modality. For example, the child
against the commitments and to attain protection response is generally in line
broader coverage. This is due both to with the related CCCs, but the quality of
immediate contextual factors and to the services varies according to the capacities
limits imposed on programmes by funding/ of implementing partners as well as donor
donor conditions and by governing redlines (e.g., assistance to gender-based
authorities. One example of this is in violence survivors, case management
education, where the core agenda of of difficult child protection cases). Other
‘equitable access to quality learning’ must challenges relate to the scale and nature
be understood in the context of both the of interventions in relation to the needs.
massive deficits in educational capacity For example, MHPSS interventions may
(including loss of infrastructure and be generally appropriate, but too limited
teachers), and the fact that donor ‘redlines’ given the extent and nature of the trauma
have largely prevented UNICEF and others suffered by children.
from tackling the quality agenda through
teacher training. Access to education,
4.4 Programme coverage and
in particular for adolescents, children
targeting79
with disabilities and children in informal
settlements, has been too limited to date.
The remote learning agenda, accelerated Evaluating UNICEF programme coverage
by the COVID-19 pandemic, has rightly against assessed needs has been difficult
been pursued alongside more traditional for a number of reasons, and three in
approaches in attempting to address these particular. The first relates to the process
gaps. of needs assessment itself and the lack
of reliable and recent baseline data,
In other sectors, a similar mix of constraints complicated by the demographic shifts
has limited the ability of UNICEF to fulfil involved in the massive displacement
the CCCs through its own programme. of families over the past few years. The
A further constraint for the cross-border annual humanitarian needs assessment
79 Evaluation questions B5 Has UNICEF target-setting and prioritization been appropriate in the light of priority needs, gaps and available resources?
How good has the coverage and equity of response by UNICEF and partners been? and C.1 To what extent has UNICEF met its targets and
programme objectives since 2018? Although mainly concerned with the UNICEF programme, this section also considers the coverage achieved by the
clusters / AoRs in which UNICEF has a leading role.
Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the Level 3 Humanitarian Crisis in Syria 57
programme (HNAP) that has been used to The third problem in assessing coverage
identify ‘people in need’ for the HNO and relates to uncertainty concerning the
HRP processes has only limited utility as actual reach of the UNICEF programme.
a basis for actual programming. Partners The agency’s figures for ‘reach’ are largely
in the education sector, for example, are based on programme assumptions about
encouraged not to base their programming who will benefit from given outputs rather
on the HNO needs assessments. There than being based on actual data from
is a pressing need for more reliable post-delivery monitoring, reporting and
baseline and periodic joint assessments feedback. This is not unusual in highly
in all sectors and all parts of the country. volatile situations, where access may be
As the security situation has increasingly restricted, but it leaves real uncertainty as
stabilized and access has improved in to who actually benefits. With increasing
many areas, this should in principle be stability in many regions, UNICEF and
possible, but will require both continued its partners need to find better ways to
advocacy with the relevant authorities and gauge both the reach and the impact of its
leadership from UNICEF in the relevant programme interventions.
clusters and AoRs.
The way in which UNICEF and the clusters
The second (related) problem concerns the that it (co-)leads have targeted and
lack of ‘granularity’ of available data. This prioritized their interventions is inevitably
is most evident in the HNO and HRP80 but affected by these uncertainties and data
also in internal UNICEF documents such gaps. Targeting has been based on the
as situation reports (SitReps). The lack of often-unreliable numbers generated by
detail extends to the specific impacts of the the processes mentioned above, and
crisis on children, which are sometimes on vulnerability analyses of variable
assumed rather than assessed. This quality. While they may be generally
suggests that UNICEF targeting (and that of accurate at the macro level (more so in
other agencies relying on these data) may GCAs), these analyses often fail to take
be at best approximate, especially over a into consideration displacements and
period that has been characterized in some beneficiary coping capacities. In some
parts of the country by major population cases, particularly in NWS, the evaluation
movements. found that targeting has been as much
80 The HRP and HNO contain information about severity of needs across the sub-districts.
Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the Level 3 Humanitarian Crisis in Syria 58
influenced by opportunities to programme interventions, might prove a more effective
as by assessed needs and priorities – for basis for targeting interventions for at least
example, by the presence of an NGO in some components of the programme.
a certain area, or the ease with which a
given area can be accessed.81 While this is Despite the limitations noted above,
understandable – humanitarian response some things can be said about UNICEF
is often the art of the possible – it means and cluster coverage based on the
that targeting is often based on capacity to available data. Across all sectors, UNICEF
programme as much as strict prioritization and the relevant clusters have targeted
of needs. For example, in education the around 70-80 per cent of the assessed
cluster target is constructed on the basis of needs. However, within that figure, target
the aggregated targets in the HRP projects, achievement has been highly variable
including those submitted by UNICEF across sectors and geographic areas. Most
partners. Targets tend to be adjusted on the sectors have struggled to achieve sufficient
basis of the previous year’s performance. coverage even against Agenda A priorities.
Nutrition consistently set relatively low
There is a general consensus that targets compared to need, then often
the targeting processes for both the over-performed based on those numbers;
clusters and UNICEF has been imprecise however, information at field level indicates
and determined by factors other than that coverage was at best around 70 per
prioritized needs (whether this is judged cent, with a lot of variability depending on
by ‘numbers in need’ or ‘severity of area accessibility.82 Education and child
need’). Where they have been ‘capacity- protection coverage was also relatively low
based’, this too has sometimes been compared to need, and child protection
misjudged, and this is likely to be a major targets were very low compared to
factor behind some of the instances of assessed need. Even in the relatively strong
under- or over-performance by UNICEF WASH sector, UNICEF and cluster partners
sectors (see below under ‘effectiveness’). have struggled to achieve coverage and
An area-based approach, perhaps using meet the needs.
zonal risk mapping to guide multi-sector
81 KIIs with UNICEF and NGO staff in Gaziantep, including cluster coordinators and IMOs (IMOs were often double-hatting and so able to speak both to
UNICEF and cluster targeting practices).
82 KIIs with UNICEF and NGO staff in Gaziantep; analysis of HPM data 2019–2020.
Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the Level 3 Humanitarian Crisis in Syria 59
For example, over the evaluation period, Within these ‘reach’ figures, the large
reported education coverage by UNICEF majority are children reached through dis-
and the cluster has been around 50 per cent tribution of supply and light rehabilitation
of assessed need across WoS – relatively of schools. While the work is essential and
low in a context where around 2.7 million appropriate, it cannot simply be correlated
children were out of school in 2021 (see with increases in school attendance, let
Figure 7 below for 2020 data). In this sector, alone with improved educational
UNICEF targeting strategy is largely based outcomes.
on partner capacity and reach, with adjust-
ments made to targets on the basis of the
results achieved in the previous year.83 4.5 Balance and coherence of
UNICEF programme
Balance of the programme84
Figure 7: Education coverage in Syria
The evaluation attempted to assess
Education coverage the question of balance of the UNICEF
Whole of Syria - 2020 programme response across Syria as a
945.120 children 2.658.088 children whole (including each of the three main
15% of the children in need 42% of the children in need
crisis areas) but found it difficult to do
so. That balance has been affected by a
number of factors over the past four years,
UNICEF reach
including access, funding constraints and
Additional conditionality. As noted above, access
6.337.241 Children
education
in need of education to non-GCAs of NWS has been severely
cluster
(formal and non-formal)
reach
affected by conflict-related insecurity
3.603.208 Children over this period, as well as the general
reached by the education
cluster (57% of CIN) constraints of operating primarily cross-
border. Access to non-GCAs of NES has
been contingent on securing the necessary
Children not reached
authorizations from authorities on both
sides.
2.734.033 children
43% of the children in need
83 It should be noted that the large majority of children are reached through distribution of supply and light rehabilitation of schools. As SCO staff noted,
“pedagogical quality improvements reached only a limited amount of beneficiaries given the redlines of not being able to engage in teacher training
and systems strengthening”. Reach figures for 2020 and 2021 are affected by COVID-related school closures.
84 Evaluation question B.4 How well balanced and harmonized has the UNICEF programme been over the evaluation period?
Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the Level 3 Humanitarian Crisis in Syria 60
Part of the difficulty of evaluating the concern UNICEF.85 Elsewhere, UNICEF
geographical balance of the UNICEF appears to have found a reasonable
programme across different areas is that programme balance. Although this has
the organization’s accounting for funds been weighted toward urban and peri-
allocated and spent in these different urban populations (as well as camps), this
areas is unclear. Figures are based on hub appears reasonable in terms of ‘density’ of
programming rather than areas covered; needs. Beyond that, we have not been able
therefore, for the cross-zone work to NES, to draw firm conclusions about geographic
the evaluators were unable to obtain any balance.
data (see further section 6 below). This
is clearly unsatisfactory and a significant With regard to programme balance,
gap both in terms of accountability and UNICEF has adopted a broad-spectrum
management of information. Using target approach in its response, attempting to
data to assess the geographic balance of cover substantively all of the main sectors
the programme is problematic for much the (within its remit) affecting children and
same reason (UNICEF did not set targets for adolescents. While delivery on those
NES). But here the problem is compounded agendas has been inconsistent and
by the factors noted earlier, and the fact implementing partner capacity in the
that severity as well as the numbers in different sectors has been variable, the
need have to be accounted for. evaluation found that UNICEF was right
in the circumstances to maintain such a
As noted above, most sectors have broad-spectrum response. The imbalances
struggled to achieve coverage against that were found were largely related to
assessed need across the whole country. external factors, including access and
Our overall conclusion is that areas beyond funding. Of the sectors particularly affected
government control in the northeast have by donor conditionality, education and
been relatively under-served over the last ADAP stand out. Limits placed on the
two years by the internationally-supported ability of UNICEF and others to work
response, for populations beyond the camp on these agendas led to some related
in particular. Both on grounds of equity imbalance in the overall programme
and for its own sake, this imbalance should response.
85 This conclusion is based on review of (limited) available data but also KIIs with donors, UN agencies (OCHA, WHO) and NGOs.
Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the Level 3 Humanitarian Crisis in Syria 61
Coherence of the programme largely explained by the fact that UNICEF
cannot directly support the Ministry of
An important question for the evaluation
Health, and rehabilitation work in health
was how well integrated the different
has been very limited, partly for lack of
components of the UNICEF programme
funding.86
have been, and in particular whether
the different sectoral interventions were
In its local communication work, UNICEF
mutually reinforcing. A considerable
has shown its ability to address multiple
degree of effective inter-sector planning
agendas at the same time. For example, the
and delivery was found in the sectors
rapid response teams set up for nutrition
that have traditionally been associated
surveillance were able to raise awareness
with each other (e.g., child protection
on a range of other issues. The RCCE
and education and WASH in schools).
mechanism – integrated in the broader
However, the integration of different
COVID-19 response strategy – proved
sectoral interventions was found to have
its worth both with regard to COVID-19
been largely ad hoc and opportunistic
communication and to wider health
rather than planned as part of a deliberate
messaging (although one key informant
strategy. The evaluators recognize the
suggested that RCCE for COVID-19 was too
challenges involved, particularly in GCAs,
narrowly focused and could be extended to
where multi-sector programming often
other areas of the programme).
requires engagement with numerous
different ministries, requiring in some cases
The evaluators found good integration
formal vetting of all UNICEF interventions.
of education and child protection thanks
to standard teacher training on child
As suggested above, a more strategic
protection and PSS. Child protection and
approach to programming, based on an
PSS considerations are also integrated
agreed inter-sector planning framework,
in non-formal education activities, and
would help to ensure more consistent
there is good and effective integration of
delivery of multi-sector interventions.
mine risk education in Curriculum A and
While WASH in schools has been a key
other curricula (including the accelerated
component of the WASH programme
learning and self-learning programmes).
and one of its indicators, WASH in health
The ADAP programme in GCAs is also
infrastructures is less evident, perhaps
86 The evaluators noticed some examples in their field visits, e.g., the apparent lack of WASH facilities in a neo-natal unit the main hospital in Deir-ez-Zor.
Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the Level 3 Humanitarian Crisis in Syria 62
designed in synergy with CP and education been successful and greatly appreciated
programming, but there have been by beneficiaries and local administrations.
challenges in making links between these Its necessary links with child protection
sectors and the social policy programme. (case management) and education have
been weak in the past but appear to have
Integration between education and recently been addressed. There is potential
nutrition is lacking; in fact the evaluation to scale the programme up, funding
found no evidence of links between these permitting.
two sectors of UNICEF. This needs urgent
reconsideration given rising levels of food The results of the staff survey on coherence
insecurity and malnutrition. WFP school were mixed. While some pointed to
feeding programmes are currently limited good examples, most recognized there is
to dry rations. room for improvement. One respondent
reflected, “I think this is work in progress
Child protection mainstreaming is relatively as attaining integration / coherence /
weak, except in education and ADAP. synergies within and across sectors /
Mine risk education is integrated in some sections remains a challenge. … There
interventions, such as immunization, are opportunities that have yet to be
polio campaigns and the school curricula fully explored”. Others suggested that
in 2018–2019. In NWS, UNICEF as child integration is driven by individuals, rather
protection AoR coordinator has developed than being systematic: (“It depends how
(jointly with the gender-based violence much the manager is aware”) and thus it
AoR) guidelines for donors and third- “requires behaviour change among
party monitors on how to monitor child programme staff as well as implementing
protection and gender-based violence partners”.
programming, but similar guidance and
standard operating procedures do not exist
4.6 Programme delivery and
in other sectors.
effectiveness87
Although relatively small compared to
the scale of needs, the social protection The ability to claim effectiveness for
programme for disabled children has UNICEF interventions in Syria relies heavily
87 Evaluation questions C1 To what extent has UNICEF met its targets and programme objectives since 2018? C2 What have been the main challenges
to delivering against the CCCs? C4 How good has UNICEF programme monitoring, reporting and quality assurance been? What do they show about
the quality and effectiveness of UNICEF work?
Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the Level 3 Humanitarian Crisis in Syria 63
on assumptions about the link between that may not be safe to make in the Syria
outputs and outcomes. There are some context.
components of UNICEF programming (e.g.,
vaccination) where the causal link between Assumptions have to be checked against
output and outcome is relatively clear. In the prevailing reality – and re-checked,
other sectors, the link between output and given the rate at which the context for
outcome is less clear and the assumptions families can change. To be confident
involved are more tentative. In education, that the interventions of UNICEF and its
for example, the fact that a child regularly partners are having the intended effect
attends school, while positive in itself, generally requires monitoring of outcomes
does not mean that he or she is receiving a over time, engagement with and feedback
good basic education. Quality factors have from communities and local authorities as
a major bearing on likely outcomes. In this well as partners, and the ability to adjust
case, support to the training of teachers accordingly. But this is an area where
and the provision of teaching materials is UNICEF and others have only limited
one route to helping assure this, but again means of data gathering and triangulation
involves assumptions (e.g., that teachers at their disposal, and outcome data are
will be paid and will turn up for work) scarce. Some of the ‘key lessons’ identified
Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the Level 3 Humanitarian Crisis in Syria 64
in the staff survey are about the importance Analysing in detail the inconsistencies
of investing in evidence generation. in these trends is beyond the scope of
Monitoring is largely concerned with the this evaluation, but the evaluation team
delivery of outputs, although there is some identified some factors that contributed to
quality assurance component through them. For over-performance, these included
third-party monitors and facilitators, poor targeting based on underestimation
which was recognized in the staff survey of beneficiaries in the HNO (e.g., for EPI);
as essential. The lack of UNICEF presence access to new beneficiaries (displacements,
in the field (complete in non-GCAs of newly accessible areas) and opportunities
NWS and NES, partial in GCAs) is a major to intervene for unplanned response or
barrier not only to needs assessment and sudden emergencies; and successful
programme monitoring but also to impact awareness campaigns (e.g., back-to-
assessment. school). For under-performance, they
included delayed start of intended
Allowing that performance against activities (through lack of resources,
targets can only be a rough proxy for logistics/administrative constraints,
effectiveness, the evaluation included an etc.); lack of NGO/implementing partner
assessment of UNICEF target performance, capacity; changes of strategy or operating
supplemented by a review of the year- constraints in other related sectors (e.g.,
end SitReps and the humanitarian WASH in schools in 2018; micronutrient
performance monitoring (HPM) reports.88 distribution during EPI campaign in 2019);
This showed a high degree of variability financial constraints; and shifts in sector
between and within sectors, with most strategy. In some cases, under- and over-
falling in the range 50-100 per cent, but performance seem to have been linked:
with numerous significant outliers (both under- performance in one year (perhaps
under- and over-performance) and a large due to funds being secured late) followed
degree of inconsistency between years. by over-performance the next, using
Similar trends are also observed in cluster unspent funds carried forward.
performance.89
88 Because the indicators in the HRP and UNICEF HAC are only partially aligned (except in education and child protection), this assessment is based
mainly on the HPM indicators.
89 For example, in 2019 the education target for children enrolled in formal education activities was overachieved by 187 per cent while in 2021 only 57
per cent of the target was achieved.
Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the Level 3 Humanitarian Crisis in Syria 65
The evaluation concludes that the ability The second (related) factor hampering the
of UNICEF to gauge the effectiveness of its organization’s ability to gauge effectiveness
programme interventions is hampered by is the lack of direct access to and
two main factors. The first is that to a large engagement with communities, and the
extent all sectors limit their effectiveness heavy reliance on third-party monitoring
and impact analysis to outputs rather (TPM) to supplement partner self-reporting.
than outcomes. For example, in health Most of those consulted about this (inside
and nutrition, the focus is on the number and outside UNICEF) agreed that this
of consultations, but there is very limited was a significant weakness, especially in
information about drop-out rates and non-GCAs of NWS. While much of this
recurrence of malnutrition. The same could is related to access constraints beyond
be said concerning education outcomes UNICEF control, the evaluation concluded
and indeed outcomes in most sectors. that considerably more could be done to
Too many external variables are involved strengthen this aspect of UNICEF work (see
for UNICEF to be confident that delivery further section 5.4 below).
of outputs will lead to achievement of
outcomes.
Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the Level 3 Humanitarian Crisis in Syria 66
5
WORKING WITH OTHERS: LEADERSHIP,
COORDINATION, PARTNERSHIPS90
5.1 UNICEF leadership and Child, the UNICEF advocacy role in seeking
coordination roles to protect the rights and best interests of
children in all parts of Syria.
Feedback from external key informants
Besides its own programme, UNICEF has a
(United Nations and others) suggests that
range of system-wide roles. These include
senior leadership has been one of the
its role on the UNCT/Humanitarian Country
particular strengths of the UNICEF role in
Team (HCT) in Syria and the Strategic
Syria over the evaluation period, and a key
Steering Group of the WoS mechanism; the
part of the organization’s added value in
related leadership of the regional director
the region. The representative and regional
and the country representative for Syria;
director have contributed strongly to
and more generally, based on its mandate
strategic leadership of the United Nations
and on the Convention on the Rights of
90 Evaluation questions D.1 What has the UNICEF partnership strategy and balance of partnerships been? D.5 To what extent has UNICEF provided
system-wide leadership on coordination of response and child-related agendas?
Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the Level 3 Humanitarian Crisis in Syria 67
as a whole and shown strong diplomatic different set of challenges. Coordination
and communication skills in engaging in government-controlled parts of Syria
with the GoS, other controlling authorities (based on ‘sectors’ rather than ‘clusters’)
and international actors. This has helped is done in close collaboration with the
open the space for dialogue on policy relevant government departments and
and programming and demonstrated the ministries. Here the different sectors are
possibility for progress on what have often co-led with GoS or the Syrian Arab Red
been difficult and seemingly intractable Crescent (SARC), with limited input from
agendas (such as education in NES and NGOs. In some cases (e.g., education) they
repatriation of foreign children). have not followed agreed best practice by
forming a strategic advisory group. UNICEF
In the rest of this section, we consider does not have a co-coordinator, and the
the more specific responsibilities related perception of INGOs in Damascus (the
to UNICEF ‘cluster lead agency’ roles in ‘DINGOs’) is that they feel marginalized,
WASH, nutrition and education, and its role with the sectors largely reflecting UNICEF
as co-lead for the child protection AoR. programmes: “The sector’s agenda tends to
be UNICEF’s agenda”. This seems a missed
UNICEF cluster and AoR (co-)leadership opportunity, as some of the DINGOs could
be important allies given their expertise
Although different terminology is used in
(i.e., the Norwegian Refugee Council in
different parts of Syria for the response
education and child protection issues),
coordination mechanisms (cluster, sector),
especially now that new opportunities are
UNICEF has played its expected cluster and
emerging to work with various ministries
AoR lead or co-lead role in all areas except
on upstream issues.
non-GCA NES, where coordination has
been NGO-led. As noted in the previous
For (non-GC) northwest Syria, the standard
section, its performance in the cluster lead
cluster system is based out of Gaziantep,
role – and in the WoS coordination role –
with UNICEF playing its normal lead/co-
has been variable across sectors and hubs.
lead roles. The performance of individual
Here we consider briefly why this has been
sectors in their external leadership and
the case.
coordination roles has been variable
(see below). The role of NGOs as co-
Coordination challenges for different areas
coordinators in Gaziantep was reported to
of Syria and for the Whole of Syria
be largely effective and helped strengthen
With regard to coordination in the three
the coordination reputation of UNICEF.
different crisis areas, each poses a
Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the Level 3 Humanitarian Crisis in Syria 68
In (non-GC) northeast Syria, the biggest Education and nutrition have been less
challenge is coordination with the NGO well coordinated for WoS. Although it has
Forum working group system, which worked hard in the face of sometimes
largely mirrors the OCHA-led cluster unrealistic expectations, the performance
system. Here, UNICEF alignment with the of the education coordination function
GoS is particularly sensitive for the INGOs has not been satisfactory; besides lacking
working under the Forum. The WASH and a WoS strategy, it has lacked a dedicated
child protection clusters have found ways cluster lead. Additionally, it has lacked a
to interact with their respective working regional perspective, something that is
group counterparts quite successfully, but important given the scale of the regional
the same cannot be said for nutrition and Syrian refugee diaspora and the prospects
education. Besides the implications for for return. Nutrition coordination across
these sectors, this is a reputational risk WoS has also lacked a clear strategy.
factor for UNICEF.
The challenge in resourcing the coordina-
For the Whole of Syria, performance has tion function
been variable by sector. Again, WASH
UNICEF has struggled to resource its
provides a largely positive example,
coordination lead function, particularly
including effective advocacy with donors
with regard to the cross-border work in
on behalf of NGOs (not just its own
NWS. Reliance on ‘double-’ and sometimes
partners) for the cross-border work in NWS,
‘triple-hatting’ for coordination and
and strong liaison across hubs, including
programme roles has been a problem
the NES Forum working group. The
at all levels, confirmed by numerous
UNICEF-led WoS child protection AoR also
interviewees and by the internal UNICEF
has a good reputation with partners, and
WoS review.91
it is reported to have played a crucial role
in harmonizing between hubs. There was
The evaluation concludes that where, as
particular appreciation from the NES child
in NWS, the practice of double-hatting
protection working group of the role played
has become (or is in danger of becoming)
by UNICEF in this respect.
routine, UNICEF should assume that this
91 This finding is also echoed in the evaluation of UNICEF’s cluster lead agency role (‘CLARE II’) available here: https://evaluationreports.unicef.org/
GetDocument?fileID=22654
Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the Level 3 Humanitarian Crisis in Syria 69
is not a suitable or sustainable option for a
response with such complex coordination
challenges. Both WoS and hub-level
coordination functions have been affected.92
The evaluators acknowledge that these are
not always easy posts to fill, given the mix
of technical expertise, communication and
people skills required. They also depend
in part on interpersonal chemistry, and
some of the current problems are rooted in
difficult past relationships. While financial
constraints may explain the practice of
double-hatting, UNICEF needs to review
and fix the structural issues affecting some
of the clusters.
5.2 UNICEF collaboration with systems and capacities in the social and
GoS, ministries and other other sectors. As noted earlier, some of
authorities93 that disruption relates to the loss of key
service delivery capacity at local level,
The organization’s presence in the through hospitals, health centres, schools,
country since well before the beginning water and power plants and other public
of the conflict meant that it already had institutions. The loss of trained personnel
well-established relationships with key in all sectors – from health and education
government ministries. But the conflict to WASH and energy supply – coupled with
brought about profound changes to policy destruction of critical infrastructure, has
priorities as well as affecting government meant that many of the most immediate
budgets, resources and personnel, and priorities revolve around the restoration of
caused massive disruption to established basic services. From a UNICEF perspective,
92 UNICEF could perhaps have made more use of standby partners here, as demonstrated by the very effective deployment of a SBP to the WASH
cluster in Qamishli. While visa issues and some limits in SBP deployment exist (normally 3+3 months), there have been situations where SBP have
been deployed for longer timeframes.
93 Evaluation question D.2 How effective and appropriate has UNICEF collaboration and engagement with government ministries and other relevant
authorities been?
Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the Level 3 Humanitarian Crisis in Syria 70
priorities refocused from the longer-term is the primary cause of the long-standing
agenda onto the short- to medium-term mistrust between NGOs and the Damascus-
priorities for children. Development based United Nations agencies. That
concerns gave way to more immediate mistrust is to some extent mutual, and the
humanitarian and recovery concerns. operations of NGOs working in non-GCAs
The politics of engagement with the are themselves subject to political factors
Syrian government (and now with de relating both to the policies of controlling
facto controlling authorities in NWS and authorities in NWS / NES and to the
NES) are sensitive and complex. This is policies of international donors.
reflected, for example, in the conditions
imposed by international donors, and in These perceptions may be unsurprising
the redlines established in the Parameters given the politics and evolution of the
and Principles of United Nations conflict, and the fact that those living
Assistance in Syria (see Section 2.2). As in non-GCAs are identified by the GoS
noted above, these have imposed major as ‘opposition’ supporters. But from a
constraints on the ability of UNICEF and humanitarian perspective, it is essential
others to support anything beyond relief to demonstrate that UNICEF has equal
and basic rehabilitation. More generally, concern for children and their families
while the norms of humanitarian action living in all parts of Syria. While UNICEF
demand engagement with warring has generally done well in navigating the
parties, humanitarian policy and financing very complex political terrain in Syria,
instruments – as well as the scale of it needs to do more to demonstrate this
humanitarian funding – limit the forms of equality of concern. In particular, it needs
that engagement. to forge a more collaborative approach
to working with the NES Forum and its
The politics of engagement have a bearing members, in order to achieve the shared
on questions of humanitarian principles – goal of increasing coverage in non-GCAs
independence, neutrality and impartiality of this region. This, of course, demands
– especially because Syria is such a willingness and trust on both sides, but
profoundly divided country. This is partly UNICEF has shown through its WASH and
a matter of perception, and the evaluation child protection work in NES that this is
found that many of the NGOs operating possible to achieve.
outside areas of GoS control do not believe
UNICEF in Damascus (or indeed other Work with GoS counterparts in GCAs has
United Nations agencies there) are really come increasingly to resemble a ‘normal’
independent of the GoS. This perception UNICEF approach in post-conflict countries.
Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the Level 3 Humanitarian Crisis in Syria 71
UNICEF interventions are in line with GoS the related interventions were vetted and
priorities and have progressively shifted cleared by the ministry.
towards recovery and basic rehabilitation. In education, there has been close and
Collaboration with ministerial counterparts effective engagement with the Ministry of
appears overall to have been effective Education on issues such as information
and, in some cases, is deemed excellent management, revision and alignment of
(WASH with the Ministry of Water curricula and facilitation of exams, as well
Resources and education with the Ministry as teacher training on child protection and
of Education). As noted above, such PSS. In child protection, UNICEF has a
collaboration is sensitive in some quarters, good reputation for engaging with all the
but the evaluation concludes that it is both actors across the crisis on protection of
appropriate and necessary, so long as it children. Syria does not have a ministry
does not lead to a relative de-prioritization dedicated to adolescents, resulting in
of work in non-GCAs. gaps in the policy framework and a weak
enabling environment for adolescent
In WASH, close collaboration with the participation.94 Social policy has recently
Deputy Minister of Water Resources started to take advantage of more flexibility
allowed a relatively solid programme to be and transparency from key ministerial
established in GCAs and some cross-zone counterparts and is increasingly becoming
interventions in areas of NES under self- able to plan and implement potentially
administration control, as well as some important upstream work on social services
(low-profile) cross-line support in areas policy and financing.
of NWS, in coordination with Gaziantep.
For health and nutrition, UNICEF worked In non-GCA NWS, the programme is
in close coordination with the Ministry implemented in areas under Turkish control
of Health, and programmes run by or under the control of the ‘Salvation
implementing partners were aligned with Government’ and Hay’at Tahrir al-Sham
government systems and processes. All of (HTS). The interactions of UNICEF
94 UNICEF has worked on some elements of the ADAP agenda with MoE and the Ministry of Culture.
95 The exception to this is in child protection, where there is ongoing low-profile engagement on CAAFAG issues: recruitment, arbitrary detention, MRM
reporting and preparing the ground for signing the Action Plan to End Recruitment and Use of Children in Armed Conflict as requested by the Security
Council.
Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the Level 3 Humanitarian Crisis in Syria 72
implementing partners with these entities UNICEF work in northeastern Syria
is largely limited to access negotiations is dependent on both GoS and self-
and broad agreements to work in particular administration consent. This is relatively
areas.95 Some (limited) work is done with straightforward in towns (Qamishli, Al-
the local administrations still in place. Hasakah) under government control, as
If the UNSC cross-border resolution is well as in the IDP camps under Kurdish
not renewed, the situation would not control. It is more challenging in other
essentially change for the NGOs based out areas of cross-zone support, although it
of Gaziantep, which could continue working appears that opportunities for expanding
cross-border in NWS. But the political such interventions may be increasing.
control of these non-GCAs affects the Child protection and WASH have been
potential for increasing cross-line support more effective than other sectors in making
operations from GCAs: interactions of the use of these opportunities. It is unclear
United Nations agencies and NGOs with whether this depends on different degrees
the Salvation Government in particular will of openness of key ministries to allow
likely be much more sensitive than those operations in Kurdish-controlled areas, or
with the self-administration in NES. Recent on better negotiation capacities of some
attempts to scale up cross-line support UNICEF sectors.
show the difficulties involved in getting the
necessary permissions from both sides of As noted above, a key result in NES was
this divide. the negotiation and signing with the self-
administration of the ‘Action Plan to End
One instance of apparent non-collaboration Recruitment and Use of Children in Armed
is the UNICEF decision not to engage with Conflict’. For health and nutrition, there
local administrations in education in NWS. is limited cross-zone work beyond EPI,
It was not clear to the evaluation team and the evaluators felt there was scope
why this choice was made, particularly for expansion of some of the health work
in view of the extreme weakness of the to hospitals outside government areas of
education system in NWS; on the face of control, and a need to better assess and
it, this decision sits awkwardly with the address the deteriorating nutrition situation
organization’s commitment to the principle in the region. In education, there appears
of equity and is perhaps overdue for to be limited engagement with education
review. authorities outside the formal camps and
for schools in government-controlled areas.
Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the Level 3 Humanitarian Crisis in Syria 73
5.3 UNICEF collaboration with The relationship with UNHCR is said to
United Nations agencies, work well at the UNCT level,98 and there
SARC and NGOs96 are examples of effective collaboration
on practical agendas, e.g., on WASH in
IDP settlements, but there appears to be
The evaluation found that overall, UNICEF
some divergence of approach on the core
had good collaboration and coordination
protection agenda. When UNHCR decided
with all its key United Nations agency
to move the WoS protection cluster to
counterparts at WoS and regional
Damascus (as did the United Nations Mine
level. As noted above, UNICEF has a
Action Service with the mine action AoR),
strong reputation and is considered by
UNICEF and the United Nations Population
other agencies as a key interlocutor in
Fund (UNFPA) agreed jointly to keep their
the extremely complex and sensitive
respective AoRs based in Amman. The
environment of the Syria response.
evaluators believe that this was the right
Interactions at Damascus and Gaziantep
strategic decision, and it was appreciated
levels are broadly good, although the were
by cluster partners. Participation in the
some challenges related to the different
WoS protection cluster is reported to
structures of the different agencies.
be more problematic since the cluster
relocated to Damascus; it is less trusted by
One key sector of collaboration has been
partners and UNHCR is perceived as less
health. UNICEF has worked closely with the
neutral, especially with respect to NES.99
World Health Organization (WHO), notably
on the joint EPI programme, and on the
Work with the World Food Programme
COVID-19 response from 2020, but also
(WFP) has been relatively limited, and as
in areas like WASH in health facilities. For
noted above, there is a need for stronger
the most part this collaboration appears
to have worked well,97 although problems collaboration on school feeding and
approaches to dealing with moderate acute
were reported with the COVID-19 response
malnutrition (MAM). To date, WFP support
and the supply of COVID vaccines by
to the MAM caseload has been limited, and
UNICEF (though as noted in section 4
this risks affecting the broader response to
above, this was largely outside UNICEF
malnutrition in NWS, and specifically the
control).
96 Evaluation question D.3 How well has UNICEF collaborated with other UN agencies?
97 UNICEF and WHO KIIs in Damascus and Cairo.
98 KII UNHCR.
99 KIIs AoR members.
Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the Level 3 Humanitarian Crisis in Syria 74
UNICEF response to severe cases (SAM). coordination and emergency section),
The SENS survey carried out in NSW in WASH (as sector/cluster co-lead) and, to
2021100 confirmed very low MAM coverage a limited extent, child protection through
in 2021 (12,000, out of c.126,000 children at its SCO emergency section. Feedback
risk). As nutrition cluster lead, UNICEF has from interviews with SARC senior staff
a responsibility to advocate for stronger suggests that while the relationship is
MAM coverage, and it should do more to greatly appreciated, UNICEF tends to be
forge a common agenda with WFP in this unduly reticent in leadership (e.g., on
regard. For its part, WFP “would like a more child protection) and sometimes slow to
strategic and comprehensive approach by deliver.102
UNICEF education” with regard to school
feeding.101 The organization’s working relationships
with NGOs – local, national and
UNICEF work with SARC has been international – have varied in quality and
extensive and the working relationship type across the three main crisis areas.
appears generally a good one. SARC is a Political sensitivities and related restrictions
partner to all United Nations agencies as on partnerships and partner presence have
well as many NGOs, and a large proportion played a significant part in this. Some of
of aid in GCAs is delivered through SARC the organization’s usual key partner INGOs
and its extensive network of sub-offices, are not present, particularly in Damascus,
staff and volunteers. Supported by both the since INGOs have (for the most part) been
International Committee of the Red Cross unable to work simultaneously in GCAs
(ICRC) and the International Federation and non-GCAs. The very different political
of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies contexts in NWS, NES and the rest of
(IFRC), SARC has sometimes struggled to the country have had a major bearing on
prove its political neutrality to donors and UNICEF partnership networks.
international agencies given its closeness
with the GoS. However, it is generally In non-government-controlled areas of
recognized as a key intermediary in aid NWS, UNICEF has been able to implement
delivery in Syria. UNICEF engages with its programme through Syrian NGOs of
SARC primarily on relief (through the field notably high caliber and strong capacities.
100 Physicians Across Continents and United Nations Children’s Fund, ‘Standardized Expanded Nutrition Survey, Idlib and Aleppo Governorates, north
-west Syria’, PAC, Ankara, 18 June 2021.
101 KII with UNICEF and other organizations’ staff in Gaziantep and Damascus.
102 KII with senior SARC management.
Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the Level 3 Humanitarian Crisis in Syria 75
Given the ‘remote’ nature of programming while seeking to ensure continuity of
in this region, UNICEF has relied heavily services and avoidance of service gaps.
on the ability and trustworthiness of these In GCAs, the evaluation found that the
partners to deliver and account for good UNICEF decision to work with local (GoS-
quality interventions. The results from approved) implementing partners and
TPM suggest that this trust has largely private contractors has largely proved
been well placed, although as noted appropriate. The evolving context and
above, the lack of direct UNICEF presence the opening of new upstream work
in the region leaves an uncomfortable opportunities suggest the need to expand
degree of exposure to risk and uncertainty the partnership network to include selected
concerning outcomes. Damascus-based INGOs. Apart from
accessing their sector-specific expertise,
As the process of expanding cross-line this would have the added benefit of
operations into non-GC NWS is likely to helping address perceptions that UNICEF is
be complex and slow, UNICEF needs to too much focused on its own relationship
maintain its support (at least indirectly) with GoS and the sectors are too UNICEF-
to the cross-border work through its dominated.
partnership and coordination networks
Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the Level 3 Humanitarian Crisis in Syria 76
In non-government-controlled areas of In some sectors (notably education and
NES, formal partnerships are currently child protection in NWS), there has been
possible almost exclusively with local a particular need for technical capacity
NGOs recognized by the GoS, as well development. National NGOs reported a
as with private contractors. Child high degree of satisfaction and appreciation
protection is a limited exception, through of UNICEF technical support and flexibility
contracts managed by Amman. While throughout the partnership agreement.
this arrangement is not ideal, it has
allowed crucial expertise to be accessed In child protection, efforts were made
and supported, which is important given to strategically select and train partners
the extent of needs. As noted above, it at technical level, and to build technical
is essential for UNICEF to strengthen its expertise and communities of practices
communication and coordination with through the AoR. These efforts extended
the NGO Forum actors (mainly INGOs), support for the CAAFAG taskforce in NES.
especially in some of the currently under- In child protection work in GCAs, although
supported sectors. This would allow better it operates through NGOs, UNICEF seems
harmonization of field assessments and to invest less in partnerships and is more
interventions, address problems and issues oriented toward working with the Ministry
affecting specific sectors (e.g., provision of for Social Affairs and Labour and the
nutrition supplies to INGOs) and expand Syrian Commission for Family Affairs
response coverage. and Population. There is scope to expand
partnerships with NGOs, e.g., through
Concerning the quality of partnerships, INGOs and the sector. NGOs can play an
interviews conducted for the evaluation important role in scaling up child protection
and the results of the online survey of services in the prevailing circumstances
implementing partners suggest that overall, and in building the culture needed to
NGO partners have been very satisfied with address the most serious protection
their partnership with UNICEF. A number of concerns (e.g., gender-based violence,
implementing partner respondents in NWS children in detention).
highlighted the quality of the collaboration,
and (for WASH in particular) described this
as a ‘real partnership and not a financial
transaction’.
Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the Level 3 Humanitarian Crisis in Syria 77
5.4 Accountability to and In GCAs and non-GC NES, the evaluation
engagement with affected did not find any evidence of a structured
populations103 AAP approach embedded in the response.
The recent supplementation of the
facilitator network with an experienced
Accountability to affected populations
cadre of third-party monitors with specific
(AAP) – and more generally, engagement
responsibility for AAP indicates that SCO is
with communities – has been one of the
aware of this weakness, and this is a step in
weakest aspects of UNICEF practice to
the right direction. It will not be sufficient in
date. This is recognized among staff, who
itself: in NWS, some limited AAP initiatives
identified AAP as an area for improvement
implemented by third-party monitors
in the staff survey. This is largely a function
already exist, but staff acknowledge this
of context: UNICEF itself has limited
is not sufficient to assess the relevance
presence in many areas, and little or none
and impact of interventions from the
in the non-GCAs. As a result, is has little
perspective of intended beneficiaries.
direct contact with communities in these
areas and is heavily reliant on its partners
Some sectors have made progress towards
and third-party monitors. In GCAs, while
AAP in NWS. For example, in health and
UNICEF has more access, its ability to
nutrition, feedback from beneficiaries
engage and consult with communities
is collected by the third-party monitors
is restricted by the GoS. While some
and shared with UNICEF, although the
elements of the programme (notably social
beneficiaries are not directly involved
protection) have made progress in getting
in the selection of specific programme
feedback from communities, the C4D/
activities. Banners with beneficiary rights
RCCE mode of engagement has largely
and entitlements are printed and shown at
been used to deliver messages rather than
health facilities, and these include phone
generate feedback or assess perceptions.
numbers and e-mail address to lodge
So while AAP is generally incorporated in
complaints. UNICEF coordinates with other
the design of projects, in many cases this
agencies for the collection and follow-up of
appears to reflect an aspiration rather than
these feedback and complaints.
the current reality.
103 Evaluation questions C.3 How accountable and responsive has UNICEF been to affected populations? To what extent have they engaged communi-
ties in programme design and implementation? D.4 How successful have UNICEF and its partners been in community mobilization, outreach initia-
tives and working with and through local volunteers? E.3 How well has UNICEF used C4D and awareness-raising campaigns to support pro-
grammes?
Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the Level 3 Humanitarian Crisis in Syria 78
Child protection and WASH in NWS have UNICEF is aware of the AAP and
attempted something more comprehensive. community engagement challenge
Local councils and beneficiaries are and is taking some steps to address it.
reported to be involved in project initiation Social policy has set a useful lead here in
and planning, needs assessments, selection conducting beneficiary perception surveys
criteria, implementation and project of its programme components. But more
closure. Emphasis is given to prioritizing comprehensive work on AAP will become
the needs of the most vulnerable groups increasingly important within the expected
(including people with disabilities and expansion of UNICEF cross-zone/cross-
female-headed households), and special line operations in NES and NWS, not least
emphasis is given to the participation of in identifying possible implementation
adolescent girls and women, partly with a challenges. For example, will people living
view to reducing the potential for gender- in non-GCAs of NWS accept vaccines
based violence. Multiple channels are used coming from Damascus? What is the level
to receive feedback/complaints, and an of acceptance in NES for education in
inter-agency hotline for reporting sexual Arabic? Such issues can only be addressed
exploitation and abuse and other concerns if beneficiaries are properly consulted from
from beneficiaries and aid workers was the outset.
established in 2019.104 The evaluation team
was unable to verify the extent to which
these measures have worked in practice.
104 Such mechanisms have also been established for GCAs and non-GC areas in NES.
Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the Level 3 Humanitarian Crisis in Syria 79
6
MANAGEMENT AND OPERATIONAL
SUPPORT105
6.1 Whole of Syria from different ‘hubs’ inside and outside
management and support Syria have been overseen, supported and
arrangements coordinated through MENARO, including a
dedicated WoS team in Amman.
The system-wide WoS structure and
This structure has both UNICEF-specific
mechanisms, led by OCHA, were
(internal) and wider (external) functions.
introduced in 2015 (see section 2 above).
Internally, it has provided the means
The UNICEF WoS structure, designed
to coordinate UNICEF programmatic
in part to complement the system-wide
interventions and messaging from within
structure, is the arrangement by which
Syria (SCO) with cross-border interventions
UNICEF humanitarian activities mounted
105 Evaluation questions E.5 Have UNICEF management structures and arrangements enabled the most effective and efficient response? E.5.1 With
regard to UNICEF Whole of Syria structures and processes, how clear have the lines of accountability been? How well have those accountabilities
been managed and delivered on?
Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the Level 3 Humanitarian Crisis in Syria 80
from Türkiye (Gaziantep), Jordan and for in-country staff to report without facing
Iraq. Related to this, it established lines institutional and individual repercussions.
of management accountability for the
external hubs directly through to the Overall, the arrangement has been
regional director (i.e., to the GEC) as well effective in enabling UNICEF to respond
as oversight and operational support without excessive political interference.
for the ‘standalone’ Gaziantep office. But like other agencies working with
Externally, as part of the system-wide WoS WoS structures, UNICEF has struggled
mechanism led by OCHA from Amman, to make a coherent whole of the various
the structure housed WoS coordination parts of its response across the different
functions for the sectors and sub-sectors response hubs. This is reflected in the lack
in which UNICEF was lead or co-lead of an overarching WoS strategy and the
agency. These have been largely related to tendency to treat the cross-border work
fulfilling humanitarian planning cycle (HPC) into NWS as anomalous or even peripheral
functions. to its strategy for Syria. The evaluation
concluded that one reason for this was the
The UNICEF WoS arrangement was lack of a coherent overall vision for the
established when there were a number of UNICEF Syria humanitarian response.
active UNSC-authorized border crossings
providing support into Syria from One feature noted by UNICEF staff is the
Türkiye, Jordan and Iraq. This was clearly lack of clarity on roles and responsibilities –
appropriate and necessary at the time due and related lack of clarity of accountabilities
to the need for a remote management, – within the existing WoS arrangements,
coordination and oversight function in a including where the locus of decision-
secure location. The structure has provided making lies. This is something that needs
a link between geographically separate ultimately to be decided by the regional
programmatic activities, as well as a director in discussion with colleagues in
valuable cluster coordination function – SCO, Amman, Gaziantep and HQ.
although some clusters have proved more
effective than others, as noted in section This disconnect in thinking across the
5 above. The regional office has also different hubs, reflected in the tendency
provided necessary financial, HR, supply, to use ‘Syria’ to refer only to the areas
and communications support, with the covered by the Syria country office,
latter being particularly important with is not unique to UNICEF. But it has
respect to reporting ongoing child rights been perpetuated in part by limited
violations that would have been difficult communication between staff in different
Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the Level 3 Humanitarian Crisis in Syria 81
hubs. What was originally an appropriate i. Internal (enabling UNICEF response).
system of ‘firewalls’ within the WoS Inter-hub response coordination;
arrangement – designed to protect the WoS communication and advocacy;
security of staff, partners and data – management oversight and technical
has tended to foster an atmosphere of support to cross-border response;
mistrust across the different UNICEF hubs.
ii. External (enabling system-wide
While this has reportedly improved, it is
response). Funding, supply and
a situation that continues to date, and it
technical support for Syrian and
extends to attitudes to NGOs working in
international NGOs working cross-
non-GCAs. The evaluators noted a ‘them
border into NWS, through the
and us’ attitude during field missions,
Gaziantep hub. Provision of WoS
fuelled in part by personality clashes, but
cluster / AoR coordination and
also reflecting the political fractures across
leadership. WoS needs assessment
Syria. This situation represents a barrier
(HNO) and contribution to HRP.
to effective collaboration both within
UNICEF and between UNICEF and NGOs,
We consider below the value and continu-
particularly in NES, and it is essential to
ing relevance of each of these functions.
address it immediately.
Inter-hub UNICEF programme coordination
With the closure of all but one of the
has perhaps been the least prominent
UNSC-authorized cross-border routes in
function of the WoS mechanism over the
2020 (Bab al-Hawa from Türkiye to NWS),
evaluation period – and indeed this is not
the rationale for the current structure has
(with limited exceptions) considered part of
become less clear, and the high cost of
its role, which is mainly focused on sector-
maintaining it somewhat harder to justify
wide rather than UNICEF programme
in the face of declining funding. An internal
coordination. One result is that the hubs
UNICEF review is currently considering
have been working to largely distinct and
how future WoS coordination support
unconnected strategies and agendas.
should be structured and resourced.
The requirement for close coordination
This evaluation has not undertaken
between cross-zone/cross-line and
sufficiently detailed analysis to advise on
cross-border operations has been met in
a revised structure, but it has considered
part by the ‘joint operational planning’
the functions performed by the WoS
process, although this was intermittent
mechanism to date and their continued
over the latter part of the evaluation
relevance. The essential functions of the
period. Given the likely need for UNICEF
current UNICEF WoS arrangement appear
to continue to provide support services to
to be:
Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the Level 3 Humanitarian Crisis in Syria 82
such programmatic issues. The only
communications are around managing
funding and expenditure and meeting
donor redlines. … [T]here is not enough
time for leads of the sections in hub to
think about this as they are dealing with
multiple roles and demands.”
Having a ‘remote’ communications function
beyond the hub level has proved important
over the evaluation period (see below) and
the need for this remains, regardless of the
UNSC decision on the further extension
of the cross-border mandate. This role
remains important for communications
and advocacy relating to all parts of Syria,
at a time when communication about
the humanitarian system from Gaziantep
the situation in all three crisis areas is
while growing the scale of cross-line
still politically sensitive. Maintaining a
support from Damascus and Aleppo, the
‘distanced’ communications function helps
importance of this internal programme
to provide a protective firewall for the
coordination function is likely to grow and
Damascus office in particular.
to require liaison via Amman, given the
difficulties of coordinating directly between
With regard to the WoS coordination
Gaziantep and government-controlled
function, the evaluation found that the
Syria.
value of this depended on how it was
interpreted and implemented in practice.
A staff member summarized the
This varied considerably across the
challenge in this way: “While the JOP
different sectors. The WASH and child
leads to joint programming targets with
protection sectors both found a way to
distribution between hubs, the technical
add real value in this regard, helping
side of implementation (standardization
ensure that needs were addressed across
of practices, etc.) and coherence of
all areas of Syria. Some sectors (nutrition,
programming is rarely discussed
education) struggled to fulfill this WoS
in my section. There are no regular
coordination role effectively. A UNICEF-
discussions between SCO and Gaziantep
internal Whole of Syria coordination
or previously with Amman hub regarding
Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the Level 3 Humanitarian Crisis in Syria 83
review conducted in 2021 found that Supporting work cross-border in NWS
understanding of cluster lead agency (CLA)
Among the functions listed as ‘external’
accountabilities varies among staff within
above are the provision of funding,
UNICEF, and that this was often seen more
supply and technical support to NGOs
as an extension of its programmatic role
working in non-GCAs of NWS. Although
rather than a contribution to the wider
this currently revolves around UNICEF
humanitarian system.106 The review also
work with implementing partners of its
found that UNICEF is considered the most
programme activities in these areas, it must
neutral and influential of the agencies,
be seen in the wider context of the overall
but that UNICEF strategic leadership and
system response. These are, in that sense,
advocacy as the CLA for four clusters
‘external’ functions, and they are essential
needed to be stronger to ensure the agency
from a system-wide perspective. Concern
can make the best use of this influence.
about how to maintain or transfer these
functions to others, together with what
Management support and oversight of the
ongoing coordination role UNICEF should
office in Gaziantep has been an essential
play in NWS (see below), is the subject
function of the WoS unit. As long as the
of ongoing contingency planning around
Security Council resolution is extended,
the potential closure of the Bab al-Hawa
there is clearly a need to maintain a
crossing.
separate office to manage and support
cross-border activities from Türkiye. Even
The most immediate challenge facing
if the UNSC mandate is not renewed,
UNICEF and others is how to maintain
the need to maintain Gaziantep-based
coverage of the more acute and high
cluster and AoR coordination functions
dependency needs (Agenda A) in NWS
would remain, providing technical support
given the combined constraints of access,
and coordination to those Syrian NGOs
authorization, available implementing
still working in NWS. As noted above,
partners and declining funding. Access may
there would also need to be increased
soon become the primary constraint if the
collaboration with the Damascus and
final border crossing from Türkiye is closed
Aleppo offices, requiring a liaison function.
to United Nations agencies.
106 The review attributed this to “different understandings of the CLA role (significantly influenced by the location) and lack of internal clarification on
roles and responsibilities”. United Nations Children’s Fund, ‘Whole of Syria Coordination Review’, summary note, UNICEF, Amman, January 2022.
These findings echo those in the CLARE II evaluation.
Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the Level 3 Humanitarian Crisis in Syria 84
Because it has no direct presence in non- supplemented by TPM). The question for
GCAs of NWS, UNICEF has very limited UNICEF is what role it should continue to
ability to ‘read’ the context and assess play in this endeavour and where its added
changing needs, and cannot engage direct- value lies. This is likely to require capacity
ly with communities. This ‘arm’s-length’ in the Gaziantep to be maintained at least
approach raises questions about over- at current levels, even if the functions are
sight, effectiveness and quality assurance reconfigured.
(entirely reliant on partner self-reporting
Box 7: Support and engagement from MENARO and UNICEF HQ
According to the UNICEF Procedure on Corporate Emergency Activation for Level 3 (L3)
Emergencies, the support provided by the regional office (RO) is to be “enhanced in comparison
to the support regularly provided to emergency preparedness and response”, and HQ divisions
are to “organize themselves to provide enhanced and prioritized support and coordination to the
RO and [country office]”.* Because the Syria country office has built up the capacities needed
for an emergency of this kind, the need for enhanced support from other parts of the organization
has waned over time, and the L3 emergency status of the Syria response was discontinued as of
February 2022. The evaluation team’s consultations about the role played in the Syria response
by different offices across the whole organization under L3 – and the way in which these were
coordinated – elicited generally positive views.
Headquarters has been particularly engaged in terms of fundraising, communications and behind-
the-scenes advocacy. The in-country visits from HQ sectoral experts to Syria were reported to
have been beneficial. Financially, the response has been supported by HQ with the cancellation of
emergency loans and the use of HQ overhead for the prevention of sexual exploitation and abuse
initiative. Support from MENARO has primarily been provided by the regional director (RD) as Global
Emergency Coordinator for the Syria response, and by the dedicated WoS unit. The RD was felt
by external United Nations informants to have played a key role in regional negotiations. Useful
support was also provided by regional advisers in MENARO.
*UNICEF Procedure on Corporate Emergency Activation for Level 3 Emergencies, p. 3.
Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the Level 3 Humanitarian Crisis in Syria 85
6.2 Finance and risk manage- manual extraction exercise to identify such
ment107 costs, something that does not seem to
have occurred to date.109 This information
Expenditure against budgets would appear to be essential for section
heads and senior management, as well as
Each year, spending trends have differed
for donor reporting, and its lack is a deficit
by sector and between hubs. Overall
that should be rectified.110
spending rates108 of cross-border activities
(predominantly from Gaziantep since 2019)
Risk management
have ranged from 70-86 per cent between
Beyond the specific mechanisms for
2018 and 2021 (year to November), while
managing financial and fiduciary risk,
those in GCAs managed by the SCO have
UNICEF has a structured system in place
been substantially lower. Some sectors
across the WoS to identify operational,
have struggled more than others in terms
strategic, programmatic, contextual,
of spending rates: for example, SCO health
and institutional risk on an annual basis.
and nutrition and child protection, together
Reputational risk is assessed against all of
with cross-border non-food items (NFIs),
these categories. While this system seems
have some of the lowest rates. Sectors with
to work quite well, the ongoing review
the lowest spending rates tend to be those
process would benefit from being more
with the lowest funding levels. Generally
regular, perhaps quarterly, rather than once
good spending rates can be seen in most
in the second half of the year.
sectors operating out of Gaziantep, perhaps
because they are less affected by delays
One major risk factor in the short term
associated with acquiring GoS approvals.
relates to the potential closure in 2022 of
the UNSC-authorized border crossing into
One important issue – and a significant
NWS from Türkiye. Contingency plans
limitation for the evaluability of the
for the closure of the border have been
programme – is that UNICEF appears
established. For example, in Gaziantep
unable to provide a breakdown of
contracts for six months after the possible
expenditure relating to cross-zone activity
closure had already been established
into NES. Currently, it would require a
107 Evaluation question E.4 How well have the general finance, control and risk management functions performed? This topic falls more within the
scope of the recent (2022) audit of SCO. It is reviewed here only with a view to identifying any major issues arising. See the audit for a more
definitive analysis, particularly on financial management.
108 This refers to planned budget vs. expenditure (i.e., utilization) and not expenditure against funds received.
109 While overall expenditure can be inferred from data relating to transfers between MENARO and SCO, this is not an adequate proxy for sector-
specific expenditure.
110 This could reportedly be solved should HQ agree to an additional ‘output’ code within the chart of accounts.
Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the Level 3 Humanitarian Crisis in Syria 86
and supplies and stocks procured and reasonable, it is debatable whether UNICEF
delivered into NWS. Contingency planning has taken the ‘necessary’ risks for the
for the earlier (2020) closure of the United organization in order to fulfil its mandate,
Nations cross-border route from Iraq is to be effective and meet the needs of
also reported to have been extensive children across WoS. Physical and security
and effective. While these are positive risks have been almost completely passed
examples of risk mitigation, there is more on to partners in NWS, and also to a lesser
work required to make the 2022 plan extent in SCO/NES, although both UNICEF
viable. This includes the need for much and its partners share the reputational
closer collaboration between the SCO and risk. Particularly with regard to Agenda A
Gaziantep offices on the practicalities of (emergency and high dependency), UNICEF
increasing cross-line support to NWS and had considerable operational flexibility
harmonizing this with continued ‘external’ available to it through simplified standard
support (e.g., through global procurement) operating procedures (SSOPs) and L3
to NGO activities in NWS. procedures, yet it does not seem to have
fully availed itself of these more flexible
The evaluation notes some persistent options; rather, it appears that procedures
reputational risks for UNICEF in Syria. had reverted to ‘standard’ before the L3
Some of these concern transparency status was rescinded in 2022.
and accountability with regard to the
programme:111 the ability to account Some of the main reputational risks for
properly for what UNICEF and its partners UNICEF relate to matters of humanitarian
have been able to deliver, and also what principle. As noted in earlier sections,
they have not been able to deliver (and responding proportionately and solely
why). This was raised as a concern in the on the basis of need (i.e., impartially) is
2019 audit and was an issue raised by a difficult to ensure given the operating
number of UNICEF donors. constraints, limited implementing partner
availability and the lack of reliable data
Some respondents to the evaluation felt on needs. While this evaluation has noted
that UNICEF has been too risk averse in areas of need that have been underserved,
some respects. While the ‘no unnecessary it found that UNICEF has generally
risks’ approach cited by the SCO112 appears managed to prioritize its response
111 KIIs with donors.
112 UNICEF KII Damascus.
Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the Level 3 Humanitarian Crisis in Syria 87
appropriately. Independence of policy Levels of staffing across WoS were found to
and political neutrality, while linked to be largely appropriate, with one significant
questions of impartiality, are often a matter exception: the staffing of the cross-border
of perception. The terms on which UNICEF work from Gaziantep. The Gaziantep office
engages with the relevant authorities in has been understaffed throughout the
Damascus and elsewhere, and its policy evaluation period relative to its expected
independence from those authorities as functions and workload, resulting (inter
well as from donors, all have a bearing alia) in sectoral heads routinely double-
on actual and perceived independence. hatting as cluster leads, and having to
To some extent this is dictated by United manage programmes with inadequate
Nations-wide frameworks, including numbers of staff. It has also resulted in high
the Parameters and Principles of United levels of staff stress and frequent turnover,
Nations Assistance in Syria (see section 2), particularly in the earlier part of the
but it is also dictated by the extent of the evaluation period. This appears less to do
‘space’ that UNICEF has been able to carve with problems in recruitment (though there
out and the quality of its relationships with have been constraints here), than with
the authorities in question. financial and budgetary constraints. It also
relates to the fact that the Gaziantep office
has historically been treated as a temporary
6.3 Staffing and human
(short-term) expedient, that it has had
resources113
limited autonomy of decision-making,
and has generally been an anomaly in
As part of its analysis of the core questions terms of UNICEF country and regional
about role and performance, the evaluation structures. Had this been a country office
considered how well UNICEF had managed responsible for management and support
its human resources in support of the crisis of a major crisis response involving some
response.114 This includes the balance of $50 million expenditure annually, on top of
staffing across the WoS and the nature and its system-wide responsibilities, it might be
timeliness of staff deployments. expected to have been substantially better
resourced.115
113 Evaluation question E.1 How well has the UNICEF HR function worked to support programme and operational needs?
114 A more specific analysis of how well the HR function itself has performed in relation to the Syria response is given in the recent internal audit (April
2022). Here we note that the 2019 OIAI Audit had recommended that the recruitment procedures in place should be simplified in order to shorten
the time taken to deploy new staff. This does not appear to have happened. An estimated 50 per cent of staff are recruited within 60 days, 25 per
cent within 90 days and 25 per cent within 150 days.
115 A similar point was made in 2017 in an independent review focused mainly on UNICEF’s potential role in a post-conflict Syria: “UNICEF should
reconsider the policy of having a cap on staff in Gaziantep and provide the Gaziantep hub with resources matching its responsibilities as long as
demands for cross-border programming remain high”. Concord Consulting, ‘Post-Conflict Recovery in Syria: Orientations for UNICEF’s contribution’,
Concord Consulting, October 2017, p. 7.
Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the Level 3 Humanitarian Crisis in Syria 88
The understaffing of the Gaziantep office functions were inevitably compromised
was highlighted by partners in the survey. as a result. Funding scarcity has played
One respondent explained that UNICEF a significant part in this, but lack of
staff are very supportive but “more are prioritization also plays a role.
needed, there are not enough”, and
another stated that many of the challenges The contrast with staffing levels in the
in the partnership boil down to the fact that SCO is striking. The Damascus office and
“there are too few staff to follow all the hubs in GCAs have generally been well
partners”. Other weaknesses in UNICEF resourced and properly staffed. The current
partnerships in Gaziantep highlighted in number of staff in SCO is approximately
the survey also point to an overstretched 222, working with the support of 70
office: lack of follow-up, little assistance technical facilitators. This compares with 31
in resolving problems, lack of regular staff members within the Gaziantep office
meetings, and failure to learn lessons and under the latest programme budget review
use them when designing new projects. (PBR). This constitutes a ratio of nearly
Several partners commented on the 10:1 in staffing levels against an annual
negative effects of the high turnover. As workplan budget ratio of approximately 4:1.
one respondent expressed it, there are This is not to suggest that the SCO and its
“too many changes in the positions of sub-offices are over-resourced, but rather
the staff. … Each new staff needs a lot of to highlight the ‘shoestring’ nature of the
time to learn and to build on what was Gaziantep-based operation – even allowing
done already but what we are facing is for the different working modalities
that new staff will neglect the previous involved and the support provided by
work and start over”. Another blamed the WoS team in Amman. Gaziantep staff
the “inconsistency in interventions and appear to have been permanently stretched
processing of project activities” on “staff and overloaded, affecting both the
turnover during project implementation”. effective delivery of the programme and
the effectiveness of sector coordination.
This suggests that the ‘true’ cost of Without qualified deputies, some Gaziantep
adequately managing and supporting the staff have reported having to work while
cross-border operations – both programme on leave. The possibility of taking greater
and sector leadership – is considerably advantage of standby partner staff in
higher than that budgeted by UNICEF. Gaziantep should be considered. None
Coordination and programme management were used in 2019, (although six stretch
Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the Level 3 Humanitarian Crisis in Syria 89
staff were assigned) and only four were
used in 2020–2021.116
With respect to prevention of sexual
exploitation and abuse within ongoing
operations, substantial progress has been
made in recent years in rolling out training
and awareness-raising with UNICEF
and implementing partner staff, as well
as establishing a prevention of sexual
exploitation and abuse network across
hubs and regionally. However, there is
reason to believe that this is a seriously
under-reported issue117 and much more
needs to be done to raise awareness
amongst beneficiaries and establish case
management protocols at a community
level so that beneficiaries are empowered concerted effort. This is a difficult topic
to reports incidences of sexual exploitation to address in a culture where discussion
and abuse and other abuses.118 UNICEF of such issues is discouraged, and
staff, partners and third-party monitors complainants may face risks. It may
need to be enabled to follow up on any take a number of successful complaints
cases and undertake investigations. This (leading to action) for communities to have
will require greater levels of specialist confidence in the system. There is currently
support. no agreement with the Government of
Syria concerning the establishment of
Further progress on prevention of sexual necessary oversight, investigative and
exploitation and abuse will need a follow-up processes.
116 According to the Gaziantep Surge Plan, 2020–2021. The recent PBR process led to a somewhat longer-term perspective being adopted, with
international positions being made fixed-term rather than temporary – something that should have happened earlier. But the PBR process also
adopted the smallest possible structure for this office. Without a more radical reformulation of the functions of the Gaziantep office, this is likely to
perpetuate the problems noted.
117 The HNAP household survey conducted in June 2020 reported that “3 per cent of the households (across Syria) who have received assistance
indicated that they were asked a favour in exchange for assistance, of which 14 per cent reported being propositioned with a physical/emotional
relationship in order to access assistance”. Whole of Syria Inter-Agency PSEA Network, ‘SEA and Humanitarian Assistance: Household perceptions
of favors in exchange for aid’, October 2020., p. 4.
118 There is a PSEA hotline in Gaziantep that all UNICEF partners and beneficiaries can use, but the sensitivity of the issue means people are unlikely to
talk about this on the phone. So far, no PSEA cases been reported in Gaziantep or SCO areas.
Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the Level 3 Humanitarian Crisis in Syria 90
6.4 Supply and the in government-controlled areas of Syria
procurement of goods and is more challenging than ever, taking
services119 into account the prevailing economic
difficulties, ongoing sanctions, donor
conditionality, security constraints, and
The internal audit report of 2019 reported
the reduced performance of previously
a large number of items procured within
reliable suppliers, who are now cancelling
Syria being delivered outside of the
long-term agreements due to exchange
UNICEF 30-day standard for procurement,
rate uncertainties and availability of raw
and the situation appears not to have
materials.
improved. The evaluation team received
consistent feedback from implementing
Responsibility for delays does not lie only
partners interviewed in Syria concerning
with the supply section. Issues such as
the late arrival of supplies, and this was
access, inadequate supply planning, the
echoed in the partner survey, which
late arrival of donor funds, and the late
listed delays in delivery of supplies and
submission of requests by section chiefs
equipment as the main weakness in their
partnership with UNICEF.120 are also contributing factors. For future
delays to be reduced there needs to be a
concerted effort from all parties concerned.
Considering that around 90 per cent of
We suggest that a task force be established
procurement for SCO is done ‘locally’
within the SCO comprising section staff
(only vaccines and medical supplies
and supply staff, together with fundraising
are managed through Supply Division
staff and senior management, to agree
in Copenhagen), a review supported
on an action plan to address this and to
from MENARO and / or Copenhagen
monitor progress. Consideration should be
would be beneficial to determine how
given to building the size of the SCO supply
performance can be improved and
team (including filling the vacant head
procedures made more efficient. This could
of supply section position) as well as the
include changes to supply protocols and
capacity of the staff in programme sections
contract clauses that would allow greater
responsible for supply planning.
flexibility. This is especially important as
the current procurement environment
119 Evaluation question E.2 How well has the UNICEF supply function worked to support the programme? How well has it been integrated within
overall response planning?
120 Field visits, Aleppo; online survey of UNICEF partners. Summary performance slides taken from Insight prepared by Supply Division support this
view.
Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the Level 3 Humanitarian Crisis in Syria 91
Supply cross-border into NWS has also businesses. UNICEF has demonstrated
been affected by significant delays over that it is capable of rapidly and effectively
the evaluation period, although this scaling up to meet the supply needs of
has improved. The supply function in major new emergencies, for example
Gaziantep seems to have worked relatively in Eastern Ghouta, Idleb and Rukban.
well, particularly with respect to the However, challenges clearly remain, and
prepositioning of supplies in NWS as until these are addressed there remains
part of recent contingency planning. The an ongoing reputational risk related to the
major exception has been the winterization supply function for Syria.
programme, when goods have arrived late
each year as the winter comes to a close,
6.5 Programme monitoring,
seriously undermining the benefit of the
quality assurance and
programme and affecting the organization’s
beneficiary feedback121
reputation. While this appears to relate
more to late identification of funding than
to the procurement process, the most Restricted access poses a major challenge
recent SCO winterization programme has to UNICEF with regard to programme
also been delayed despite funding being monitoring, quality assurance and
identified early in 2021, suggesting there community engagement. One concern
may be multiple factors involved. raised by the 2019 internal audit was
Overall, in order to improve supply that results as reported by implementing
function performance, there is a need for a partners were not being independently
concerted joint effort from all departments verified. To address this, the SCO
involved to try to identify and address currently has approximately 70 technical
current bottlenecks and improve the timing facilitators to support programme
of supply to third parties and implementing officers with programme monitoring and
partners. The decentralization of some implementation. These are reported to
SCO procurement responsibilities to its have been particularly beneficial in terms
field offices is a step in the right direction, of monitoring WASH construction work.
especially as this will also enable heads However, having become embedded
of field offices to better support local within the sectoral teams, these technical
121 Evaluation question C.4 How good has UNICEF programme monitoring, reporting and quality assurance been? What do they show about the quality
and effectiveness of UNICEF work?
Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the Level 3 Humanitarian Crisis in Syria 92
facilitators cannot be considered UNICEF needs to find better ways to
completely independent. In recognition of establish the impact of its programme
this, the SCO has now hired a firm of third- interventions. The very limited scope
party monitors to improve the impartiality of beneficiary feedback and community
and coverage of programme monitoring. engagement mean that UNICEF lacks one
of the key means of verification concerning
In its cross-border work from Gaziantep, both its own programme (delivery,
UNICEF has been entirely reliant over the relevance, quality, effectiveness) and of
evaluation period on TPM to supplement the wider context and families’ evolving
partner self-reporting. Although there priorities. While some AAP activities
are concerns about heavy reliance on have been initiated in NWS, the results of
a single company for this purpose, the feedback go to the third-party monitors
complications of trying to establish rather than to UNICEF directly. It is
additional TPM processes (including the unclear how this feedback is used, but the
steps necessary to establish trust with evaluation concludes that more could be
actors in NWS) have so far prevented made of this source of direct feedback.
expansion of this approach.
While important and necessary, TPM
will never be able to replace UNICEF
programme managers’ direct (in-person)
supervision and oversight of programme
activities, or regular engagement
with beneficiary communities. The
organization’s heavy reliance on TPM
in NWS does not sit well with either
programmatic staff or donors. A further
concern is that performance monitoring
would appear to be more at a (quantitative)
output level rather than measuring
(qualitative) impact. In this regard,
calculations of ‘people reached’ with a
given output – itself a very imprecise
measure – may say little about programme
effectiveness and the qualitative experience
of intended beneficiaries.
Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the Level 3 Humanitarian Crisis in Syria 93
6.6 Knowledge and information management is a key
information manage- element of the UNICEF coordination role.
ment122 Unfortunately, UNICEF has frequently
been short-staffed in terms of dedicated
cluster leads and information management
Section 4 above describes some of the
personnel, especially in Gaziantep.
ways in which a lack of evidence-based
context analysis hampers UNICEF at all
Effective information management
levels of the programme: the ability to
depends in part on good communication,
identify priorities for intervention and
and here there is a particular need for
target assistance accordingly, to gauge the
improved communication and information-
quality and effectiveness of its programme
sharing between SCO and the Gaziantep
interventions, and the ability to determine
office. While the need remains to respect
the effectiveness and continued relevance
confidentiality of partner and beneficiary
of those interventions. This is an agenda
identities, and more generally to recognize
that extends far beyond UNICEF and
the sensitivity of information, the need
demands collaborative action.
to harmonize cross-border and cross-line
support is growing. What had become
The annual SCO integrated monitoring
largely discrete programme areas cannot
and evaluation plan lists the many studies
remain so, therefore it is imperative to
and reviews ongoing or undertaken with
strengthen communication between these
a wide variety of partners, including
hubs.
government ministries, ranging from large
nationwide sectoral surveys, such as the
SMART nutrition survey and immunization
6.7 Fundraising123
reviews, to more specific initiatives and
evaluative studies. While such initiatives
During the period covered by this
can be assumed to have a positive impact
evaluation (2018–2021), UNICEF appealed
on improving contextual and programmatic
for $1.2 billion and raised $902 million, or
knowledge for UNICEF, the organization
73 per cent of funds requested.124 Funding
has a wider set of responsibilities on
has been relatively stable: UNICEF raised
this agenda at the cluster level, where
122 Evaluation question E.7 How well has UNICEF learned from past evaluative exercises, audits, reviews and other studies?
123 Evaluation question E.6 How well has the response been supported by fundraising and by communications? C.5 How effective an advocate has
UNICEF been for children in Syria?
124 In 2020, funds for the response to COVID-19 were raised in a separate appeal but included in the 2021 HAC.
Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the Level 3 Humanitarian Crisis in Syria 94
between 73-78 per cent of its targets per cent of their targets, respectively.
until 2021, when it raised 65 per cent. In addition to the quantity of funding, the
Despite the obvious shortfalls, the UNICEF nature of that funding is also important.
response in Syria is better funded than Most funding is for a single year. Short
in many other crises and the pattern of funding cycles are passed on to UNICEF
funding is consistent with that of other partners which, particularly if combined
United Nations agencies. Recent declines in with delayed approvals and release of
funding relate more to the fact that donors funds, make it very challenging for partners
are stretched or have other priorities than to implement programming smoothly.
to a lack of confidence in UNICEF.125 Short funding cycles are not suitable for
sustainable community development
These funds are shared between the SCO, or programming designed to support
the Gaziantep office and the WoS-related systems.
work in Amman. Funding for the SCO has
been more stable, consistently around 78- The conditions attached by donors to
79 per cent of its expressed needs (though their funding have negatively affected
in 2021 it dipped to 70 per cent). Funding programming. Many staff surveyed for this
for the cross-border and WoS work has evaluation identified donor conditionalities
again been reasonably stable, though as the primary barrier to success. As
at a lower level (around 50 per cent for one respondent commented, the main
Gaziantep, 80 per cent for Amman hub). challenge is “types of resources with many
conditions that make it very complex and
Most UNICEF programme sectors have difficult and time-consuming to implement
suffered from funding deficits or late arrival activities in an effective, quality and
of funds, and these deficits and delays have sustainable manner and at scale”. Pooled
affected UNICEF capacity to implement the funding (specifically the country-based
related interventions. Some sectors have pooled funds and Education Cannot Wait)
fared relatively well, while nutrition and was noted to be particularly challenging;126
health have raised only 40 per cent and 30 when every donor’s specific redlines are
125 Donor and UNICEF KIIs. For example, although the UK (FCDO) recently stopped funding UNICEF, this decision was due to wider aid cuts, not lack of
confidence in UNICEF, which received a high rating from FCDO.
126 The Central Emergency Response Fund (CERF), by contrast, was said to be more flexible, though until 2021–2022 it played only a very limited
funding role in Syria (communication from MENARO).
Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the Level 3 Humanitarian Crisis in Syria 95
applied to the entire pooled fund, the 6.8 Communications and
use of those funds becomes even more public advocacy
restricted. This makes it particularly difficult
to support Agendas B and C, which are
UNICEF communications about Syria are
essential to the short and medium-term
mostly managed from MENARO, with the
well-being of children and their families.
support of Communications Division in HQ.
The arrangement is an appropriate one: it
Since 2018, the UNICEF share of funds
means the organization can report rights
raised for the system-wide response
violations while protecting the staff inside
(against the HRP) has decreased from
the country. The communications team has
twelve to nine per cent. Additionally,
an overview of programming in both GCAs
although the funding levels received for
and non-GCAs, allowing it to harmonize
2021 were on par with previous years, the
messages. In recent months, however, the
2021 appeal was more than 13 per cent
team based in Damascus has been more
larger than previous years, as the needs
active in engaging with the media and
are increasing. Already, some programmes
is currently recruiting a communications
have begun prioritizing activities to ensure
specialist.
the most critical services are provided, and
programme documents for cross-border
In addition to releasing press statements
work have recently included a clause
about rights violations and other incidents,
stating that if no funding is available,
the communications team has organized
activities will have to stop. Donors
campaigns on a variety of themes on
interviewed for this evaluation indicated
the anniversary of the conflict, using
that although UNICEF has performed well,
traditional media, digital channels and
more transparency about programming
multi-media to push key messages. Syria
was needed, particularly about
was an early adopter of the agency’s
programming in the non-government held
‘digital transformation’, and as such its
areas of the northeast and northwest.
media footprint is measured and analysed
monthly. However, generating coverage on
Work is underway to diversify the funding
Syria is challenging. Public interest in the
base, as recommended by the 2019 audit
conflict is declining, there are few foreign
report. Although significant alternative
journalists in the country, and because
funding sources had not materialized at
INGOs have limited presence, their voices
the time of writing, the evaluation team
are largely absent. A new approach to
believes it essential to continue this effort.
communicating about Syria is reported to
be under development.
Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the Level 3 Humanitarian Crisis in Syria 96
Despite the high quality of UNICEF to be supported from MENARO in order to
communications work, there is a prevent fragmented messaging, but that
perception among UNICEF partners that this has to be more responsive to issues as
the organization is better at highlighting they arise. Should the UNSC cross-border
its own programming than raising the mandate not be renewed, UNICEF should
alarm about children’s unmet needs. This continue to support Syrian NGOs in non-
sentiment was echoed in the staff survey, GCA NWS with communications to reach
in which one respondent commented that international audiences.
the communications team should “not
only focus on success stories, but also on
projecting the situation and reflecting the
need on the ground using the voices of
children, highlighting the unmet gaps”.
Several interviewees pointed to the fact
that although there have been attacks on
both healthcare and educational facilities,
the former has received notably more
media coverage. The need for UNICEF to
be more vocal about attacks on schools
was a frequent refrain in interviews. The
evaluation acknowledges the need for
UNICEF to balance its public messages with
ongoing private advocacy, but concludes
there is space for UNICEF to raise its voice
more forcefully about children’s rights
violations.
Both staff and partners in Gaziantep
expressed the need for UNICEF to
communicate more about the situation
in the non-GCAs of the northwest and
expressed some frustration that staff there
are unable to speak to the media. The
result was sometimes delays in raising
issues. The evaluation team believes the
communication function should continue
Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the Level 3 Humanitarian Crisis in Syria 97
7
CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS127
7.1 Overall conclusions reputation in the region. The evaluators
agree with this assessment, which is
echoed in the results of a parallel survey
with partners. The UNICEF response to
Asked in an online survey to comment on
the crisis, while variable across sectors
the main strengths of the UNICEF response
and locations, has been strong overall in
to the crisis in Syria, staff from Damascus,
what has often been an extraordinarily
Gaziantep, Amman and other offices
challenging context. The organization
highlighted in particular the commitment,
has managed to find the right roles for
professionalism and expertise of UNICEF
itself, even as it has struggled – largely
staff; the agency’s strong relations with
for reasons beyond its control – to mount
other actors, including with authorities,
a response proportionate to the scale of
NGO partners and donors; and its strong
90 Evaluation question C.6 What have been the main lessons arising from UNICEF programme performance and implementation since 2018?
Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the Level 3 Humanitarian Crisis in Syria 98
needs. The hard work and commitment the strengths of UNICEF in Syria over the
of UNICEF staff and partners has helped evaluation period and a key part of its
protect millions of children across all parts added value regionally.
of Syria from the worst effects of the crisis
over the past four years. The evaluation found that while UNICEF
has done well to navigate the sensitive
UNICEF has implemented a wide range political space across different parts of
of different intervention types over the Syria and to find the right roles for itself,
evaluation period.128 This has included it has not always been able to fulfil those
emergency interventions (e.g., in Eastern roles as it should. Sector leadership and
Ghouta 2018, Idlib 2019–2020) and aid coordination, although just as significant
to new and existing IDP populations, as the UNICEF programme itself, has been
support to basic service provision for the lacking in some sectors, largely because
general population, and policy, advocacy UNICEF has struggled to resource this
and systems work with the relevant function properly. Within the programme,
authorities. While programme access and performance has been mixed, with
coverage have often been limited, UNICEF consequences for children and their
has rightly chosen to respond across a families. There are multiple causal factors
broad spectrum of sectoral interventions here, many relating to external constraints
matching the key threats to children’s – limited funding, donor conditionalities,
well-being, security and development. lack of access, denial of permissions – but
In addition, the organization’s chosen others relate to UNICEF performance.
modes of engagement and support –
including direct service delivery, technical The more recent context in Syria is quite
assistance, supply, coordination, policy different to that prevailing in the period
and advocacy work – have generally 2015–2017, yet equally demanding of
reflected the needs of the wider system, the organization’s full and continued
the opportunities available, and the specific engagement. The humanitarian component
competencies and added value of UNICEF. of UNICEF work remains by far the largest
External informants stressed that UNICEF part of the programme in terms of funding.
senior leadership at representative and Given the scale and severity of current
regional director levels has been one of needs, ongoing access and funding
128 For a useful summary of the range and impact of UNICEF interventions over the past ten years, see the ‘Strategic Shift Think Pieces’ for child
protection, education, health, nutrition and WASH (March 2022). These also provide a summary of the proposed direction for key elements of the
UNICEF programme in 2022–2024.
Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the Level 3 Humanitarian Crisis in Syria 99
challenges, major uncertainty concerning so far addressed in only a limited way.
non-government-controlled areas of Taken with other prevailing threats, notably
northwestern Syria in particular, and the related to climate, these factors make risk
importance of increasing the reach of management particularly challenging.
interventions across all parts of Syria, the
evaluation concludes that UNICEF needs Figures from the HNO/HRP 2022 suggest
to review its approach to the humanitarian that the overall situation continues to
agenda (in its wider sense) across Syria as deteriorate against key humanitarian
a whole. indicators, particularly food insecurity.
This is not, for the most part, measured in
Understanding the humanitarian challenge terms of excess mortality, morbidity and
malnutrition (although these rates have
The complexities of the context and sheer
been worsening in some areas) but rather
scale of needs in Syria have posed severe
in terms of the basic safety, well-being
challenges for the response. As the crisis
and development of children. The current
has evolved since 2016, the nature of the
crisis of acute impoverishment has evolved
humanitarian agenda has changed from
quickly, leaving families little time to adapt
one dominated by the direct effects of
and develop viable coping strategies.
conflict – including populations under
The wider economic, development and
siege, mass displacement and attacks on
demographic catastrophe resulting from
civilians and civilian infrastructure – to
the conflict has transformed Syria from
one where the dominant threats relate
a low-middle-income to a low-income
more to the indirect effects of conflict
country.
and its aftermath. Yet the threats posed
to children and their families remain
It has become increasingly necessary
severe throughout Syria. Since 2018, and
to recognize the distinct challenges of
particularly in the past two years, the
responding to needs in government-
collapse of the Syrian economy has led to
controlled areas (GCAs) on the one hand
the acute impoverishment of much of the
and non-government-controlled areas of
population. In NWS, ongoing insecurity
NWS and NES on the other. The former
and mass displacement (up to 2020) has
(GCAs), which now constitute around 70
been a feature of the evaluation period.
per cent of the country, have the highest
High levels of aid dependency, particularly
number of those judged to be ‘people in
among formal and informal IDP camp
need’. The non-GC areas, on the other
populations, characterize both NWS and
hand, have the highest concentration of
NES. More recently, COVID-19 has posed
those said to be in most severe need –
a threat that vaccination campaigns have
Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the Level 3 Humanitarian Crisis in Syria 100
around 50 per cent of those in the two Taken together, these three agendas
highest severity categories. Working constitute an extended humanitarian
cross-border to enable the work of NGOs agenda for UNICEF in Syria. Each requires
in NWS has proved an essential but blunt a different response approach. The first
instrument, and a politically contingent typically requires (sustained) direct service
response modality that may soon be closed delivery. The second and third require
to the United Nations. Meanwhile, major support to basic service provision and
questions hang over the ability to meet support to related systems (including
needs effectively cross-line, yet increasing prevention of system collapse). The
weight is being put on the success of this challenge here is to achieve scale, quality
modality. The need for a concerted plan to and complementarity of services, which is
address this new potential reality is urgent. increasingly likely to require area-based,
multi-sector and multi-agency approaches.
The evaluation found that the humanitarian In GCAs, such approaches need to
agenda across the whole of Syria has not supplement and complement service
been adequately defined by UNICEF. We provision through the GoS and locally-
suggest there are three priority agendas run systems. In other areas, alternative
for children, which are inter-related but approaches to sustainability and ownership
distinct. The first (Agenda A) is where are needed, albeit more challenging to
the humanitarian imperative is clearest: identify.
it concerns specific emergency or high
aid-dependency situations that pose Framing its agenda in terms of priorities
severe, acute threats to child health, well- for children across these agendas would
being and safety. The second (Agenda help provide an overarching framework
B) relates to less acute but widespread, for UNICEF decisions about humanitarian
severe and persistent threats to child priorities and the relationship between
health, security or well-being. The third them, as well as a programmatic and
(Agenda C) concerns critical threats to child policy bridge through recovery to future
development and life chances, including development priorities. From this could be
lack of access to basic education and lack developed a common planning framework
of opportunities for adolescents. These that pulls together strands from existing
agendas overlap, and they are also causally sector-specific strategies to enable stronger
inter-related: failure to address one risks multi-sector approaches.
exacerbating the others.
Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the Level 3 Humanitarian Crisis in Syria 101
Addressing this multi-faceted agenda non-GCAs of NES have hampered effective
is greatly complicated by the current response in those areas.
political landscape and related access and
programming constraints. On the one UNICEF strategy and response
hand, relative stability and increased access
UNICEF has faced major strategic choices
over the past three years have enabled
over the course the crisis. The decision in
greater reach and continuity of services in
2012 to pivot to humanitarian response was
many areas. On the other hand, there are
clearly demanded by the context, though
multiple constraints to programming and
it presented major challenges in scaling
to the wider recovery agenda, some related
up the response. Following that were
to donor conditionalities on work in GCAs,
important decisions about where and how
others to GoS restrictions, bureaucratic
to work – including cross-border support to
impediments or ongoing insecurity and
work in NWS, NES and southern areas, as
lack of freedom of movement.
well as cross-line and cross-zone support
– and decisions about the architecture best
In the non-GC areas of NWS and NES,
suited to managing the Whole of Syria
UNICEF and other United Nations agencies
response. The evaluation concludes that
continue to work largely remotely through
these decisions were largely appropriate
NGOs and private sector partners, with all
and remained so throughout the
the attendant problems of accountability,
evaluation period, although UNICEF has
quality control and adaptiveness,
sometimes struggled with implementation
compounded by logistical challenges.
and resourcing of the related programme
The lack of proximity to the people
and coordination functions.
they are seeking to assist – and related
limits on community engagement – is
Since 2016 and in its new draft CPD,
one of the major inherent weaknesses
UNICEF has signalled its intent to shift its
in both the cross-border and cross-line
country programme away from emergency
/ cross-zone modalities of the United
service delivery and more towards building
Nations. Their success depends on the
resilience of communities and systems. The
quality of partnerships, collaboration
‘strategic shift’ proposed by SCO rightly
and coordination with both Syrian and
addresses the challenge of sustainable
international NGOs. While these have
service delivery. However, in the view
worked relatively well in NWS (albeit
of the evaluators, what is required is an
remotely), strained relations and a legacy
evolution of the UNICEF approach to the
of mistrust with the NGOs operating in
Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the Level 3 Humanitarian Crisis in Syria 102
humanitarian agenda. Delivering on its Related to this is the question of responsi-
CCCs across Syria as a whole requires bilities for delivery on the WoS agenda. The
a balance between continued direct need to review the WoS architecture and
engagement (with partners) in essential clarify related frameworks of responsibility
service delivery, shifting as far as possible and accountability is recognized by UNICEF.
to more sustainable modes of delivery, Although the evaluators did not feel they
and support to (or at least complementing possessed enough information to speci-
of) relevant official mechanisms of service fy how this should be done, the essential
delivery. Risk communication and related point is that there needs to be greater clar-
policy and advocacy work are the essential ity on who is responsible for the oversight
complement to this, and UNICEF has a and delivery of a WoS humanitarian strate-
unique role to play in this regard. gy. Clearly, the design and implementation
of that strategy involves multiple partici-
In common with other agencies working pants, but oversight and authority is cur-
with Whole of Syria structures, UNICEF has rently too fragmented. Where such author-
struggled to make a coherent whole of the ity should lie (i.e., with which office) needs
various parts of its response across the ultimately to be decided by the regional
different response hubs inside and outside director in discussion with colleagues in
Syria. This is reflected in the lack of a WoS SCO, the wider region and HQ. While no
strategy and the tendency to treat the longer acting as GEC, the RD should remain
cross-border work as anomalous or even the ultimate arbiter on WoS issues.
peripheral to its strategy for Syria. The
evaluation found that one reason for this Given the multiple constraints on operating
was the lack of a coherent overall vision for space noted above, the evaluation finds
its Syria humanitarian response. that UNICEF has generally done well in
navigating and in some cases expanding
This disconnect in thinking has been that space; indeed it has set an example
perpetuated in part by lack of communica- among United Nations agencies in this
tion and some lack of trust between staff regard. The most immediate challenge
in different hubs. As noted above, this is a facing UNICEF and others is how to
persistent challenge that urgently needs to maintain coverage of the more acute
be addressed, as it represents a barrier to and high dependency needs (Agenda A)
effective collaboration both within UNICEF in NWS and NES, given the combined
(e.g., between SCO and Gaziantep) and constraints of access, authorization,
between UNICEF and NGOs, particularly in available implementing partners and
non-GC NES. declining funding. The access constraints
Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the Level 3 Humanitarian Crisis in Syria 103
in NWS may soon become the primary changing needs and cannot engage directly
constraint if the final border crossing from with communities. This arms-length
Türkiye is closed, and effective contingency approach raises questions about oversight,
planning for this eventuality is crucial. At effectiveness and quality assurance (reliant
the time of the evaluation, there appeared on partner self-reporting supplemented by
to be a lack of joined-up thinking on this, TPM).
lack of discussion between hubs, and too
much reliance on the potential for cross- The majority of UNICEF partners in NWS
line support. are strong, have considerable capacity,
and appear to have demonstrated their
The evaluation found that UNICEF has ability to provide aid impartially on the
over-estimated its ability to continue to basis of need. The evaluators believe that
programme in non-GCA NWS and ensure those NGOs and their crucial role could
programme quality and delivery in an area be directly funded by donors or through
where it has no direct access or presence, pooled funds, or (in the case of Syrian
while at the same time fulfilling its NGOs) through INGOs, rather than being
system-wide sector lead responsibilities. It effectively sub-contracted through UNICEF,
concludes that the ‘true’ cost of adequately and that UNICEF support would be better
managing and supporting the cross- focused on technical support to the sectors,
border work is considerably higher than supply, coordination and advocacy. This
that budgeted by UNICEF. ‘Double-’ or conclusion applies whether or not the
even ‘triple-hatting’ of programme and cross-border mandate is further extended
coordination functions, besides putting by the UNSC in 2022 and is based on a
intolerable pressure on the individuals consideration of the organization’s real
concerned, blurs the line between UNICEF added value in this context as well as the
programme interests and those of the need to plan for potential future scenarios
wider sector. It has become a structural where direct programming is no longer
feature of the cross-border programme possible. It is consistent with the principle
rather than a temporary expedient, and the of localization but is dependent on the
evaluators suggest that any situation where willingness and ability of donors to fund
this is the case should cause UNICEF to NGOs either directly or through pooled
reflect and revise its approach. funding. However, given the scale and
severity of needs in NWS, the priority
Because it has no direct presence in NWS must be to ensure continuity of support to
(non-GCAs), UNICEF has very limited affected people in this region.
ability to ‘read’ the context and assess
Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the Level 3 Humanitarian Crisis in Syria 104
This conclusion partly reflects the lack of in NES on some key agendas for children,
resources allocated to the Gaziantep office to foster contact between the GoS and
in relation to its expected functions. That the self-administration, and to show the
office has generally done well within its potential for collaboration or at least policy
limited resources, but it has inevitably harmonization across lines.
struggled to fulfil this role alongside its
system-wide coordination functions. Based on these established relationships,
UNICEF could now do more to help create
space for others to engage more fully
Navigating the political terrain
in GCAs (e.g., the INGOs in Damascus)
UNICEF has been right to engage as it
and to promote a wider range, depth and
has done with the GoS and the various
coverage of programming for children
ministries and local authorities in GCAs.
and their families. In doing so, it must
Indeed, this is a key part of its added
avoid prioritizing its own programme and
value, and no other international agency
access (or being perceived to do so) at
has a comparable breadth and depth
the expense of the wider sector needs.
of contact with the government. This is
Crucially, in maintaining this relationship
essential in responding to the short- to
with the GoS, UNICEF needs not to lose its
medium-term priorities for children, and
independence or compromise its advocacy
as space opens up, it provides a potential
voice for children, as some have suggested
platform for more system strengthening
it did on the issue of attacks on schools.
and policy work. At the same time,
Related to this, it is essential for UNICEF
UNICEF has done well to forge working
to continue to demonstrate in practice an
relationships with the self-administration
equality of concern for children living in
Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the Level 3 Humanitarian Crisis in Syria 105
all parts of Syria, whether government- scale that the situation demands. It has
controlled or not. This means being also had limited opportunity to work on
consistent in its approach to programming systems, capacity and policy agendas that
and advocacy in both GCAs and non-GCAs, could bring wider and more sustained
and being prepared to forge an effective benefits to children, given a concerted and
working relationship with NGOs and properly resourced recovery plan.
authorities in ‘opposition’ regions.
Programme relevance and adaptation to
context
7.2 Programme, coordination
The evaluation found that since 2018,
and partnership
UNICEF has largely managed to implement
conclusions
programmes appropriate to the different
contexts of GCAs and non-GC areas of
In evaluating the UNICEF response to the
northwest Syria, and to adapt its approach
crisis since 2018, one overall qualification
to changing circumstances over the
should be made. The needs in Syria are
evaluation period. While each region has
huge in scale – even in the ‘emergency
posed different challenges, lack of up-to-
and high-dependency’ class (Agenda
date data on needs – and limited ability to
A) let alone in Agendas B and C, which
monitor the effects of interventions – has
relate more to what is generally classed
been a common factor across the whole
as ‘recovery’ or ‘rehabilitation’. The latter
country. These challenges have been
arguably requires something on the scale
particularly acute in non-GCAs.
of a Marshall plan, or at least funding on
a scale that the World Bank might provide
Within this overall picture there is
in other circumstances. Yet UNICEF and
considerable variation. In non-government
others have been working largely with
held areas of the NWS, UNICEF and its
(limited and decreasing) short-term
partners have done well to adapt to the
humanitarian funding, and even that has
rapidly evolving context, including mass
often been subject to extremely tight
displacements in 2019–2020. Across all
conditionality, particularly in government-
sectors, UNICEF and its partners have also
controlled areas. Taken together with
made some progress toward sustainability
access and security constraints – as well as
even on the dominant Agenda A agenda.
the wider effects of a collapsed economy
In non-government-held areas of the
and tight economic sanctions – the result
northeast (Al-Hasakah, Ar-Raqqa, Deir-
is that UNICEF, in common with other
ez-Zor), since 2020 and the closure of
agencies, has struggled to work on the
the cross-border route from Iraq, while
Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the Level 3 Humanitarian Crisis in Syria 106
the nutrition programme has struggled service delivery. However, UNICEF
to adapt, the evaluation found positive interventions are dwarfed by the scale of
examples of programme adaptation by destruction of systems and infrastructure,
UNICEF, particularly in EPI and WASH. the effects of the economic collapse,
Complex work on child protection – and the loss of professional personnel,
including with third-country nationals particularly in health and education. Donor
and CAAFAG – has been innovative and conditionalities on funding in GCAs have
appropriate, and a good demonstration heavily constrained work on education and
of the organization’s added value and ADAP in particular and have limited the
distinctive competence (as well as its organization’s ability to support the formal
unique mandate). This has required high education system.
levels of diplomatic engagement with both
the GoS and self-administration, and is an Making progress in GCAs will require
excellent example of effective collaboration continued advocacy and more collabora-
across the whole organization (SCO, tive working. Area-based approaches in
MENARO, HQ). UNICEF has also done urban areas will increasingly be needed
well to work across different authorities in conjunction with multi-sector and inter-
on education policy, though its work on agency programming, possibly through
access to basic education has been limited specially-established consortia working to
in scope. a single strategy and operational plan. This
approach may require a distinction to be
The organization’s work in GCAs over the drawn between work on micro/local sys-
evaluation period has seen increasing tems and work on national systems, while
engagement with government counterparts emphasizing the links between them.
and local administrations, which has
allowed UNICEF to pursue a shift towards Programme strategy and logic
a recovery strategy, tackling Agendas
While the situation in the country has
B and C (basic service strengthening,
changed dramatically since it was drafted,
rehabilitation, etc.), although this remains
the 2016 CPD has been rolled over annually
constrained by multiple factors. This
and has not been formally revised.
approach is appropriate given the relative
However, the programme has in practice
stability of the environment of GCAs, and
continually adapted over the evaluation
reflects the widespread and persistent
period in ways that have been largely ad
nature of the threats to children in these
hoc, reactive and opportunistic. While this
areas and the corresponding need for
is in many ways appropriate in the context
approaches that go beyond relief and
of crisis response, the evaluation found that
Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the Level 3 Humanitarian Crisis in Syria 107
the lack of a unifying UNICEF humanitarian decisions in the prevailing circumstances.
strategy has tended to perpetuate The evaluation found that the UNICEF
disconnected and sometimes inconsistent programme has not been as coherent as
thinking across the whole programme. It it should have been, either by sector or
has also meant that UNICEF has lacked geography. While the traditional forms
a consistent basis for prioritization of of collaboration between sectors (e.g.,
interventions in the face of substantial child protection and education) have
resource and access constraints. worked well, in other ways the programme
often appears ‘stovepiped’. This is
In practice, the various sectors in Gaziantep partly a reflection of the way in which
designed their own approach, essentially programmes are designed and planned
applying ‘emergency’ programme logic to based on individual sectors. The evaluation
what has been a largely Agenda A context, concluded that UNICEF has some way
with some longer-term interventions when to go in achieving the multi-sector
the context and conditions allowed. Short- programming approach that it aspires
term logic has in fact characterized the to and that area-based programming is
programming approach for much of the probably a necessary element in achieving
work across Syria, even in some of the greater programme coherence. This should
work in GCAs where at least a medium- also be seen in the context of multi-agency
term perspective is indicated (Agendas B collaborations, for which there is likely to
and C). While this partly reflects the need to be a growing need.
focus on immediate priorities for children,
it also reflects the funding, access and Programme coverage and targeting
programming constraints within which
Across all sectors, UNICEF and the
UNICEF has had to work.
relevant clusters have targeted (but not
always met) around 70-80 per cent of the
Many of the basic assumptions in the
assessed needs. Within that figure, target
draft programme strategy notes – e.g.,
achievement has been highly variable
concerning investment in services and
across sectors and regions. While some
gradual replenishment of sector human
sectors (WASH, health) have achieved
resources – have not held true in practice.
relatively high coverage, others have been
The evaluation concludes that these
unable to achieve adequate coverage.
assumptions need to be reviewed and the
strategy revised with a view to providing
Evaluating UNICEF programme coverage
a more realistic basis for programming
Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the Level 3 Humanitarian Crisis in Syria 108
against assessed needs proved difficult
for a number of reasons, including major
uncertainties concerning the reliability of
needs assessment data and related ‘people
in need’ figures. The specific impacts of
the crisis on children were often assumed
rather than assessed, with access for
assessment severely limited across the
whole country. Likewise, UNICEF figures for
‘reach’ were sometimes based on planning
assumptions about who and how many
would benefit from given programme
outputs rather than being based on
data and feedback concerning benefits
actually delivered. This is not unusual in
such a volatile context, but it reflects how
distant UNICEF often is from its intended
beneficiaries, and is harder to justify in
the relatively more stable context that has
emerged over the past two years.
The way in which UNICEF and the
clusters have targeted and prioritized
their interventions is inevitably affected
by these uncertainties and data gaps. The
evaluation found that targeting had often
been influenced as much by opportunities
to programme as by assessed needs and
priorities, meaning that targeting cannot be
said with confidence to be based on strict
prioritization of needs. All this points to
the need both to strengthen the processes
of (ongoing) needs assessment across all
areas and to extend the coverage and reach
of UNICEF programme partnerships.
Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the Level 3 Humanitarian Crisis in Syria 109
Programme effectiveness These limitations have greatly affected the
evaluability of the UNICEF programme
The ability of UNICEF to gauge the
with regard to effectiveness. Limited
effectiveness of its interventions suffers
coverage and achievement against
from many of the same limitations noted
targets would suggest limited overall
above with regard to needs assessment
effectiveness, but the evaluation draws
and coverage. Assessing whether a given
some more specific conclusions about
programme intervention worked to achieve
the effectiveness of particular programme
the desired result has relied too heavily
elements. The importance of the agency’s
on output delivery / target achievement
role in public health risk communication
data and the logic of the programme itself.
and in related programming (vaccination,
Sometimes this is justified, as in the case
including COVID-19, WASH) emerges as
of child vaccination. In other cases, much
one clear area of major impact for which
more evidence is required concerning
effectiveness can reasonably inferred from
quality of output delivery (e.g., of teacher
the level of coverage.
training) and actual outcomes (retention
and attendance of teachers at school, data
on educational outcomes). The lack of UNICEF sector coordination and
feedback from communities themselves is leadership
one essential missing component here. UNICEF (co-)leadership of sectors and
the child protection AoR is agreed by
UNICEF needs better ways of establishing all informants to be central to its added
that its interventions – and those of its value, but its record in Syria is highly
partners – are helping achieve the intended uneven across the different sectors. Child
outcomes. Achievement against (proxy) protection and WASH have been strong in
indicators is an important but often most areas of coordination, both at WoS
insufficient metric of performance and and hub levels. They have also shown the
effectiveness. Along with better data on potential for effective coordination cross-
needs and vulnerabilities, it is essential to zone in NES, something on which UNICEF
find better ways to track the actual effect and others need to build. In education
and benefit delivered by programme and nutrition, UNICEF has not been able
components to children and their families, to provide the leadership needed, and
both at the population level and at the this needs to be rectified. Some of this
community and household levels. The is a matter of resourcing: the evaluation
evaluation noted a tendency by UNICEF to found that the practice of double- or even
overestimate its reach and performance by triple-hatting was clearly having a negative
taking specific indicators and drawing more impact on this aspect of the organization’s
general conclusions from them. role.
Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the Level 3 Humanitarian Crisis in Syria 110
The organization’s system-wide roles – in in the delivery of essential services across
sector coordination, supply, advocacy and WoS, particularly in non-GCAs. These
more general leadership on child-related partnerships have varied in quality and
issues – are essential to its added value in type across the three main crisis areas, in
the Syria response and to the quality of the part because of restrictions on partnerships
system-wide response as a whole. UNICEF and partner presence. UNICEF lacks some
should refocus to give as much attention to of its usual key partner INGOs, since INGOs
these roles as it does to delivering its own have (for the most part) been unable to
programme. This has particular urgency work simultaneously in GCAs and non-
in relation to the functions currently GCAs, but there remains more scope
performed through the cross-border for INGO partnerships in Damascus and
programme into NWS. beyond.
Collaborations, partnerships and The online survey conducted for this
community engagement evaluation suggests that overall, NGO
partners have been very satisfied with
Working relationships with sister United
their partnership with UNICEF. In particular,
Nations agencies were found generally
local NGOs have appreciated the technical
to have been constructive and effective,
support and capacity-building role that
although there are significant areas in
UNICEF has played. The evaluation also
which these need to be strengthened, e.g.,
found that there were some areas of the
with WFP on school feeding, with WHO
programme (particularly in GCAs and NES)
on aspects of the COVID-19 response,
where a wider range of partnerships was
with UNHCR on work with displaced and
needed in order to achieve the necessary
returning populations. The relationship
coverage of needs for children and their
with SARC has been mainly on emergency
families.
elements of the programme, and this
appears to have been a largely productive
The evaluation found that accountability to
collaboration.
affected populations – and more generally,
engagement with communities – had been
Working relationships with NGOs – local,
one of the weakest aspects of UNICEF
national and international – are central
practice to date. This is related to the
to the implementation of the UNICEF
organization’s limited presence in many
programme. From a wider perspective,
areas (almost none in the non-GCAs),
they are also essential to the effective
necessitating a ‘remote’ approach that
resourcing, support and capacity-building
depends heavily on third parties. More
of Syrian NGOs who have been key actors
Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the Level 3 Humanitarian Crisis in Syria 111
recently, UNICEF (particularly SCO) has and child protection sectors have been
taken steps to extend its ability to garner relatively strongly coordinated across
such feedback, but the relative lack of WoS (including on needs assessment
proximity and community engagement and programme delivery); education less
remains a major constraint on the so. The nutrition sector has not been
organization’s ability to account for and as strongly coordinated, and for NES in
ensure the effectiveness and relevance of particular has been largely disconnected
its interventions. from other key actors. The functions
performed by UNICEF in support of
(mainly Syrian) NGOs in NWS – including
7.3 Management and support
financing, supply and technical support
function conclusions
functions currently provided through
‘implementing partnerships’ – should be
Whole of Syria arrangement in UNICEF seen as external functions in the wider
context of the overall system response. The
The UNICEF WoS arrangement was
question of how to maintain or transfer
established when there were a number of
these functions to others – together with
active external hubs providing support into
what ongoing support role UNICEF should
Syria from Türkiye, Jordan and Iraq. It was
play in NWS – is central to the necessary
very much relevant at the time due to the
contingency planning around the potential
need for remote management, coordination
closure of the Bab al-Hawa crossing.
and oversight from a secure location of
multiple interventions that needed to be
With regard to the internal functions of
managed discretely. Overall, the structure
the WoS structures, this appears to have
in place has been effective in enabling
caused some confusion. Staff have been
UNICEF to respond in parts of NWS, NES
unclear about the WoS coordination roles
and other areas within Syria that could
in relation to the hub-specific coordination
not be effectively or safely accessed from
and programmes and this has not always
within the country.
been well explained. There has also
been some confusion between the cross-
This structure has had both UNICEF-
border support functions in NWS and
specific (internal) and wider (external)
the WoS agenda. The internal firewalls,
functions. The evaluation concludes that
while serving an important purpose, have
UNICEF has only been partly successful in
also contributed to a lack of effective
its external role as the interface with the
communication and (often) an atmosphere
system-wide, OCHA-led Whole of Syria
of mistrust between the hubs.
structures and processes. The WASH
Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the Level 3 Humanitarian Crisis in Syria 112
The evaluation concludes that while the While contingency planning for this is
WoS arrangement needs to evolve to ongoing, the evaluators found that this
reflect the change of circumstances, many was not yet as advanced as it should be
of its functions remain essential. This and was not sufficiently joined up between
includes the provision of support and SCO and Gaziantep. This demands urgent
coordination for humanitarian work in action.
non-GC NWS. While the financing function
may need to evolve, the supply, technical More generally, the evaluation notes some
support and sector coordination functions persistent reputational risks for UNICEF.
can only be provided by UNICEF – though Some of these concern transparency
we propose this be done at a cluster level and accountability with regard to the
– and cannot at this point be provided programme: the ability to account properly
through the SCO. From an internal for what UNICEF and its partners have been
perspective, this needs to be much better able to deliver, and also what they have not
harmonized with UNICEF cross-line support been able to deliver (and why). This was
to NWS. The WoS arrangement should raised as a concern in the 2019 audit and
provide a platform for assessing needs and has been persistently raised as an issue
coordinating interventions to all parts of by major donors. The work in NES is of
Syria according to a common humanitarian particular concern in this regard, and the
strategy and plan. SCO was not able to provide a breakdown
of expenditure relating to cross-zone
Finance and risk management activity into non-government-controlled
NES. The evaluators consider this essential
While the evaluation did not attempt
management information.
an in-depth review of these aspects of
UNICEF management (which is largely
Staffing and human resources
the domain of internal audit), financial
management and control appear to have Levels of staffing across WoS were found
been largely well conducted despite the to be largely adequate to the functions
multiple challenges involved, including being performed, with the exception of
late and uncertain funding flows and the the Gaziantep office, which has been
specific challenges of managing ‘remote’ understaffed throughout the evaluation
programmes in which there is heavy period relative to its expected functions
reliance on partner self-reporting. One and workload. The recent PBR process
major set of external risk factors concerns has rightly led to a somewhat longer-
the potential closure of the last remaining term perspective being adopted, with
authorized border crossing from Türkiye. international positions being made fixed-
Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the Level 3 Humanitarian Crisis in Syria 113
term rather than temporary, but staffing prevention of sexual exploitation and abuse
levels remain very low compared with the across hubs and regionally, this appears
expected functions. to remain a seriously under-reported
issue. Much more needs to be done to
In contrast to Gaziantep, the Damascus raise community awareness, although
office and field offices in GCAs have the evaluators recognize the cultural and
generally been adequately resourced and institutional barriers to doing this.
properly staffed, although double-hatting
between programme and coordination Supply and procurement
functions is still an issue in some of the
UNICEF has played a key (sector-wide) role
field offices. An appropriate balance
in vaccine procurement and distribution
seems have been found of international
across the whole of Syria. The main issue
and national staff. In addition to core staff,
identified under this heading concerned the
the SCO and field offices have employed
supply function in SCO. The internal audit
the services of technical facilitators to
of 2019 reported a significant problem with
extend their reach and capacity. This
delayed procurement, and this situation
model, which allows auxiliary human
appears not to have been resolved.129 Such
resources to be charged to programme
delays are not the sole responsibility of the
budgets, appears to have worked well and
supply section: issues such as sanctions,
has increased effective staffing levels for
government permissions, the late arrival
the GCAs programme to nearly 300. This
of donor funds, and the late submission of
is now being supplemented with (and
requests by section chiefs have also been
partly replaced by) contracted third-party
contributing factors. However, given the
monitoring capacity.
particular challenges of local procurement
in Syria, the evaluation concludes that a
With regard to safeguarding and
thorough review of the supply function is
specifically prevention of sexual
now needed to propose suitable solutions
exploitation and abuse, while substantial
to those challenges.
progress has been made in recent years in
rolling out training and awareness-raising
The supply function in Gaziantep seems to
with UNICEF and implementing partner
have worked relatively well over the evalu-
staff and establishing a network for the
ation period. Supply cross-border into NWS
129 This is reflected in the recent April 2022 internal audit report, which found that supply remains subject to substantial delays in a high proportion of
cases. This was also a consistent theme of evaluation interviews with implementing partners.
Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the Level 3 Humanitarian Crisis in Syria 114
has been affected by significant delays, monitoring and implementation. These
but this is reported to have improved sig- have been particularly beneficial in terms
nificantly. The major exception has been of monitoring WASH construction work
the winterization programme. Even more and are generally considered a very
importantly, supply shortages appear to useful addition to the programme teams.
have affected the supply of ready-to-use However, having become embedded
therapeutic food for emergency nutrition within the sectoral teams, these technical
programmes in both NWS and NES. facilitators cannot be considered
completely independent. In recognition of
UNICEF has done well to pre-position this, the SCO is now in the process of hiring
stocks as part of recent contingency plan- a firm to provide third-party monitors to
ning in NWS. One immediate further chal- improve the impartiality and coverage of
lenge to be addressed is the identification programme monitoring.
of alternative supply modalities in the
event that the cross-border route from In its cross-border work from Gaziantep,
Türkiye is closed.130 UNICEF has been entirely reliant over the
evaluation period on TPM to supplement
Programme monitoring, quality assurance, partner self-reporting. Gaziantep uses
feedback a single TPM company to monitor the
implementation of the activities it supports
Restricted access in GCAs and non-GC
in NWS. This is a well-established company
NES, and complete lack of access in non-
that appears reliable and professional,
GC NWS, has posed a major challenge
having worked closely with UNICEF to
to UNICEF with regard to programme
develop its data-collection methods.
monitoring, quality assurance and
Although there are concerns about such
community engagement. The 2019
heavy reliance on a single company,
internal audit raised the concern that
establishing additional TPM processes in
results as reported by implementing
NWS is understood to be difficult.
partners were not being independently
verified, and UNICEF has adopted various
While acknowledging the challenges of
measures to address this. For GCAs,
monitoring the programme in non-GC
the SCO has employed the services
NWS, the evaluators found that the lack of
of 70 technical facilitators to support
proximity of UNICEF both to its partners
programme officers with programme
130 Action is now reported to have been taken to identify such alternative supply modalities.
Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the Level 3 Humanitarian Crisis in Syria 115
and to the communities concerned children equally in Syria and this should
remained a major obstacle to assessing be the foundation of discussions with the
needs, to assuring delivery and quality, and GoS as well as with other authorities. That
to assessing the impact of its programme. equality of concern needs to be reflected in
While circumstances have largely made the coverage and impartiality of the overall
this the price of operating in this area, the response.
evaluation concludes that UNICEF needs to
find better ways of addressing these issues The gender-related aspects of the crisis
if it is to continue to programme in NWS. were found generally to have been
well reflected in the UNICEF response,
particularly with regard to girls’ access to
7.4 Cross-cutting issues
primary education. However, given the
highly gendered impacts of the crisis –
Issues of humanitarian principle were including the vulnerabilities of women and
considered across various aspects of the girls in particular to violence and coercion
UNICEF response. Largely for reasons of – this remains a crucial area of concern
operating restrictions and lack of data, and one on which UNICEF should continue
UNICEF cannot with confidence say that it to work closely with other agencies. The
has always responded on the basis of need, situation of adolescents (girls and boys),
consistent with the principle of impartiality. including access to education and training,
Although the evaluation found that the and related issues of child labour and
response was broadly equitable and needs- early marriage, is an area that needs more
based, some priority agendas have been international attention and UNICEF has an
under-served, as noted above. important role to play here.
Greater transparency would help to According to the 2022 HNO, of the 14.6
address the concerns about perceived million people in need inside Syria, some
lack of independence noted above. The 4.2 million have a disability. The majority
evaluation found that UNICEF engagement of children with disabilities aged 12-17
with the Government of Syria and with are not attending school and households
de facto authorities in areas outside that have persons with disabilities are
government control had been appropriate some of the most vulnerable in Syria,
and necessary. However, UNICEF must both in terms of access to basic needs and
be careful not to compromise its ability protection. UNICEF has done important
to support work in non-government- work to support such households through
controlled areas; its mandate applies to all its social protection programme, but it has
Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the Level 3 Humanitarian Crisis in Syria 116
not been able to mount such work on a B and C) as well as emergency relief and
scale commensurate with need. Given both protection priorities (Agenda A). In that
the priority of the need and the impact that sense, it covers most of the organization’s
UNICEF has demonstrated in this area, the priorities in Syria.
evaluation concluded that this should be a
priority for future action and advocacy with We recognize that UNICEF has already
donors and the relevant authorities. made progress on some of the agendas
below since the fact-finding for the
evaluation was conducted. We also
7.5 Recommendations
recognize that implementation of these
recommendations may depend on factors
Arising from the findings and conclusions (funding, access, etc.) over which UNICEF
presented above, these recommendations has limited control or influence. We
reflect the fact that the evaluation is propose them here as steps we believe
strategic rather than technical in nature. necessary in order to substantially
Our purpose is to suggest changes strengthen the response for children
in approach where we believe this is and their families, while recognizing that
necessary, and to suggest ways in which their achievement may in some cases be
existing initiatives can be built on. contingent on other factors.
These recommendations are made on
R1. Reframe the Whole of Syria
the understanding that UNICEF staff are
agenda and related
best placed to make decisions about the
humanitarian strategy
detail of strategy, programme design,
management structures and so on. As
a result, they provide proposals for The UNICEF crisis response in Syria,
rethinking elements of the organization’s for all its strengths, has been hampered
approach, together with some specific by the lack of a coherent strategy for
proposals, rather than a detailed blueprint its humanitarian work. Disconnected
for action. The format involves a general strategies across the whole of Syria have
recommendation (R1, R2, etc.) followed by reflected the fragmentation of the country:
more specific proposed actions (R1.1, etc.). cross-border and cross-line efforts have
We use the term ‘humanitarian’ here as not been well harmonized, and both
it is used in the HRP, to encompass work appear to be disconnected from work in
on early recovery, rehabilitation, securing GCAs. Over the course of the evaluation
basic services and addressing critical period, the humanitarian situation in Syria
threats to children’s development (Agendas has largely evolved into three distinct
Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the Level 3 Humanitarian Crisis in Syria 117
crises, each posing different challenges R1.2 Review the assumptions on which
for humanitarian response and recovery the 2021 programme strategy notes are
efforts. UNICEF needs to find a way to based and revise the strategies accordingly,
encompass these within a single strategy with a view to ensuring their ‘real world’
and analytical framework. Doing so relevance to the prevailing situation across
requires fully recognizing the scale of the Syria.
overall humanitarian crisis and the distinct
characteristics and priorities of each ‘sub- R.1.3 Harmonize existing GCA, cross-border
crisis’, as well as the linkages between and cross-zone/cross-line strategies to ensure
them. coverage and consistency of support to
children across the whole of Syria. Key to
While the political and security context this is improving collaboration between
(national and international) will largely the SCO, Gaziantep and the WoS office in
continue to define what is possible by way Amman. The expected increasing role of
of effective intervention, UNICEF must SCO in NWS calls for strategies adapted
maintain the position that its mandate to the true scale and severity of needs in
applies to all children equally across Syria, this area (which are still largely Agenda A).
and that this requires it to work across The potential closure of the last remaining
political boundaries. This should be the United Nations-authorized cross-border
foundation of discussions with both the route gives this particular urgency and
GoS and with de facto authorities in NWS demands close coordination between the
and NES. SCO and Gaziantep office.
R1. Frame a common humanitarian In northeastern Syria, the strategy for
strategy for the whole of Syria. This should ‘cross-zone’ support to non-GCA NES
distinguish between different categories (camp and non-camp) needs to be better
of priorities for children (we suggest in harmonized with the efforts of NGOs
this report a possible three-fold general working in that area, and urgent efforts
classification) and articulate the main made to extend the reach of critical
response strategies related to each. The services (see below).
strategy should facilitate an integrated
approach across different sectors and a (For action by MENARO in collaboration
mix of approaches according to prevailing SCO, WoS, Gaziantep Outpost Office and
priorities, opportunities, systemic gaps and EMOPS)
UNICEF added value.
Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the Level 3 Humanitarian Crisis in Syria 118
R2. Review Whole of Syria Ensuring continuity of support for the
arrangements needs of children and their families in non-
GC NWS must continue to be a priority
for UNICEF, given the scale and severity of
The UNICEF WoS arrangement needs
needs involved. The situation remains fluid
to evolve to reflect the change of
and levels of vulnerability (as well as levels
circumstances since it was established
of aid dependency) are high. Uncertainty
while maintaining certain key functions.
over the future of cross-border support and
Specifically, it needs to provide a stronger
challenges to increasing cross-line support
platform for assessing needs and
from GCAs add to that vulnerability and
coordinating interventions to all parts of
planning against future scenarios is an
Syria according to a common humanitarian
immediate priority.
strategy and plan. This includes much
stronger harmonization of cross-border
R3.1 As a priority, UNICEF should
and cross-line support. The WoS office
finalize and implement (as appropriate)
in Amman and SCO need to collaborate
contingency planning for the potential
closely on this agenda.
closure to the United Nations of the Bab
al-Hawa border crossing from Türkiye.
More generally, the arrangements
This should involve close and detailed
need to provide a clearer framework
collaboration between Gaziantep,
of responsibilities and accountabilities
Damascus and MENARO as well as with
for each hub and the functions located
other agencies and with donors.
within them. Lack of clarity on this has
been a significant barrier to effective and
R3.2 Both as part of contingency planning
harmonized working for UNICEF across
and for its future strategy, UNICEF should
WoS.
actively seek to ensure that its implementing
partner NGOs in NWS can access direct
(For action by MENARO in collaboration
funding from donors or from pooled funds
with SCO, WoS, Gaziantep Outpost Office
rather than being dependent on funding
and EMOPS)
through UNICEF. Again, this requires close
collaboration with other agencies and with
donors. As part of this, UNICEF should seek
R3. Ensure continuity of Agenda
to ensure continuity of programme services
A support to areas of north-
currently provided through implementing
western Syria outside GoS
partnerships, while aiming to phase out
control, while adapting the
its role as a funding partner to the NGOs
support strategy to reflect the
concerned.
evolving situation
Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the Level 3 Humanitarian Crisis in Syria 119
R3.3 As a corollary to this, UNICEF advocacy to increase the operating space.
should take urgent steps to ensure – in the Doing this will involve rebuilding trust and
event that SCR 2585 is not renewed – that will require more transparency and better
it can continue to fulfil essential functions communication on both sides. This is also
on behalf of its partners and the wider essential for securing the trust of donors,
humanitarian system, including: leadership who currently express understandable
on cluster / AoR coordination, advocacy confusion as to the nature and extent of
and communications, technical support and aid efforts in NES (by UNICEF and others)
training, and essential bulk procurement and concern at the lack of coordination and
services on behalf of humanitarian actors collaboration between the United Nations
working in IDP camps and non-government and NGOs. For its part, UNICEF must be
controlled areas of NWS. This is likely more open about the extent and limits
to require current capacity levels in the of its ability to support work cross-zone,
Gaziantep office to be maintained, with even within the camps where it currently
some roles reconfigured. operates.
(For action by MENARO in collaboration R4.1 Building on excellent work to date
with SCO, WoS, Gaziantep Outpost Office on WASH, health (EPI), child protection
and EMOPS) (CAFAAG, third-country nationals) and
education (curriculum development,
exams) and on established relationships
R4. Repurpose the strategy for
with self-administration as well as GoS
support to non-government- counterparts, UNICEF should develop a
controlled areas of northeastern plan within the wider humanitarian plan
Syria proposed above for extending its effective
reach in NES. This should include high-
UNICEF has made real strides in opening level advocacy and should seek to maintain
space and responding to critical needs, but essential work in camps while extending
there are key service gaps (e.g., in nutrition beyond these – or supporting the NGOs
and education) and the scale and coverage to do so. Critical service gaps, notably in
are insufficient, particularly in areas outside nutrition, should be addressed as a matter
the formal IDP camps. Progressively of urgency.
extending the support provided cross-
zone will require closer collaboration with R4.2 In concert with other United Nations
NGOs as well as de facto authorities (self- agencies, UNICEF SCO and Qamishli
administration) together with higher-level office (in collaboration with the WoS office
Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the Level 3 Humanitarian Crisis in Syria 120
in Amman) should seek to forge a new and area-based approaches. While this is
partnership with the NES Forum with a dependent on donor willingness to fund as
view to ensuring that cross-zone initiatives well as GoS permissions, joint inter-agency
link more strongly with work undertaken approaches – possibly using consortium
by NGOs in self-administration areas and or event joint venture models – could help
that overall coverage of needs (camp/non- to provide assurance as well as a potential
camp) improves. As part of this, all UNICEF scale multiplier effect.
sectors – including both programme
and coordination staff – should work to R5.1 Building on positive existing
improve communication and coordination relationships with GoS ministries and local
with the respective working groups in the authorities, UNICEF should continue to seek
Forum. Lessons from the successful work to expand the space for both data gathering
of the WASH and child protection sectors and programming, on its own behalf as well
in bridging this gap with the NGO Forum as that of the wider system. This should
should reviewed by other sectors. form an integral part of the proposed
humanitarian strategy and plan and should
(For action by SCO and WoS in be based on priority areas of concern.
collaboration with MENARO and EMOPS) The proposed multiple indicator cluster
survey (MICS) process should form part
of this, in order to help provide essential
R5. Build the scale of work in GCAs
baseline data, and should be supplemented
through enhanced partnerships
by mechanisms for routine situational
and consortia
monitoring against key indicators of
concern for children.
UNICEF has done well to work with
national and local authorities, SARC and R5.2 Again as part of the proposed
approved NGOs in GCAs despite the humanitarian plan, UNICEF should
multiple limitations imposed by donor actively seek new collaborative business
conditionalities, as well as limits imposed models – including multi-agency initiatives,
by the government on needs assessment sector-specific response consortia, and
and response. The main challenge area-based multi-sector approaches.
identified by the evaluation is one of These should include work with other
scale: UNICEF needs to find ways to better United Nations agencies, SARC and
address the humanitarian agenda for NGOs, working in partnership with local
children in GCAs at scale, through wider authorities and potentially with private
partnerships, integrated programming sector actors. An area-based approach to
Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the Level 3 Humanitarian Crisis in Syria 121
programming, particularly in urban areas, some time to address but should be treated
may be necessary to properly address the with the urgency they deserve. Some
complexity and density of needs, to foster demand strengthening not only the UNICEF
inter-sectoral planning, and to contribute to programme response but the wider sector
social cohesion in areas containing multiple response and its coordination.
identity groups.
R6.1 Nutrition sector. In light of the
R5.3 In light of the stabilization of deteriorating nutritional situation, UNICEF
large parts of the country and increased should strengthen its nutrition sector
opportunities for upstream work, the response by:
SCO should explore the scope for new
(i) Undertaking a SMART survey as
partnerships with international NGOs in
comprehensive, extensive and in-depth
Damascus. This would allow it to tap into
as possible to properly assess the
their sector-specific expertise (especially for
extent and magnitude of the ongoing
child protection, education, social policy)
malnutrition crisis;
which is much needed. It would also help
(ii) Revising and strengthening its
to address the element of mistrust of civil
nutrition cluster / sector coordination
society which has developed during the
team and processes, ensuring that
last few years and would complement
NES is soundly covered and that
advocacy with the GoS to open space up
UNICEF nutrition staff (programme and
for greater contributions from civil society
coordination) are interacting effectively
in general.
with the NGO Forum nutrition working
group;
(For action by SCO in collaboration with
(iii) Addressing all nutrition supply issues
MENARO, DAPM and EMOPS)
(provision of RUTF, micronutrients, etc.)
under UNICEF responsibility as global
R6. Address critical service gaps cluster coordinator for nutrition. If these
and maintain key services issues cannot be resolved in-country, they
should be taken up at the appropriate
level;
Consistent with the wider humanitarian
strategy, UNICEF should identify critical (iv) Working with WFP to ensure that the
service gaps across the whole of Syria, current minimal school feeding
analyse the reasons behind them, and programme (i.e., based on daily provision
take steps to address them as a matter of of high energy bars) is incorporated
priority. Some of these (nutrition is a key across all schools and possibly expanded
example) cannot wait. Others may take to include more nutritious foods.
Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the Level 3 Humanitarian Crisis in Syria 122
R6.2 Education sector and ADAP. Develop (iv) With regard to ADAP, UNICEF should
a conflict-sensitive education strategy for aim to harmonize its approach with
the WoS and for Syrian refugees in the education to focus on the crucial issue of
region to allow all Syrian children to access providing a bridge between ‘learning’ and
quality and certified education. An analysis ‘earning’ for adolescents.
of the conflict dynamics in relation to
education policies and programmes should R6.3 WASH and health (EPI/COVID-19)
be the first step of building the strategy, R6.3.1 WASH: Building on effective
so as to minimize negative impacts and collaboration with the MoWR to date, the
maximize positive impacts of education WASH section should continue to expand
policies and programmes on conflict. To the coverage and scope of its basic
this end: infrastructure and system rehabilitation
interventions in GCAs, as well as in non-
(i) Beyond continued efforts to extend
GC areas of NES.
access to education, UNICEF should,
as part of its education strategy, devise R6.3.2 Health: Building on effective
a WoS plan for better assessing and collaboration with the MoH, the health
working on the issue of educational section should continue to expand the
quality and impact. Allowing that this is a coverage and scope of its system-based
very large agenda, incremental progress interventions in GCAs, and, building on
should be the aim, including through the cross-line and cross-zone experience
discussion with the MoE in Damascus. of the EPI and COVID-19 vaccination
programmes, progressively expand its
(ii) The education cluster should be
coverage in NES.
strengthened, including adequate staffing
(dedicated coordinators and information
(For action by SCO and WoS in collabo-
management officers), increased
ration with MENARO, Programme Group,
participation of the cluster partners (e.g.,
EMOPS, and Gaziantep Outpost Office)
establishing strategic advisory groups)
and improved coordination between the
hubs and across the wider region.
R7. Strengthen needs assessment,
(iii) UNICEF should capture lessons
situational monitoring and
learned from using alternative education
targeting across WoS
modalities due to the pandemic (e.g.,
online and remote learning), which might
Related to R4.1 above, UNICEF needs a
offer opportunities to expand access to
plan to strengthen its ability – and that of
accredited education in the region (e.g.,
the sectors for which it has lead responsi-
learning passport).
Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the Level 3 Humanitarian Crisis in Syria 123
bilities – to better gauge the evolving pic- priorities (such as nutrition) and establish
ture of needs and vulnerabilities across all specific delivery targets for key elements
parts of Syria, including with regard to un- of the programme that are monitored at
der-5 malnutrition. The methods employed least quarterly for each of the three crisis
may vary somewhat across the three crisis areas separately as well as in aggregate.
areas, but a common analytical framework More generally, it should involve (as part
should be used at sector and inter-sector of humanitarian planning) a review of
levels. This needs to allow for more ‘re- programme indicators to provide a more
al-time’ and baseline data gathering. reliable guide to performance.
(For action by SCO and WoS in collabora- R8.2 Optimize programme monitoring
tion with Gaziantep Outpost Office, MENA- capacity and quality. Recognizing the
RO and EMOPS) challenges to monitoring, especially in
non-GCAs of NWS and NES, the SCO
and Gaziantep offices should review the
R8. Strengthen monitoring and
functions expected of third-party monitors
accounting for programme deliv-
and facilitators. Their technical capacities
ery and performance
should be reinforced for all sectors and
their tasks refined. At the same time,
UNICEF needs to be better able to account monitoring focus should shift from output
(internally and externally) for its pro- to outcome level, and increasingly assess
gramme interventions through partners in impact of specific interventions, as far as
all parts of Syria. The inability to do so re- possible through direct engagement with
liably is a reputational risk and means that affected communities.
UNICEF lacks a sound basis for programme
management. As part of this, UNICEF R8.3 Review the way in which programme
needs to be significantly more transparent coverage and reach are reported. UNICEF
in reporting both what it does (and where), must ensure that a realistic picture is
and what it is unable to do. It also needs to painted – and crucially, it must highlight
ensure comparable transparency concern- what it has not been possible to do rather
ing the work of clusters and AoRs for which than reporting only ‘positive’ news of
it has lead responsibilities. achievements. UNICEF owes a duty both to
children and to the wider sectors in which
R8.1 Strengthen the basis on which it works to consistently report the gaps in
programme performance is measured. coverage of essential services, even where
This should take account of immediate lack of effective delivery means UNICEF
Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the Level 3 Humanitarian Crisis in Syria 124
may itself be partly responsible. The R9.1 Strengthen coordination systems
organization’s credibility with donors and and capacities. UNICEF should aim to
other actors would be enhanced as a result. have dedicated and high calibre sector
coordinators and information management
R8.4 Strengthen the AAP approach and officers at hub level. Cluster coordinators
community engagement. Directly linked need to have both sufficient seniority
to the above recommendation, UNICEF and the experience to be able to inspire
should embed specific AAP commitments confidence within the clusters and ensure
(as per the CCCs) into its programme that the concerns of the wider sector are
components and partnership agreements, differentiated from those of the UNICEF
defining a specific role to be played by programme. The formation of strategic
third-party monitors and facilitators. advisory groups could help with this, and
This should not be limited to complaints with providing greater strategic focus.
mechanisms, but build more on beneficiary
satisfaction and impact surveys, drawing R9.2 Maintain coordination capacity at
on the experiences of the social policy Gaziantep level. In the framework of the
section in this regard. ongoing contingency plans for NWS,
UNICEF should plan to maintain strong
(For action by SCO and WoS in coordination capacity in Gaziantep. This
collaboration with Gaziantep Outpost would enable both a better coordinated
Office, MENARO and EMOPS) response from those operating cross-
border and from within this region, and
better harmonization of this response with
R9. Strengthen cluster and AoR
cross-line support from GCAs. One aim
leadership and coordination
should be to reduce the risk of a disconnect
arising between a possible NGO-led
While in some sectors, UNICEF leadership coordination system in Gaziantep and the
and coordination have been strong, in United Nations-led one in Damascus.
other areas they have been relatively weak
at both hub and WoS levels. UNICEF must (For action by WoS, SCO and Gaziantep
make sure that its own programme delivery Outpost Office in collaboration MENARO
is not privileged over fulfilment of its and EMOPS)
essential system-wide roles. Double- and
triple-hatting has seriously affected UNICEF
performance and the well-being of the staff
concerned.
Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the Level 3 Humanitarian Crisis in Syria 125
R10. Strengthen the supply ing and prevention of sexual exploitation
function and abuse, while good progress is being
made internally, more needs to be done to
Supply for the programme in GCAs and raise awareness amongst beneficiaries and
cross-zone in NES has been a persistent establish case management protocols at a
problem, related in part to the economic community level. Continued advocacy at
crises in Syria and Lebanon. The SCO a governmental level is required to enable
should request expert support from wider progress on this agenda.
MENARO or Supply Division to help
identify steps necessary for improvements, (For action by SCO and WoS in
as well as to provide general support to the collaboration with Gaziantep Outpost
supply section. A head of section needs Office, MENARO, DAPM, PG and EMOPS)
to be recruited as soon as possible. The
evaluation suggests that a task team be
R12. Strengthen communication
established, including programme and
and advocacy efforts
fundraising staff, to monitor progress on
agreed steps and report to senior managers
on progress. This is a core function for While UNICEF (SCO/RO) has made good
UNICEF, the performance of which has use of private advocacy channels with
system-wide implications. authorities across Syria and in the wider
region over the evaluation period, it needs
(For action by SCO in collaboration with to be more consistent and responsive in
MENARO and Supply Division) its public advocacy and condemnations
of gross abuses of child rights (it has
sometimes been too risk-averse in this
R11. Enhance risk management regard). Such communication needs to
and control processes be distinguished from communications
designed primarily to promote UNICEF and
While UNICEF risk management and con- its work. The current practice of routing
trol processes appear relatively strong, the such advocacy mainly through MENARO is
review of risks should happen more reg- appropriate.
ularly than it does at present (we suggest
quarterly). Collaboration on due diligence While UNICEF has tended to highlight
and spot checks under the HACT system its own (positive) role, not enough
could be extended beyond the current communication work is done to highlight
United Nations partners. On safeguard- the gaps in coverage for children across
Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the Level 3 Humanitarian Crisis in Syria 126
WoS, and particularly in NWS. Given
the limited presence of INGOs across
the various hubs, this is an especially
important agenda for UNICEF. An advocacy
strategy and rollout plan should form part
of the proposed humanitarian strategy and
plan (R1).
(For action by MENARO, WoS and SCO in
collaboration with Global Communication
and Advocacy Division and EMOPS)
Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the Level 3 Humanitarian Crisis in Syria 127
ANNEXES
Annex 1. Terms of References
Evaluation of the UNICEF response to
the L3 Humanitarian Crisis in Syria
Introduction humanitarian crisis in Syria is one of the
biggest and most complex crises in the
In 2021, the UNICEF Evaluation Office will
world.133 The humanitarian situation is
evaluate the organization’s response in the
the result of continued hostilities, new and
Syrian Arab Republic. This document out-
protracted displacements, spontaneous
lines the requirements for and expectations
returns and the sustained erosion of
of a team of five consultants to undertake
communities’ resilience during a decade of
this exercise.
crisis.
Background on humanitarian situation Following a decade of conflict and
in Syria humanitarian crisis, hostilities in parts
of the Syrian Arab Republic continue
Starting with peaceful demonstrations in
to intensify. The destruction of civilian
early 2011, the Syrian Arab Republic
infrastructure, depleted savings and limited
descended into an all-out conflict, inflicting
economic opportunities have forced many
untold suffering and hardship on civilian
to resort to harmful coping strategies.
populations. To date, the scale, severity and
The result is extreme vulnerability.
complexity of humanitarian needs remain
Those particularly at risk are children,
extensive; as of December 2020, the United
pregnant and lactating women, people
Nations estimates that more than 13 million
with disabilities, the elderly and other
people inside Syria need humanitarian
groups or individuals with specific needs
assistance.131 Some 4.8 million children
or diminished coping mechanisms. Four
are in need of assistance in 2021.132 The
131 United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, ‘Syria Humanitarian Response Plan, 2020’, Geneva, https://hum-insight.info/
plan/1044, accessed 7 January 2021.
132 United Nations Children’s Fund, ‘Humanitarian Action for Children, 2021’, UNICEF, New York, accessed 7 January 2021.
133 United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, ‘About OCHA Syria’, Geneva, https://www.unocha.org/syrian-arab-republic/about-
ocha-syria.
Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the Level 3 Humanitarian Crisis in Syria 128
out of five people in Syria live below the disruption of basic services. Notably, the
poverty line,134 and many families’ coping government closed schools between March
mechanisms are depleted. Families face and September 2020. Health and nutrition
making hard choices in order to survive, surveillance activities were disrupted and
e.g., pushing children into extreme survival vaccination coverage for children fell by 40
measures such as child labour, early per cent.138
marriage and recruitment into the fighting
in order to help their families make ends
meet.135 The humanitarian context has been UNICEF response in Syria
further challenged by an unprecedented The crisis has been the focus of organi-
economic downturn in Syria in 2020 zation-wide support since January 2013,
that has had profound impacts on the when UNICEF declared it a Level 3 (L3)
welfare of a significant proportion of the emergency and put in place its corporate
population.136 These economic hardships emergency activation procedure (CEAP).139
have revealed the pre-existing and This radically transformed what was pre-
underlying fragility of the Syrian economy viously a small, upstream-focused country
and have been compounded by multiple office (CO) into a large-scale, emergen-
shocks over the past 12 months, including cy-oriented programme. This scale-up
the regional financial crisis – the most facilitated support in entirely new areas of
significant of which has been the banking programming and the opening of new field
crisis in neighbouring Lebanon, and the offices to support children located in hard-
imposition of new and further-reaching to-reach areas.
unilateral coercive measures which
have further complicated procurement Since 2013, UNICEF has appealed for
processes and limited the transfer of funds almost $2.5 billion and has received almost
to partners operating from within Syria.137 $1 billion. The UNICEF response is outlined
The COVID-19 pandemic has caused in its annual Humanitarian Action for
134 Ibid.
135 United Nations Children’s Fund, ‘Syria Crisis Fact Sheet, August 2019’, UNICEF, New York, 2019, https://www.unicef.org/mena/reports/syria-crisis-
fast-facts.
136 Syria Humanitarian Response Plan, 2020.
137 Ibid.
138 United Nations Children’s Fund, ‘End of Year Results Summary Narrative, 2020’, UNICEF, New York, 2020.
139 An L3 emergency is declared on the basis of: scale, urgency, complexity, capacity and reputational risk to UNICEF and/or the United Nations. In an
L3 emergency, UNICEF calls for an institution-wide and global mobilization through its CEAP. Predefined emergency procedures allow UNICEF to
respond effectively and immediately to the situation. A Level 2 (L2) emergency is led and managed by a regional office.
Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the Level 3 Humanitarian Crisis in Syria 129
Children appeal, which is in line with the Purpose and objectives of the
Syria Humanitarian Response Plan, the evaluation
framework within which the humanitarian
The planned evaluation is intended to
community responds to humanitarian
serve both accountability and learning
and protection needs. UNICEF has been
functions. The purpose of the evaluation
delivering its response from three separate
is to strengthen UNICEF performance in
locations: the UNICEF Syria country office,
protecting children’s rights and well-being
and two other ‘hubs’, one in Amman,
in the country, and in responding to large-
Jordan for southern Syria and northeast
scale emergencies.
Syria, and one in Gaziantep, Türkiye for
northwest Syria. The country office has
The specific objectives of the evaluation are
field offices in Homs, Aleppo, Tartous,
to:
Qamishli, Deir-ez-Zor and Damascus.
• Provide a comprehensive assessment
UNICEF works in Syria in the following
of the overall UNICEF response to
areas to provide humanitarian assistance
the crisis within Syria (including
to vulnerable children and women to
cross-border programming) against its
address their urgent needs, while ensuring
own mandate and standards, its
sustainable programming throughout the
stated objectives and standard
protracted crisis: 1) health and nutrition,
evaluation criteria;
2) education, 3) water, sanitation and
• Based on collation and analysis of
hygiene, 4) child protection 5) social policy
relevant data and information,
and social protection and 6) adolescent
generate evidence, conclusions and
participation and development.
key lessons and make recommenda-
tions to improve the response in Syria
Given the protracted nature of the crisis,
and similar responses elsewhere and
UNICEF has a dual focus of direct life-
in the future.
saving assistance and multi-sector
resilience-strengthening through partners
There are also corporate requirements for
and field offices, in line with efforts to
an evaluation of the response in Syria. The
strengthen nexus-oriented programming.
2018 UNICEF evaluation policy states that
the responses to protracted humanitarian
Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the Level 3 Humanitarian Crisis in Syria 130
crises ought to be evaluated every three • UNICEF Syria cluster and coordination
years.140 An evaluation of the UNICEF leads responsible for contributing
response in Syria was last undertaken to the humanitarian country team-led
in 2015.141 Additionally, an audit of the interagency humanitarian response in
Syria country office, conducted in 2019, Syria
reinforced the need for a corporate
evaluation of the response. It indicated Beyond UNICEF and its immediate
that the evaluation should review “the stakeholders, the report should be
effectiveness of UNICEF management of interest to all actors who share
structures and arrangements in the scope responsibility and concern for the welfare
of the Level 3 global evaluation of Whole of of crisis-affected communities in Syria.
Syria response, to identify good practices Ultimately, the evaluation is intended to
and lessons learned that can be applied in benefit people affected by the crisis, and
future similar situations”. above all the children of Syria. The final
evaluation report will be publicly available
Expected users on the UNICEF evaluation page.
The evaluation is primarily intended for
Evaluation scope
UNICEF staff, including:
• UNICEF staff in Syria and the hubs in Key focus areas
Jordan and Türkiye responsible for the The evaluation will focus on the following
programme implementation themes, which will be further specified
• UNICEF staff in the Middle East and during the scoping and inception phases of
North Africa Regional Office the exercise:
(MENARO) (RD office, humanitarian
section and technical sections) and 1 Relevance and appropriateness of
HQ divisions (EMOPS, PG, DAPM, UNICEF strategies and programme
Supply Division, DEDs, etc.) designs to context and needs
responsible for coordinating and 2 Cross-cutting principles (humanitarian
supporting the L3 humanitarian principles, do no harm, gender,
response human rights, accountability, etc.)
140 United Nations Children’s Fund, ‘UNICEF Evaluation Policy’, UNICEF, New York, 2018, https://www.unicef.org/media/54816/file
141 United Nations Children’s Fund, ‘Evaluation of UNICEF’s Humanitarian Response to the Syria Crisis’, UNICEF, New York, 2015, available at: https://
www.unicef.org/evaluation/reports#/detail/744/evaluation-of-unicefs-humanitarian-response-to-the-syria-crisis
Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the Level 3 Humanitarian Crisis in Syria 131
4 Programme performance and what systems are in place to monitor
the situation and UNICEF performance.
5 Coordination and collaboration with
The evaluation will investigate UNICEF
government, local authorities and
leadership of the clusters / areas of
partners in the United Nations system
responsibility (AoR), their coordination
and non-governmental organizations
with other actors, coherence with other
(NGOs)
sectors and implementation. In addition,
6 Quality of supporting functions:
the evaluation will assess to what
supply, human resources (HR),
extent UNICEF has upheld humanitarian
planning, monitoring and evaluation
principles, mainstreamed protection
(PME) (including data quality, needs
and gender, identified, managed and
analysis, programme and end-user
mitigated risk. Finally, it will include an
monitoring, fit-for-purpose reporting)
assessment of the management structures
7 Effectiveness of UNICEF management
and arrangements, and the quality of the
structures and arrangements
supply, HR and PME functions.
8 Risk identification, management and
mitigation Geographic scope
9 Lessons The evaluation will focus on UNICEF
programming inside Syria (including cross-
border operations). Given the scale, extent
Programmatic scope
and duration of the UNICEF response
The evaluation will include an assessment
in Syria and the sub-region, it will not
of the appropriateness of the UNICEF
be possible to evaluate the response in
strategy and programme designs in the
refugee-hosting countries. It is important to
sectors supported by UNICEF, including
consider where UNICEF has not been able
the delivery modalities in the different
to programme, despite the existence of
parts of the country, also for hard-to-reach
humanitarian needs, and why this was so.
populations.
Temporal scope
It will also include an assessment of
The evaluation will consider the UNICEF
coverage, results, effectiveness, quality
response from 2018 to the present.
and efficiency, as well as a review of the
Recommendations will be made based on
quality and use of evidence, assessing
the understanding of the future challenges
how well the response has used previous
likely to face UNICEF and the wider
evidence such as reviews and evaluations
humanitarian system in Syria.
to inform or adapt current programming,
Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the Level 3 Humanitarian Crisis in Syria 132
Indicative evaluation questions • Were targets set proportionate to need,
in light of other capacities, funding
Key evaluation questions (KEQs) will be
and resourcing issues? Was appropri-
further defined once the scope / themes
ate adaptation made to targets as
are agreed upon by the reference group.
needs evolved?
The following questions are indicative. It is
expected that in answering each question, • How appropriate is the UNICEF re-
factors that contributed to strong or weak sponse in the context of the overall UN
performance will be identified. strategy, and the government’s strate-
gy?
0. Introductory question (descriptive) What
has been the UNICEF contribution to the 2. Cross-cutting principles
wider effort to provide vulnerable people
• Has the response been consistent with
inside Syria with assistance? What is the
humanitarian principles?
context for the UNICEF response? How has
• How well has UNICEF mainstreamed
the context affected UNICEF work?
protection (applying the ‘centrality of
protection’ principle), including do no
1. Relevance and appropriateness of strate-
harm?
gies and programme design to context and
• How accountable have UNICEF and its
needs
partners been to affected populations?
• How appropriate are the overall
What has been the extent / quality of
UNICEF strategy and specific pro-
community engagement?
gramme strategies to the context?
• Has UNICEF response been equitable?
• Considering the context and needs,
• Was the Leave No One Behind princi-
were the forms of intervention cho-
ple consistently applied?
sen by UNICEF the right ones (sectors,
sub-agendas)? Did they take account of • Have gender equality, disabilities, pre-
the roles and capacities of other ac- vention of sexual exploitation and
tors? Has UNICEF employed the most abuse and human rights issues been
effective operational modalities? Were properly addressed?
the interventions developed consider-
ing cross-sectoral links and synergies? 3. Programme performance
• What has been the scale, coverage and
• How comprehensive have the situa-
reach of the UNICEF L3 programme
tional and needs analysis underpinning
relative to needs / vulnerability? Were
UNICEF programme and strategy deci-
they adapted to changing needs and
sions been?
context?
Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the Level 3 Humanitarian Crisis in Syria 133
• What have been the main threats • How well have UNICEF implementing
to children’s security, well-being partnerships worked? Does UNICEF
and development in the period have the right partnership model? How
January 2018 to date? well has UNICEF advanced the localiza-
tion agenda?
• How does this break down by
time, location and demographic • How well has UNICEF managed its
group (including location, urban relationship with government and oth-
and rural populations, age group, er stakeholders?
gender)?
5. Quality of supporting functions: opera-
• To what extent did UNICEF deliver
tions, funding, supply, HR, PME (including
against its Core Commitments to Chil-
data quality, needs analysis, programme
dren in Humanitarian Action (CCCs)?
and end-user monitoring, reporting), com-
Where it did not, what were the main
munications
reasons?
• To what extent has HR in Damascus
• Has UNICEF been effective in meeting
and Amman supported the response
its stated programme objectives?
to achieve its programmatic and
• Has the response been timely?
operational needs?
• Has it delivered for the most vulnera-
• To what extent has PME in Damascus
ble groups?
and Amman supported the response
• To what extent has UNICEF contributed
(including data quality, needs analysis,
to resilience of individuals, communi-
programme and end-user monitoring,
ties and systems in Syria?
reporting)?
• How has the supply function
4. Coordination and collaboration with
performed?
government, local authorities and partners
• How have the finance and
in the UN system and NGOs
administrative functions performed?
• How well has UNICEF performed in
• How well has the response
its system-wide coordination roles (in
been supported by fundraising,
leading the clusters co-lead / AoR) and
communications and advocacy?
leadership roles (in influencing the
wider system through advocacy, in- • How well has UNICEF learned from
cluding advocacy for IHL)? past evaluative exercises and reviews?
Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the Level 3 Humanitarian Crisis in Syria 134
6. Effectiveness of UNICEF management remote interviews); ongoing / scheduled
structures and arrangements exercises, such as the ongoing review of
the coordination for the Whole of Syria,
• To what extent have the management
being implemented by the global cluster
structures and arrangements enabled
coordination unit (GCCU); as well as the
the most effective response?
resilience evaluation being implemented
• How well has cross-border
by the Syria CO. While these exercises
programming worked?
respond, by design, to different information
needs and objectives, the evaluation will
7. Risk identification, management, and
make sure to harness information that will
mitigation
be yielded by these exercises.
• How well has UNICEF identified,
managed and mitigated risks to the
Methodology and approach
response, to the programme and to
Given the combined accountability and
the affected populations, children in
lesson-learning purposes of the evaluation,
particular? Has this been reactive or
a balance will need to be struck between
proactive?
independent scrutiny and participatory
approaches. With respect to the latter,
8. Key lessons
a relatively high level of participation
• Overall, what are some of the most
is anticipated in terms of feedback and
important lessons from programming
discussion of interim and final findings and
in Syria?
recommendations. That said, the intention
is not to produce a consensus report, but
rather one that reflects the judgement of
Special considerations
the evaluation team, fully informed by
The design of the evaluation will pay evidence and feedback.
due consideration to other ongoing
evaluative exercises / reviews that have The precise evaluation questions to be
been undertaken in the past. This is to answered and the methods for answering
avoid duplication and maximize the work them will be determined during the
already undertaken. Those undertaken inception phase, but overall, the evaluation
include the Syria Corporate Review (2019); will employ a mixed-method approach,
the Evaluation of UNICEF’s Coverage using qualitative and quantitative
and Quality in Complex Humanitarian techniques and triangulation of data to
Situations (of which Syria was a case compile a robust and credible evidence
study country through a desk review and
Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the Level 3 Humanitarian Crisis in Syria 135
base in order to assess the UNICEF documents is being compiled, and
response to the Syria crisis at the global, compilation will continue during the
regional and country levels. It is expected inception phase.
that the evaluation will use the following
methods at a minimum: • Surveys: Short online surveys will also
be designed and will be directed at two
• Key informant interviews and focus main stakeholder groups: UNICEF staff
group discussions: The evaluation team (including relevant staff in field offices
is expected to interview or conduct focus who because of time constraints may
groups with key informants in person or only be reached to a very limited extent)
remotely. Key stakeholders will include, and UNICEF partners.
but not be limited to, UNICEF staff in
Syria, Gaziantep, and Amman hubs, • Direct observation (if possible): To the
regional office, headquarters; cluster / extent that the situation allows, the
AoR members and partners (including evaluation team will undertake field
UN and NGO partners), donors, and, visits to observe the UNICEF response
if possible, national and sub-national directly and conduct interviews with
authorities and members of the affected communities and affected populations
population. Specific protocols for the to determine their view of UNICEF
consultations will be designed by the programmatic and operational
evaluation team based on the UNICEF responses. Methods for consulting
Procedure for Ethical Standards effectively with affected populations will
in Research, Evaluations and Data need to be developed in consultation
Collection and Analysis. with UNICEF staff and partners in the
relevant locations, with a particular
• Formal desk review: In addition to focus on the ‘do no harm’ principle, i.e.,
rapid review of data in the scoping and ensuring that the safety and security
inception phases, the evaluation team of beneficiaries and partners is not
will conduct a systematic and detailed compromised by any actions on the part
desk review of documents, data and of the evaluation team.
other inputs, including from surveys.
The evaluation team will use appropriate The evaluation will be conducted in
data collection tools to organize the the proposed phases as follows (to be
information, in collaboration with the discussed and finalized by the reference
Evaluation Office, DAPM, EMOPS, group):
SD and PG. A reference library of
Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the Level 3 Humanitarian Crisis in Syria 136
Phase 1: Scoping phase / Inception phase Phase 2: Field mission / data gathering /
(May–June 2021) analysis / preliminary briefings (July–
August 2021)
The scoping phase will involve consulta-
tions with key internal and external stake- This is the main data-gathering phase.
holders in the Syria country office (SCO), The timing, schedule and itinerary will be
hubs, MENARO, and at headquarters (HQ) agreed with the regional office (RO) and
(including staff from EMOPS, PD, DAPM, CO(s). Given COVID-19 travel restrictions,
PPD, SD) concerning the purpose and es- the situation will be assessed to deter-
sential elements of the evaluation, together mine if it will be possible to undertake any
with a preliminary desk review of the avail- travel (either within Syria, to Amman or
ability of relevant data and documentary Gaziantep). It is envisaged that the field
evidence. component should commence in the first
week of June and last for approximately
This phase will enable the evaluation team three weeks. Based primarily on key infor-
and UNICEF to reach a common under- mant interviews, focus-group discussions
standing as to the nature of the task, the and direct observation and documentary
questions to be addressed, the sources and review, the team should by the end of this
methods to be used, and the outputs to be phase have produced a preliminary briefing
delivered. It will also enable the evaluation report for discussion with UNICEF staff. The
team to undertake initial consultations purpose of this is two-fold: (i) to feed into
with key informants, and also to review the relevant strategic planning and policy re-
available data and documentary material, view processes; and (ii) to provide an initial
including material generated in the scoping basis for validation of findings.
phase.
Prior to the writing of the preliminary brief-
The primary output from this phase will be ing report, a presentation on the initial find-
an inception report, a draft of which will ings should be given, and it is envisaged
be circulated for comments internally, and that a discussion of these initial findings
this will form the mutually agreed basis for with UNICEF staff in the sub-region should
conducting the evaluation. It should include help inform the writing of the preliminary
a contextual analysis and an evaluation briefing report.
matrix detailing the questions to be asked,
together with related indicators and likely The main outputs from this phase will be:
sources of verification. (i) a presentation on the preliminary brief-
ing from the field mission; and (ii) a prelim-
inary briefing report.
Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the Level 3 Humanitarian Crisis in Syria 137
Phase 3: Validation of findings and produc- The consultants will be responsible for
tion of first draft report (Aug–Sept 2021) compiling feedback in the form of a com-
ment matrix for each round of consultation.
This phase is intended to allow time for
more detailed follow up on key areas of the
Phase 5: Dissemination (Nov. onwards)
evaluation, cross-checking and validation of
the provisional analysis from Phase 2, and The team will make a presentation to
filling of gaps in documentation, key infor- communicate the findings, conclusions
mant interviews and other consultations, and recommendations of the evaluation,
including with HQ staff. This phase should to facilitate strategic reflection on the re-
also allow time for conducting and ana- sponse and to discuss the uptake of les-
lysing the results of a survey (or multiple sons learned and recommendations. One
surveys) on relevant aspects of the UNICEF or more facilitated, participatory workshops
response. During Phase 3, a draft of the will be conducted with staff from the re-
evaluation report will be prepared. gional offices, country office and hubs,
potentially also including key UNICEF part-
The main output from this phase will be a ners. This is subject to further discussion
first full draft of the evaluation report as a with the regional offices and country offices
basis for consultation. at the inception phase and later stages of
the evaluation.
Phase 4: Consultation on draft report,
revision and production of final report (Oct– The outputs for this phase are a summary
Nov 2021) PowerPoint presentation and the delivery
of the workshops.
This phase allows for full consultation
with internal stakeholders on the draft
report. Two main rounds of consultation
Limitations and anticipated challenges
and revision are envisaged (second draft,
third draft). This phase will also involve a
There are several limitations, such as the
recommendations workshop in which the
potential inability of some members of the
team will present the findings, conclusions
evaluation team to travel to Syria and field
and tentative recommendations and lead a
locations due to safety concerns, COVID-19
discussion among key stakeholders.
and the issuance of visas, the lack of access
and availability of data in emergency con-
The main output from this phase is the
texts and the need to balance timeliness
production of a final evaluation report that
with depth of information and well-sub-
takes due account of feedback received.
stantiated findings. Additionally, limited
Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the Level 3 Humanitarian Crisis in Syria 138
internet access and available technologies • Relevant ALNAP guidance for
may limit use of collecting data remotely. evaluation and real-time evaluations of
humanitarian action;147 results-based
Norms and standards management principles (theory of
Guidance documents mentioned below are change applied in the emergency should
those that the evaluation team is expected be determined by the evaluation team).
to comply with:
The inception report and relevant data
• Evaluation Office standards and collection tools will, if necessary, undergo
sector-wide standards for independent ethical review by an ethical review board.
evaluation of humanitarian action142
Management and governance arrange-
• United Nations Evaluation Group
ments
(UNEG) Norms and Standards for
The UNICEF Evaluation Office will manage
Evaluation in the UN System 2016143
the evaluation, in close collaboration with
(including impartiality, independence,
the CO, RO and key HQ divisions concerned
quality, transparency, consultative
with the Syria crisis. A senior evaluation
process);
specialist, supported by an evaluation
• UNEG ethical guidelines for UN
specialist, will manage the evaluation
evaluations;144
process, under the guidance of the UNICEF
• UNICEF ethical guidelines and standards
Director of Evaluation. The Evaluation
for research and evaluation;145
Office will commission a team of external
• UNEG guidance on integrating human consultants to undertake the evaluation.
rights and gender equality and UN
System-Wide Action Plan (UN-SWAP) on A reference group for the Syria
gender equality;146 humanitarian evaluation will be established
142 L3 evaluations are included in the Plan for Global Evaluations, 2018–2021, which makes provision for evaluating Level 3 emergencies from the
corporate level, given the substantial investments being made by UNICEF in humanitarian action.
143 United Nations Evaluation Group, ‘Norms and Standards for Evaluation’, UNEG, New York, 2016. Available at: http://www.unevaluation.org/document/
detail/1914.
144 United Nations Evaluation Group, ‘Ethical Guidelines’, UNEG, New York, 2008. Available at: http://www.unevaluation.org/document/detail/102
145 United Nations Children’s Fund, ‘UNICEF Procedure for Ethical Standards in Research, Evaluation, Data Collection and Analysis, 2015’, UNICEF, New
York, 2015, https://www.unicef.org/supply/files/ATTACHMENT_IV-UNICEF_Procedure_for_Ethical_Standards.PDF
146 United Nations Evaluation Group, ‘Integrating Human Rights and Gender Equality in Evaluation’, UNEG, New York, Available at:
http://www.unevaluation.org/document/detail/1452.
147 https://www.alnap.org/system/files/content/resource/files/main/alnap-evaluation-humanitarian-action-2016.pdf
https://evaluation.msf.org/sites/evaluation/files/real_time_evaluations_of_humanitarian_action.pdf
Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the Level 3 Humanitarian Crisis in Syria 139
at the outset of the evaluation to ensure Timeline
the relevance, accuracy and credibility and
Task/Deliverable Timelines
therefore the utility of the exercise. The
reference group will serve in an advisory
capacity and its main responsibility will be Concept Note/Draft ToR drafted January 2021
to provide feedback on the main evaluation
deliverables. The reference group will be
Set-up of RG and discussions
chaired by the Director of Evaluation, with
(with COs, RO and HQ
membership composed of members from divisions) on the evaluation March 2021
scope/approaches/KEQ, etc
the CO, RO and a few HQ divisions. A
(and finalization of draft ToR)
terms of reference outlining the roles and
responsibilities of the reference group will
be shared. Evaluation team recruited April 2021
The UNICEF RO and CO will be kept
informed of the evaluation progress on a
regular basis by the regional evaluation In-depth scoping/inception May 2021
advisor and the multi-country evaluation
specialist.
Field mission/data gathering/
preliminary briefings– Syria,
Deliverables June-July 2021
Türkiye and Jordan (as
The team will be responsible for the situation allows)
following deliverables.
• Draft inception report (include a context Validation of findings, analysis, August-
and production of first draft
analysis and evaluation matrix) and final September 2021
report
inception report
• Draft evaluation report, final evaluation
Consultation on draft report,
report October-
revision and production of final
November 2021
report
• Slide deck, recommendations workshop
• Summary of evaluation report in
a PowerPoint presentation, final
November 2021
Other dissemination activities
presentation onwards
Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the Level 3 Humanitarian Crisis in Syria 140
Annex 2. Evaluation Matrix
Overall evaluation questions
How well has UNICEF served the best interests of children (short and longer-term) across the whole of Syria since 2018?
What has been the main added value of UNICEF interventions? What can be learned from this for the future of UNICEF
work in the country, region and globally?
Question Indicators, metrics &
Main question Sub questions/topics Sources
Number lines of enquiry
A. Evolution of Syria context, priority issues for children and the operating context (appropriateness and relevance)
A.1.1 Political and security context
A.1
Including the course of conflict,
geopolitics and international
interventions, human rights issues
How has the general Syria country
context evolved over (i) the A.1.2 Demographic context
Documentary review:
decade 2011–2021, (ii) evaluation Including population distribution, Relevant national and sub-national
Multiple sources,
period (2018 to date)? displacement, ethnicity, age and demographic, socio-economic,
including CPDs, HRPs,
gender profiles, etc. health and social welfare systems
external sources
Distinguishing WoS, GCA and A.1.3 Social and economic context data
non-GCA over these periods Including comparison of pre-war
(MIC) with current (LIC) context
A.1.4 Changes in capacity of
relevant systems (health, education,
etc.)
Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the Level 3 Humanitarian Crisis in Syria 141
• Relevant development baseline
data (e.g. literacy, school
A.2.1 Health attendance, infant / maternal
A.2.2 WASH mortality, household income
A.2.3 Nutrition and asset levels, etc.) – most
How has the humanitarian
A.2.4 CP and GBV recent/reliable, noting data gaps
context evolved, specifically for As above, plus HNOs,
A.2.5 Education and ADAP issues
children and women? Needs and • Evolution of priority needs, UNICEF PSNs, UNICEF
A.2 A.2.6 Social protection
vulnerabilities. threats and vulnerabilities 2018 Situation Analysis
(across all sectors) 2018 – of Children and Women
Including issues related particularly
Across WoS, NWS and NES present. Including health,
to displacement (IDPs)
nutrition, CP, GBV, education
• Changing levels of access to
services / effective protection /
social welfare systems
A.3.1 Evolution of humanitarian
space / access options since 2018? • Comparison of humanitarian
A.3.2 The role and structures of the operating context (i) pre- and
UN and international organizations post-2018; (ii) since 2018
How has the context for (including WoS) • Comparison of UNICEF WoS Document review
humanitarian intervention by A.3.3 Patterns and levels of structure with those of other UN of FTS, UN/OCHA
A.3
international and national/local international funding and in-kind agencies documentation, KIIs,
organizations evolved since 2018? support (including COVID-19) • Humanitarian funding trajectory partner survey
A.3.4 The role and capacities of since 2018 and likely future
local and national civil society orgs • Changes in access /security
(including cross-border)
Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the Level 3 Humanitarian Crisis in Syria 142
• Funding patterns and trends
over evaluation period – overall
and by sector. UNICEF future
funding prospects
• Limits imposed by donor
funding conditionality and
areas of non-funding
A.4.1 Funding constraints and
% funding 2018–2021 by (i) whole • Fundraising constraints and the
programme and (ii) sectors splitting of funds between SCO
and XB Documentary review:
A.4.2 Challenges related to donor
What have been the main funding conditionality and areas of • Effect of gov’t partner approval KIIs, fundraising
A.4 operating challenges for UNICEF work not funded delays on programme documentation,
implementation review of PDs, partner
and its partners? A.4.3 Operational challenges for
survey, UN +other
UNICEF (including access, permits) • Effect of government influence
documentation
on inter-hub cooperation
A.4.4 Other implementation
challenges for UNICEF (including • Ability to communicate
identification of suitable partners) between hubs while managing
data security
• UNICEF reputation amongst
donors.
• WoS management structure.
• Internal delays re: signing of
LTAs
Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the Level 3 Humanitarian Crisis in Syria 143
B. UNICEF strategy, needs assessment, planning and programme design (Relevance, appropriateness, coverage, equity, coherence)
B.1.1 What role has UNICEF played
B.1 in Syria over the evaluation period
(2018 to date)? How consistent has
this been with the organization’s
mandate, corporate commitments
• Judged against UNICEF
and global strategic plans?
mandate, GSP, CCCs and the
Has UNICEF found the right
B.1.2 How well has UNICEF used
context
role for itself in Syria over the UNICEF plans/
its strengths and comparative
evaluation period? How well did strategies, HRP, cluster
advantages relative to other
its strategy support this? Was • Comparison with other UN strategies, JOP plans,
agencies in Syria? Where and how
the response consistent with agencies’ role and approach contextual information
did it add most value? Where did it
UNICEF global and regional from UN sources, CCCs,
add least value?
commitments? KIIs
• UNICEF comparative advantage
B.1.3 Has UNICEF had a clear
vs. others’ capacities, gaps,
strategy for its programme
For WoS + GCA/non-GCA
opportunities
(including WoS)? How well suited
has this been to the context?
B.1.4 How have the role and strategy
evolved since 2018? Where are they
now heading? Are they going in the
right direction?
B.2.1 What has been the essential
B.2 logic of the UNICEF approach in
Syria? Has this proved sound? Does
Has UNICEF programme logic
it still hold good? Strategy and planning
been clear, cogent and based on
• Analysis of logic as it appears documents (CPDs, JOP,
realistic assumptions? B.2.2 Has there been a clearly
from strategy and planning PSNs, HACs, sectoral
articulated logic for interventions in
documents (CPD, JOPs, etc.) strategies, PPTs for
Has the programme been (i) GCA, (ii) non-GCA, (iii) WoS?
planning meetings)
internally coherent and has it been
B.2.3 How well designed was • As above plus HRP, HAC, etc. CCCs, partner survey,
harmonized between GCA/NWS/
the UNICEF programme and its AAP documentation
NES?
component parts? To what extent
were communities and partners
engaged in the design process?
Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the Level 3 Humanitarian Crisis in Syria 144
B.2.4 Specifically, have there been
clearly defined goals, objectives and
strategies for:
o Child protection and GBV
o Social protection
o Education and ADAP • Analysis of sector logic as it
o Health and nutrition appears from PSNs, etc.
o WASH
B.2.5 Was the programme logic
sound in each case? On what
assumptions was it based, and did
these prove realistic?
B.3.1 How well has UNICEF
B.3
assessed and monitored needs and
vulnerabilities since 2018?
• Regularity of sectoral
B.3.2 Given the assessment of
assessments
priority needs, how well fitted to
Context analysis
the context were the organization’s
overall and sector-specific • Quality of UNICEF PDM reports. (sources as above)
Has the UNICEF programme been UNICEF plans/strategies
objectives/ outcomes and outputs?
relevant and appropriate to the (as above), KIIs, partner
B.3. How coherent was the overall • Quality of TPM activities and
evolving context? survey
programme? Were the sector reporting
interventions designed in such a
What has been the quality of Assessment reports
UNICEF needs assessment and way as to take account of related • Access to and awareness levels PDM reports
situational monitoring? sectors? Were these inter-linkages of programmatic activities TPM reports
made explicit in assessments
Site visit reports
and designing the programme
• Comparison of needs and SitAns
components?
programming
B.3.3 Has the UNICEF programme
been more than the sum of its parts?
What has been its added value
across sectors?
Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the Level 3 Humanitarian Crisis in Syria 145
B.4.1 What was the programme
B.4
balance between GCA and non-GCA
areas? And within those areas by
sector, geography, demography,
How well balanced and etc.? Did this properly reflect priority • How well have XB and XL
harmonized has the UNICEF needs and vulnerabilities? activities been reported on?
programme been over the
B.4.2 What was the balance
evaluation period? As between
between different programming • Comparison of needs and Needs assessments
GCA and non-GCA?
modalities: service delivery (direct/ programming (OCHA, ACPAS, HNO,
indirect), technical advisory, others), UNICEF
What has been the balance of
capacity-building, system • Analysis of various modalities reporting (COAR,
the UNICEF programme over the
strengthening, policy advice, SitReps, InSight), KIIs
evaluation period between areas,
advocacy, etc. (categories to be
demographic groups, sectors • Evidence of harmonization
agreed – probably just 3 or 4). Did
of intervention and operating between GCA, non GCA
this reflect UNICEF comparative
modalities?
advantage and added value?
B.4.3 How well harmonized was the
programme as between GCA and
non-GCA (X/B & X/L) components?
B.5 B.6.1 Has UNICEF prioritized its
interventions in appropriate ways,
given limited resources and access?
Has UNICEF target setting and
B.6.2 What has been the coverage
prioritization been appropriate in
of assessed needs through the • Analysis of needs, targets,
the light of priority needs, gaps KIIs, HNOs,
UNICEF programme? results overtime
and available resources? UNICEF planning
B.6.3 To what extent has UNICEF
documentation, EL/FB
addressed the needs of the most • Comparison of programme
How good has been the coverage results table
vulnerable children and women? design with 2010 and 2020 CCCs
and equity of response by UNICEF
and partners? B.6.4 Did the programme design
and targets properly reflect
UNICEF commitments in the Core
Commitments for Children?
Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the Level 3 Humanitarian Crisis in Syria 146
B.6.5 Were targets set by UNICEF
appropriate, realistic and
proportionate to need, in light of
other capacities?
B.6.6 Was appropriate adaptation
made of targets in response to
changing needs or other factors?
How was this affected by funding,
resourcing, access or other issues?
B.6 • Evidence of strategic changes as
a result of review processes.
What have been the main lessons
arising from UNICEF strategy and • Changes in programmatic focus Review meeting reports
programme design since 2018?
• Changes in implementation
methodologies
C. Programme performance and impact (Quality, results, effectiveness)
C.1.1 Results against targets (%),
C.1 by sector/programme component
and for whole programme annually.
What have been the reasons behind
target achievement or shortfall in
each case?
To what extent has UNICEF met its EL/FB results table + JD
targets and programme objectives C.1.2 Results against objectives Analysis against output and outcome results table (from HAC,
since 2018? By sector? (outputs and outcomes) indicators, analysis of contributing AWPS, SitReps), KIIs,
C.1.3 What has been the real world factors, bottlenecks TPM reports, partners
For WoS + GCA/non-GCA impact in each sector? What is the reports
quality of evidence UNICEF has for
this?
C.1.4 Where has UNICEF been
unable to achieve its objectives, why
has this been?
Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the Level 3 Humanitarian Crisis in Syria 147
C.2 C.2.1 To what extent did UNICEF
deliver against its own CCCs?
What have been the main
C.2.2 What have been the main Compare programme design/plans
challenges to delivering against See B.2.6 above, KIIs
constraints to fulfilling these (B.2.6 above) with actual delivery
the CCCs?
commitments, and how effectively
were these addressed?
C.3.1 How accountable have UNICEF
C.3 and its partners been to affected
populations? Were there effective
How accountable and responsive
feedback mechanisms? What have
has UNICEF been to affected Evidence of AAP in UNICEF AAP documentation,
been the common concerns of
populations? To what extent documentation, evidence of KIIs, partner survey
beneficiaries? How well has UNICEF
has it engaged communities AAP data used to adapt/design
responded to beneficiary feedback?
in programme design and programming See B.2.3 above
C.3.2 What has been the extent and
implementation?
quality of community engagement
in programme design and
implementation?
• Judged against UNICEF HPM
C.4 C.4.1 How well has UNICEF
and other monitoring standards
monitored programme
and indicators
implementation and the work of its See B5 above,
partners? Including through TPM. • Quality of UNICEF PDM reports.
PDM reports
C.4.2 Specifically, how effectively • Quality of TPM activities and
has UNICEF monitored the quality of reporting
How good has UNICEF TPM reports
programme implementation? What • Access to and awareness levels
programme monitoring, reporting
quality assurance measures has it of programmatic activities
and quality assurance been? Site visit reports
adopted? Have they worked?
• Donor satisfaction re: reporting
C.4.3 What controls have been put received. AAP documentation
in place to ensure the effectiveness
• Appropriateness of AAP
of UNICEF monitoring processes, KIIs
activities and their effect on
particularly with respect to cross-
programme implementation
border and cross-line activities?
modalities.
Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the Level 3 Humanitarian Crisis in Syria 148
C.4.4 How has UNICEF acted on
the results from its own and third
party monitoring? Has it led to
programme adjustments?
C.4.5 What has been the quality of
What have been the main reporting from UNICEF, its partners
challenges to delivering against and third party monitors?
the CCCs? C.4.6 Have reports been produced on
a timely basis and to the satisfaction
of donor requirements?
C.4.7 What do reports reveal about
the relevance, effectiveness and
quality of related interventions?
C.5.1 How effective has UNICEF
C.5
been as an advocate for children
across the whole of Syria? With
regard to alleviating short-term
threats to children’s well-being and
How effective an advocate has
safety? With regard to child-related Advocacy strategy,
UNICEF been for children in Syria?
policy? In other ways? advocacy materials, KIIs
C.5.2 Has UNICEF had a clear
influencing strategy? How did this
evolve over time? What evidence
does UNICEF have of impact?
C.6
What have been the main lessons
arising from UNICEF programme Evaluative judgment based on
performance and implementation answers to the questions above
since 2018?
Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the Level 3 Humanitarian Crisis in Syria 149
D. Partnerships, coordination and collaboration (Coverage, external coherence, connectedness, efficiency)
D.1.1 What has been the overall
D.1
UNICEF partnership strategy in
Syria? How has this evolved?
D.1.2 What has been the balance • Partner strategy documentation
of partnerships with (i) LNGOs,
(ii) INGOs, (iii) UN and Red Cross/
• The extent to which partners
Crescent agencies, (iv) Government
have extended programmatic
ministries or local authorities? How
coverage.
did this change over the evaluation
period? What is the appropriate
Partner review
• Quality of partner performance
future balance?
documents
What has been the UNICEF review documentation and
D.1.3 Overall, does UNICEF have
partnership strategy and balance protocols
the right partnership model? What Partner reports
of partnerships?
have been the challenges to finding
• Quality of partner reports and
appropriate partners and how has KIIs
For WoS + GCA/non-GCA the extent of programmatic
UNICEF addressed these? To what
achievements
extent has UNICEF been able to Partner survey
advance the localization agenda?
• Achievements of partner
D.1.4 How well have UNICEF
capacity building activities
implementing partnerships
worked in practice to deliver the
programme? • Partner feedback on UNICEF
support
D.1.5 Has UNICEF been a good
partner? How well has it supported
implementing partners? To what
extent has it helped build capacity?
Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the Level 3 Humanitarian Crisis in Syria 150
D.2.1 How effectively has UNICEF
D.2
collaborated with GoS bodies
(central line ministries, governorate
and local authorities, other)?
D.2.2 Across WoS, how effective has
UNICEF engagement been with local
How effective and appropriate
governing authorities in GCA and
has UNICEF collaboration and
non-GCA? Evidence of effective collaboration
engagement with Government KIIs, MOUs
D.2.3 How appropriate has UNICEF with various partners
ministries and other relevant
engagement with state and non-
authorities been?
state authorities been given the
requirements of independence and
impartiality?
D.2.4 How should UNICEF seek to
shape its future engagement with
state and non-state authorities?
D.3 D.3.1 How well has UNICEF
collaborated with other UN agencies
in Syria on agendas of shared KIIs, documentation of
How well has UNICEF collaborated concern? joint work, HCT meeting
Evidence of collaboration
with other UN agencies? D.3.2 What further areas of minutes, cluster
effectiveness
collaboration might better enable meeting minutes/
UNICEF to address the priority needs decisions
of children and women?
D.4.1 Extent and effectiveness
D.4
How successful have UNICEF and Community
of community mobilization and
its partners been in community mobilization and
outreach approaches?
mobilization, outreach initiatives outreach documentation
D.4.2 Extent of use of volunteers and
and working with and through
local committees? Effectiveness of
local volunteers? Partner survey
this approach?
Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the Level 3 Humanitarian Crisis in Syria 151
• Timeliness of procurement and
E.2
delivery to destination.
Procurement
• Significance of any pipeline documentation
E.2.1 How well has the UNICEF
breaks on programme
supply function serviced the needs
How well has the UNICEF supply implementation. Delivery analysis
of UNICEF and partners by sector of
function worked to support the
activity (health, education, etc.)?
programme? • Timeliness of LTA signature Pipeline break analysis
E.2.2 Are there ways in which the
processing
UNICEF supply function in Syria
For WoS + GCA/non-GCA LTA signature tacking
could be made more efficient and
documentation.
effective? (Including X/B and X/L) • Identification of other operation
constraints related to supply/
KIIs
logistics, e.g. transportation
across lines/border,
warehousing, etc.?
E.3.1 Extent of use of C4D and C4D programme
E.3 How well has UNICEF used C4D
awareness-raising campaigns progress reports
and awareness-raising campaigns
E.3.2 Evidence of effectiveness of
to support programmes?
these approaches? KIIs
Finance and budgetary
• The timely availability of annual
E.4
analysis reports
plans and variance analysis
reports.
E.4.1 Finance and control function HACT documentation
• Timeliness of cash transfers to
How well have the general E.4.2 Risk management, including partners and sub-offices.
Annual risk assessment
finance, financial control and operational risk and due diligence in
• Efficiency and effectiveness of reports
risk management functions partner selection
HACT procedures management
performed?
E.4.3 How well has UNICEF Due diligence protocols
• Effectiveness of risk analysis
managed the PSEA agenda?
protocols and procedures
PSEA procedures,
• Extent of PSEA implementation
protocols, and update
and adoption
reports
Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the Level 3 Humanitarian Crisis in Syria 152
D.5 D.5.1 How well has UNICEF
performed in its system-wide
coordination roles (as cluster / AoR
lead or co-lead)?
D.5.2 Did UNICEF have to step in as
provider of last resort in any case, or
Cluster documentation
To what extent has UNICEF should it have done so?
(meeting minutes,
provided system-wide leadership D.5.3 How well has UNICEF
strategies) KIIs, HCT
on coordination of response and coordinated its own activities with
documentation, partner
child-related agendas? those of other actors (strategy,
survey
design, implementation)?
D.5.4 How effective has the UNICEF
leadership role been (in the UNCT
and more widely) in influencing
the humanitarian and longer-term
agendas in the interests of children?
E. Management, operations and support functions (efficiency and control)
• The extent to which having
E.1
L3 status has facilitated staff
E.1.1 Have staffing levels been recruitment.
adequate for the programme
and support functions? Have
• Timing and efficiency of staff HR documentation
deployments been timely?
How well has the UNICEF HR recruitment.
function worked to support the E.1.2 Has UNICEF found the KIIs
programme and its operational right balance of temporary/surge
• Appropriateness of staff
needs? and longer-term deployments? Annual reports
deployed
International and national staff?
Audit reports
E.1.3 Was the right mix of skills and
• Staff turnover rates
experience achieved?
• Staffing of UNICEF-led clusters
Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the Level 3 Humanitarian Crisis in Syria 153
• Timeliness of procurement and
E.2
delivery to destination. Procurement
documentation
E.2.1 How well has the UNICEF • Significance of any pipeline
supply function serviced the needs breaks on programme
How well has the UNICEF supply Delivery analysis
of UNICEF and partners by sector implementation.
function worked to support the
of activity (health, education, etc.)?
• Timeliness of LTA signature
programme? Pipeline break analysis
E.2.2 Are there ways in which the processing
UNICEF supply function in Syria
For WoS + GCA/non-GCA • Identification of other operation LTA signature tacking
could be made more efficient and
constraints related to supply/ documentation.
effective? (Including X/B and X/L)
logistics, e.g. transportation
across lines/border, KIIs
warehousing, etc.?
E.3 E.3.1 Extent of use of C4D and C4D programme
How well has UNICEF used C4D
awareness-raising campaigns progress reports
and awareness-raising campaigns
E.3.2 Evidence of effectiveness of
to support programmes?
these approaches? KIIs
Finance and budgetary
E.4 • The timely availability of annual
analysis reports
plans and variance analysis
reports.
E.4.1 Finance and control function HACT documentation
• Timeliness of cash transfers to
How well have the general E.4.2 Risk management, including partners and sub-offices.
Annual risk assessment
finance, financial control and operational risk and due diligence in
• Efficiency and effectiveness of reports
risk management functions partner selection
HACT procedures management
performed?
E.4.3 How well has UNICEF Due diligence protocols
• Effectiveness of risk analysis
managed the PSEA agenda?
protocols and procedures
PSEA procedures,
• Extent of PSEA implementation
protocols, and update
and adoption
reports
Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the Level 3 Humanitarian Crisis in Syria 154
• How well has the current WoS
E.5
structure managed to date?
E.5.1 How appropriate, effective and
efficient have the WoS management • What future structure would
arrangements been? Do they remain be most appropriate for future
fit-for-purpose? contextual and programmatic
Have UNICEF management
E.5.2 How well has planning realities? Audit report
structures and arrangements
and management of the cross- • What factors are stopping the
enabled the most effective
border and cross-line work been current structure from being KIIs
response?
harmonized with that of GCA- effective?
related programme? Have these
• How and where are current
strands been effectively brought
programmatic and operation
together in an integrated plan?
activities consolidated? How
effective are such processes?
• To what extent has fundraising
E.6
been able to meet funding
requirements (SCO and XB)?
Funding figures by
• What factors have affected this?
sector by year (SCO and
How could this be improved?
XB)
How well has the response been E.6.1 Fundraising • How well have UNICEF been
supported by fundraising and able to retain major doners?
E.6.2 Communications Donor KIIs
communications?
• To what extent has the
communications function Donor survey results
contributed to donor
satisfaction, and kept donors and
other stakeholders up to date
with UNICEF activities?
Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the Level 3 Humanitarian Crisis in Syria 155
E.7 Previous evaluation
reports
Audit reports
How well has UNICEF learned Examples of changes made as a
Management feedback
from past evaluative exercises, result of evaluation/audit feedback
documentation
audits, reviews and other studies? and recommendations?
Peer meeting review
documentation
KIIs
F. Cross-cutting issues
F.1 F.1.1 Has the response of UNICEF
and its partners been consistent
with core principles of humanitarian
action?
F.1.2 Has the response been
consistent with other key principles
How well has UNICEF learned
(including do no harm and centrality
from past evaluative exercises,
of protection)?
audits, reviews and other studies?
F.1.3 How well has UNICEF applied
the principles of equity and Leave
No-One Behind?
F.1.4 How well has UNICEF
addressed gender and other human
rights issues?
Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the Level 3 Humanitarian Crisis in Syria 156
F.2 F.2.1 What is the UNICEF approach
to resilience, recovery, the HPD
How well has UNICEF learned Context analysis (See
nexus? Analysis of context and UNICEF LHD/
from past evaluative exercises, above), CPDs, HACs,
F.2.2 How appropriate is this resilience programming
audits, reviews and other studies? KIIs
approach, given the context and
outlook for Syria’s future?
F.3
COVID-19
How well has UNICEF responded Evidence of appropriate and effective
documentation, KIIs,
to COVID-19 and its impacts? response to COVID-19
partner survey
Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the Level 3 Humanitarian Crisis in Syria 157
Annex 3. List of Words Cited
Christou, W. and K. Shaar, ‘2021 Budget Reveals the Depth of Syria’s Economic Woes’,
Atlantic Council, December 2020
Concord Consulting, ‘Post-Conflict Recovery in Syria: Orientations for UNICEF’s
contribution’, Concord Consulting, 2017
Gobat, J. and K. Kostial, ‘Syria’s Conflict Economy’, working paper WP/16/123,
International Monetary Fund, Washington, D.C., June 2016
Mehchy, Z and R. Turkmani, ‘New Consumer Price Index Estimates for Syria Reveal
Further Economic Deterioration and Alarming Levels of Humanitarian Need’, conflict
research programme policy briefing, London School of Economics and Political
Sciences, London, January 2020
Physicians Across Continents and United Nations Children’s Fund, ‘Standardized
Expanded Nutrition Survey (SENS) Final Report: Idleb and Aleppo governorates,
Northwest Syria’, PAC and UNICEF, Ankara, June 2021
Reuters, ‘Syrian Pound Hits New Low in Contagion from Neighboring Lebanon’s
Currency Crisis’, March 2021
Reuters, ‘Turkish Lira Slump Hits Displaced Families in Syria’s Northwest, December
2021
Syrian Centre for Policy Research, ‘Confronting Fragmentation: Impact of Syrian
crisis report’, February 2016. World Food Programme, ‘Hunger, Poverty and Rising
Prices: How one family in Syria bears the burden of 11 years of conflict’, WFP, Rome,
November 2021
United Nations, ‘Syria War: Average of one child injured or killed every eight hours over
past 10 years’, https://news.un.org/en/story/2021/03/1087212
United Nations, ‘Strategic Framework for Syrian Arab Republic, 2022–2024’, United
Nations, Damascus, 2022
Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the Level 3 Humanitarian Crisis in Syria 158
United Nations Children’s Fund, ‘HRP Sector Plans 2019: Provision of primary health
care services for vulnerable children and women in Syria’, UNICEF, New York, 2019
United Nations Children’s Fund, ‘Social Policy: Cash transfer programme for children
with disabilities’, UNICEF 2019
United Nations Children’s Fund, ‘Country Office Annual Report, UNICEF Syria’, 2019–
2021, UNICEF, Damascus
United Nations Children’s Fund, ‘Humanitarian Performance Monitoring Framework,
UNICEF Syria’, 2019–2021, UNICEF, Damascus
United Nations Children’s Fund, ‘Every Day Counts: Acute malnutrition in northeast
Syria’, UNICEF, 2020
United Nations Children’s Fund, ‘Procedure on Ethical Standards in Research,
Evaluation, Data Collection and Analysis’, UNICEF, New York, 2021
United Nations Children’s Fund, ‘Media Monitoring Snapshot: Foreign children In
northeast Syria,’ UNICEF, New York, September 2021
United Nations Children’s Fund, ‘UNICEF Partnership and Resource Mobilization
Strategy’, UNICEF, New York, 2021
United Nations Children’s Fund, ‘Strategic Shift Think Pieces’ for child protection,
education, health, nutrition and WASH, UNICEF, March 2022
United Nations Children’s Fund, ‘Resource Mobilization Strategy for Syria’, UNICEF,
New York, 2022
United Nations Children’s Fund, ‘Whole of Syria Coordination Review’, summary note,
UNICEF, Amman, January 2022
United Nations Children’s Fund, Draft Syria Country Programme, UNICEF, Damascus
United Nations Children’s Fund, ‘UNICEF Syria Programme Strategy Note: WASH’,
UNICEF, Damascus, undated
Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the Level 3 Humanitarian Crisis in Syria 159
United Nations Children’s Fund, ‘UNICEF Syria Programme Strategy Note: Health and
nutrition’, UNICEF, Damascus, undated
United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, Humanitarian Data
Exchange, Geneva, https://data.humdata.org/dataset/idmc-idp-data-for-syrian-arab-
republic
United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, ‘Syrian Arab
Republic: Euphrates water crisis and drought outlook as of 17 June 2021’, Geneva, 2021
United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, ‘Humanitarian
Response Plan for the Syrian Arab Republic’, 2015¬–2021, Geneva
United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, ‘Humanitarian
Needs Overview for the Syrian Arab Republic’, 2015¬–2021, Geneva
United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, ‘Syrian Arab
Republic: Needs and Response Summary, February 2021’, Geneva, 2021
United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, ‘Situation Report
May 2022’, Geneva
Whole of Syria Inter-Agency PSEA Network, ‘SEA and Humanitarian Assistance:
Household perceptions of favors in exchange for aid’, October 2020
Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the Level 3 Humanitarian Crisis in Syria 160
Photo credits:
Cover © UNICEF/UN0603139/Belal
Page v © UNICEF/UN0581830
Page viii © UNICEF/UN0679733/Chnkdji
Page xii © UNICEF/UN0648537/Chnkdji
Page xv © UNICEF/UN0635286/Shahan
Page 1 © UNICEF/UN0603203/Deeb
Page 8 © UNICEF/UN0581829
Page 10 © UNICEF/UN0581822
Page 11 © UNICEF/UN0405699/Akacha
Page 15 © UNICEF/UN0405681/Akacha
Page 20 © UNICEF/UN0587770
Page 23 © UNICEF/UNI326166/Albam
Page 30 © UNICEF/UN0659946/Souleiman
Page 34 © UNICEF/UN0645410/Souleiman
Page 35 © UNICEF/UN0603200/Deeb
Page 39 © UNICEF/UN0581299/Almatar
Page 44 © UNICEF/UNI285786/Akacha
Page 47 © UNICEF/UN0686700/Deeb
Page 54 © UNICEF/UN0635235/Souleiman
Page 63 © UNICEF/UNI310482/Al-Issa
Page 66 © UNICEF/UN0634998/Belal
Page 69 © UNICEF/UN0710285/Souleiman
Page 75 © UNICEF/UNI326166/Albam
Page 79 © UNICEF/UNI322624/Al-Issa
Page 82 © UNICEF/UN0401441/Aldroubi
Page 89 © UNICEF/UN0645413/Souleiman
Page 92 © UNICEF/UN0646049/Janji
Page 97 © UNICEF/UN0647264/Deeb
Page 104 © UNICEF/UN0704623
Page 108 © UNICEF/UNI325078/Albam
Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the Level 3 Humanitarian Crisis in Syria 161
October 2022