Source: UNICEF Uruguay®
Evaluation of ‘Digital bridges for equity
educational ’
Final Report
BRA10-846-38689/2021 contract
1
Thanks
The evaluation team thanks all and all those that contributed to this evaluation. The
Evaluation was carried out with the invaluable help of UNICEF Uruguay and Ceibal staff. His
Availability, commitment, knowledge, advice and comments made this evaluation possible.
The evaluation benefited from the contributions of many other interested parties, including teachers,
Students, workshops and directors of educational centers. His contributions were critical for the
work of the evaluation team and are deeply appreciated.
Technical file
Evaluation equipment
Cristian Maneiro - Evaluation Expert
Isabel Farah Schwartzman - Digital Education Expert
João Mesquita - Team Leader
Sofia Doccetti - Education and Evaluation Expert
Quality review
João Mesquita - Team Leader
Matías Dodel - Quality Control
Project Manager
João Paulo Cavalcante
2
Executive summary 5
1. Introduction 7
2. Object of evaluation and its context 8
3. Framework and evaluation methodology 19
3.1 Purpose, objectives and scope of evaluation 19
3.2 Evaluation frame 20
3.3 EVALUATION METHODOLOGY 21
3.4 Ethical considerations 23
3.5 Limitations and mitigation measures 24
4. Findings and data analysis 24
Relevance 24
Effectiveness 30
Coherence 39
Gender and Equity 42
Innovation 44
5. CONCLUSIONS, LESSONS LEARNED AND RECOMMENDATIONS 47
6.1 Conclusions 47
6.2 Lessons learned 49
6.3 Recommendations 50
6. Bibliographic references 52
Internal supplies for evaluation 52
Public Access References 52
Appendices 55
ANNEXES LIST 64
3
Acronym and abbreviations
ANEP National Public Education Administration
Assistance Committee for the Development of the Organization for Cooperation and
OECD BAD ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
CEI CEIBAL in English
CFE Education Training Centers
CERTI Reference Center in Technology for Inclusion
DGEIP General Directorate of Initial and Primary Education
DGES General Directorate of Secondary Education
DGETP General Directorate of Professional Technical Education
Dua Universal Learning Design
EDPD Teaching Professional Development Strategy
Kpi key performance indicator
MEC Ministry of Education and Culture
MoOCs open and massive online course
OA learning object
PPP PowerPoint
Area open educational resources
UNICEF United Nations Fund for Children
USD American dollar
4
Executive summary
Between October 2021 and December 2022 CEIBAL and UNICEF Uruguay implemented the project
"Digital bridges for educational equity." The initiative, supported by financing from the
UNICEF Innovation Office aims to expand the scope of CEIBAL in Uruguay from
equitable way, increasing the collection and use of platforms and other digital resources to
enhance inclusive and quality education for all. To expand Ceibal's work areas
With innovative practices to reach the most vulnerable children and adolescents, the project
promoted the expansion, inclusive accessibility and innovation of several CEIBAL interventions, five
of which they are subject to this evaluation.
The purpose of the evaluation was to generate evidence and facilitate learning on which
interventions and actions of the Digital bridges initiative work, which do not work, and why,
seeking to expand and reinforce the scope of CEIBAL among the most vulnerable children and adolescents.
The evaluation was also proposed to document and evaluate how the project promotes solutions that
can be replicated in other contexts, particularly in Latin America, from the evaluation of
Accessibility interventions, open educational resources (REA), Language Line (Language Projects
Itinerant and tongue bridges), CEIBAL in intensive English (intensive CEI) and strategy of
Professional Teaching Development, implemented within the framework of the initiative.
The evaluation was carried out by an external evaluation team between October 2022 and May 2023,
and was guided by the criteria for evaluation of relevance, effectiveness and coherence, as well as in
Transversal criteria: gender, equity and innovation. Considering the objectives of the evaluation and the
Innovative character of the interventions that make up the project, was adopted as a general framework
the development evaluation approach and a focus focused on use. Through methodologies
Participatory The evaluation team facilitated the joint evaluation reflection with CEIBAL and UNICEF
Uruguay, and adapted the methodology based on its usefulness for the main users. In terms
From data collection and analysis techniques, a mixed method strategy was adopted, applying
The documentary review, in -depth interviews with directors and teachers, focal groups with
teachers and students, and construction workshops for change theories of the five
interventions
Evaluation data allow you to extract some conclusions
● The design of digital bridges, and the logic of intervention, are consistent with the objectives of
the initiative and with the purpose of improving access to quality education;
● Interventions are adequate to facilitate access and use of platforms and tools
learning/teaching digital, having spread numerous tools and
digital platforms;
● Digital bridges, and their interventions, are based on a robust diagnosis of
needs that allowed the definition of specific measures to face each of
Those barriers, looking for their overcoming and contributing to higher quality education, more
equitable and innovative;
● Interventions and actions supported by digital bridges have contributed in a way
consisting to improve teaching and learning practices among teachers and students of
the different educational centers and levels of Uruguay;
● The support processes implemented were adequate and contributed to the effectiveness of
the implementation and effective use of platforms and digital tools, although there are
relevant improvement points;
5
● Initiative interventions have contributed, although modestly, to increase
the coverage and scope of existing platforms and tools; All interventions of
Digital bridges have a high potential to be replicated in other contexts, even
internationally;
● Digital tools and platforms developed and/or disseminated in the bridge framework
Digital are an important support as a complement to face -to -face teaching;
● The interventions have allowed to guarantee more equitable access to an education of
quality, favoring the participation of educational communities away from cities, and
students with greater socioeconomic vulnerability;
● The innovation process that emerges from the initiatives supported by digital bridges and
which reaches educational practices in general in Uruguay, it develops in response to
Specific and relevant problems and through pilot interventions.
In line with the main findings and conclusions of the evaluation, recommendations are made
For the following schools, or for possible interventions expansion plans, namely:
● Proceed to a clear definition of the required conditions or assumptions necessary to the
successful implementation of each of the interventions;
● Create articulation instances not only "inside", but also "between" the different
Digital bridges interventions, as well as with other bad programs and platforms
CEIBAL;
● The implementation strategy of each intervention can be adjusted to the characteristics,
specific conditions and needs of each context/educational center;
● Implement an impact assessment that allows to know, qualify and quantify the
structural and long -term changes generated or influenced by the project;
● Carry out a detailed study on the barriers that limit the coverage and scope of the
platforms and tools in each of the interventions and contexts/centers
educational;
● Generate active and passive listening instruments, which allow detecting changes in uses
and valuations of key educational platforms as CREA;
● Define and/or clarify them criteria for prioritization of the most vulnerable audiences;
● Make a diagnosis of specific needs and related challenges or barriers
with gender issues;
● Develop a strategic plan for the replication of each of the interventions.
This report indicates the main findings, conclusions and lessons learned from evaluation and
Identify specific recommendations for the future improvement or expansion of the bridges project
digital The report includes a specific chapter to analyze the evaluation data, organized
according to the evaluation criteria defined by the terms of reference.
6
1. Introduction
This document accounts for the evaluation of the project “Digital bridges for equity
educational ”, initiative developed jointly between CEIBAL and UNICEF between October 2021 and
December 2022 in Uruguay. The project aimed to expand the scope of CEIBAL in a way
equitable, increasing the collection and use of platforms and other digital resources among children,
vulnerable girls and adolescents. In addition, it sought to generate resources that contribute to replication
of the CEIBAL model in other Latin American countries.
The project, which promoted solutions supported by digital technologies to enhance a
Inclusive and quality education, was the only one in the region selected by the Innovation Office
of UNICEF1 (of a total of 35 to global level) to obtain USD 1,500,000 financing no
refundable for the development of your activities.
The initiative sought to promote the development of digital educational solutions and generate conditions for
an inclusive and quality education. It was structured in three major components - understanding,
expand and replicate - for which specific objectives were defined:
1. Component I (Understand) - Identify and understand the main barriers that prevent
that Ceibal reaches all children and adolescents, focusing on continuity
Educational of the most vulnerable people.
2. Component II (expand) - reinforce and expand the equity dimension through design and
The implementation of interventions - pilot experiences - that respond to barriers
identified.
3. Component III (replicate) - generate and make available a model that allows installing the
Bases to replicate - totally or partially - the strategies developed by CEIBAL in other
countries in the region.
The main purpose of the evaluation was to generate evidence and facilitate learning which
interventions and actions within component II (expand) work, which are not, and why,
seeking to expand and reinforce the scope of CEIBAL among the most vulnerable children and adolescents.
The evaluation was also proposed to document and evaluate how the project promotes solutions that
They can replicate in other contexts, particularly in Latin America.
To achieve the objective of component II, the project is structured in specific interventions.
This evaluation encompasses the 5 interventions of this component, namely:
● Accessibility
● Open educational resources (REA)
● Language line (itinerant language projects and bridges for the approach to the tongue)
● CEIBAL in intensive English (intensive CEI);
● Teaching Professional Development Strategy
Considering the objectives of the evaluation and innovative nature of the interventions that
They make up the project, the development evaluation approach was adopted as a general framework
Formalized by Michael Quinn Patton (2010), who describes this approach as an option that
fundamentally responds to the context of the intervention. This option is justified because the
Evaluation in Development (ED) is an evaluation methodology that aims to help
1 https://www.unicef.org/innovation/
7
Social innovators who develop social change initiatives in complex environments or
uncertain, as is the case of the project.
The evaluation was carried out by an external consultant, Eval2 Plan. The evaluation process began
In October 2022 and activities for data collection were completed in February 2023. All
The evaluation was based on participatory processes in which the project team was involved (of
the different interventions), teachers, students, CEIBAL referents, workshops, teams of
inspection, directors of educational centers and the UNICEF team responsible for the follow -up
of the project. For that, in -depth interviews, focus groups, review were conducted
documentary and secondary data analysis, as well as workshops for construction of the theories of
Change of each of the interventions.
This report contains an executive summary, an introduction chapter, a chapter detailing the
object of the evaluation and its context, a chapter where the framework and methodology of the
evaluation, a chapter with findings and data analysis for each evaluation question (organized
by evaluation criteria) and a final chapter where the conclusions, lessons are presented
learned and evaluation recommendations. In addition, the report has the identification of
the bibliographic references analyzed, appendices3 and annexes.
2. Object of evaluation and its context
Context
The Oriental Republic of Uruguay is a country located in the southern cone of Latin America. Is the second country
smaller in South America with a territorial extension of 176,215 km2. According to institute data
National Statistics (INE) in the last population census of 2011, in the country there were 3,286,314
population. As indicated by its name, it is a subdivided presidential republic in 19
departments, being Montevideo with 1.3 million people, the capital of the country. 94.9% of its
population concentrates in urban areas (INE, 2011)
Uruguay is characterized by being one of the countries in the region with the greatest per capita income, low
levels of inequality and poverty, and almost the absence of destitution (World Bank, 2019). Under him
INE income calculation to measure poverty, in 2022 it was estimated that 9.9% of the population were
found below the poverty line (LP) 4. The population percentages under the line of
poverty are higher for children and adolescents: 19.7% in children under 6 years, 18.0% from 6 to
12 years and 16.2% from 13 to 17 years.
During the 2020s and 2021, the Covid-19 pandemic drastically modified the form of
School organization worldwide, giving way to distance education periods, semi
2 consulting company dedicated to the monitoring and evaluation of programs of public interest, which has
offices in Sao Paulo (Brazil) and in Brussels (Belgium). For this evaluation the team was composed by a team
Leader, two experts in evaluation and an expert in digital education.
3 Appendices are information that, due to their reduced dimension, are unified to the report, while the annexes
They are documents or information that, due to their great dimension, are attached to the report as separate pieces.
4
https://www5.ine.gub.uy/documes/demograf%C3%ADayeeless/html/ech/pobreza/2022/estimaci%C3%B3n
%20de%20la%20pobreza%20por%20el%20m%C3%a9todo%20Del%20ingreso%202022.html
8
face -to -face and/or face -to -face at different times. Government authorities prioritized the
virtual education to maintain educational continuity, resorting to CEIBAL to accompany the
educational processes. This has gone hand in hand with the implementation of free access policies to
educational platforms and free Internet data provision to facilitate access to
Virtual education from homes during pandemia.
Educational governance in Uruguay is based on a complex system of institutional autonomy. The
Compulsory formal education begins at age 4 and is governed by the National Administration of
Public Education (ANEP), public body with legal status as an autonomous entity that, to
Difference of what happens in other countries in the region, exhibits an important degree of autonomy
of the Ministry of Education and Culture (MEC).
ANEP is responsible for planning, management and administration of public education
National, as well as the regulation and supervision of private education at education levels
initial (preprimary), primary, secondary, technical and teaching levels.
The CEIBAL Plan is a state policy, conceived in 2007 as a plan of inclusion and equality of
Opportunities with the objective of supporting Uruguayan educational policies with technology. According to
Figures published on its official website, in 2022 it provided coverage to 85% of the students of the
Educational System: 100% of public education students from 6 to 15 years and their teachers, thus
as students from private institutions whose educational centers have requested the benefit.5
From the implementation of the CEIBAL Plan, to every boy, girl or adolescent who enters the system
public educational anywhere in the country is given a computer for personal use with
Free Internet connection at school. In addition, CEIBAL provides programs, educational resources and
Teacher training courses that seek to transform teaching/learning processes.
Uruguayan experience shows that the actions and programs developed by CEIBAL have the
ability to reduce the digital divide between children and adolescents and enable educational continuity
during periods of crisis such as COVID-19. However, gaps still persist in access to
learning among students. In 2020, educational separation in Primary Education
increased by two percentage points compared to 2017, while only 1% of children
From the highest income quintile, this figure rises to 5% of the poorest quintile
(INEED, 2021) 6. In addition, as reported by teachers by 2020, in full pandemic, 23%
of students did not maintain contact with the school or secondary (figure that increases to 40% if
we consider only secondary education). The participation of students in Secondary Record
Also very high levels of inequality: between the first and the last quintile of vulnerability
Social, participation varied between 28% and 61% (ANEP, 2020) 7.
The factors that explain the unequal participation of the students are multiple: problems of
Internet connection among some students; need for greater support from their families to
continue their educational path in a virtual way, and impossibility of families to accompany the
educational processes. Likewise, some teachers still have difficulty proposing and
5 https://ceibal.edu.uy/datos/ceibal-en-cifras/
6 INEED 2021: www.ineed.edu.uy/images/aristas/publicaciones/aristas2020/aristas-2020-primer-informe-de-
RESULTS-OF-TERCERO-Y-SEXE-DE-EDUCACION-PRIMARIA.pdf
7 Educational Situation In the context of the Health Emergency Teaching Survey - ANEP, 2020.
https://observatorio.anep.edu.uy/sites/default/files/arch/ed_informer%20encuesta%20Docente%20anep%20
-%2015%20de%20Julio%20v2.pdf
9
implement their practices in virtuality (optimizing the use of educational platforms
existing).
Although some of these factors have been evidenced in the different surveys conducted
During pandemia (ANEP, 2020), there is still a great emptiness of knowledge about the different
barriers that prevent the full participation of students, in particular of those who are
They find in a situation of greater socioeconomic vulnerability. It is precisely in this
Context that the digital bridges project arises, as an experience to learn from politics
public of CEIBAL and to generate interventions in areas where there are barriers for a
Use at a larger scale of technology in education.
Evaluation object
The evaluation object is the “digital bridges for educational equity” initiative, implemented
by Ceibal and Unicef Uruguay. The same ambition becomes a road map for education
national and other countries in the region, generating evidence on how Ceibal, as a center of
Innovation with digital technologies at the service of the educational policies of the Uruguayan state, uses
Digital platforms and resources to enhance inclusive and quality education for all,
including vulnerable children and adolescents. The initiative proposes three components around
to which the developed actions are structured and operationalized:
● Component 1: Understand. Understand the evaluation of the main barriers and gaps
in the scope of CEIBAL among all children and adolescents, and the design of
recommendations to improve scope;
● Component 2: Expand. It implies the expansion of some of CEIBAL's work areas
with innovative practices to reach the most vulnerable children and adolescents;
● Component 3: Replicate. The documentation and construction of a repository of the
CEIBAL model so that other countries can replicate it.
The evaluation focused mainly on component 2. This component involves work
In the territory, in coordination with the National Public Education Administration (ANEP) for
Expand the scope of CEIBAL and give better answers to the most vulnerable students, who by
Various reasons have not been able to access a quality education.
To achieve its objectives, the project is structured in interventions that have purposes and
specific audiences. The evaluation focused on the 5 project interventions within the framework of the
Component 2:
1. Accessibility
From the barriers identified in the diagnosis, developed in component 1, the line of
Accessibility seeks to meet the following problems:
● Inequity in access, use and appropriation of digital technologies in the processes of
Learning for students with disabilities. Non -accessible digital devices
generate the impossibility of use and appropriation of technology in students facing
to motor, visual and/or cognitive barriers.
10
● The lack of knowledge, competences and skills for the integration of technologies
digital in a framework of inclusive education do not allow adapting the proposals
Socio -educational to students with disabilities.
● Lack of data, systematized and available information about people facing barriers
or with disabilities.
The general objective of the intervention is to collaborate with the development of an inclusive education that
guarantee communication, participation, autonomy and educational accessibility through
Digital technologies for all students.
The specific objectives are:
● Expand the number of digital ramps8 available, as well as the amount of suitcases9,
guaranteeing a jurisdiction, covering the entire country;
● Support training in the use of digital ramps and in the valuation that teachers perform
About students to detect which is the most adjusted digital ramp;
● Disseminate the work done by CERTI10 - CEIBAL in the educational community through
Campaigns, presence on websites, in territory, among others.
The program makes the delivery and/or replacement of digital ramps and devices to students with
disability or that face barriers to learning. This requires a process of
Information survey, assessment, delivery and training of students, teachers and families.
From the CEIBAL CERTI, it is sought: advise on replacement for accessibility equipment; develop
training and dissemination lines aimed at granting tools and methodologies that allow the
Accessibility and inclusion in educational contexts (eg Universal Learning Design - DUA); trigger
Practice communities to promote inclusive education and integration of digital ramps;
initiate a process of construction and consolidation of a student database that
They face barriers in the use of technology, generate information about the use and appropriation of
digital ramps that students have; Implement improvements in CBOARD.11 software
As for training instances, the program considers two types of training/training:
● Personalized training, understood as the instance in which the teacher is accompanied
For a referent of CERTI, forming work teams. Each instance of analysis and
8 Digital ramps are technological, hardware or software resources, which have the purpose of facilitating
access and use of technological tools to people who face access, use and barriers
learning and thus promote its inclusion, accessibility and learning. Some examples can be keyboards
Expanded, buttons, joysticks type mouse, among others.
9 The traveling suitcase seeks to bring technological tools closer to Uruguayan public educational institutions and thus
facilitate access to CEIBAL devices, favoring in a timely manner to those students who
They face motor, visual and/or cognitive barriers. More information:
https://blogs.ceibal.edu.uy/formacion/certi/#valija
10 CEIBAL CERTI is the reference center in technology for inclusion and aims to overcome or reduce
Barriers for learning and participation through technology. CERTI CEIBAL works with teachers and
students with disabilities and those who face barriers who prevent or hinder their
full participation in education. More information: https://blogs.ceibal.edu.uy/formacion/certi/
11 cboard is a software type ramp that offers an increaseive and alternative communication system
(CAA) to be able to give voice to those students who need it, attending them in communication to
through several options (symbols, text conversion to audio and vice versa, among others).
11
evaluation where a teacher is involved is training it in the subject so that in
future valuations may have the necessary tools. Anyway, it is not expected
that the teacher performs the assessments on their own, but that from Certi Ceibal continues the
accompaniment. This modality reached 330 teachers from all
departments of the country, mainly in initial and primary education;
● Group formations:
○ About suitcase12 through workshops, courses, conferences, webinars, etc. Through
These instances in 2022 were formed more than 1,500 teachers.
○ In accessibility, workshops and conferences taught during the school event
Summer, webinars on specific topics, and a specific course on inclusion
where content, practical applications and examples are presented to the
inclusive education through technology (it had 3 editions during
the year of 2022).
For this type of training - group formation - there is a goal raised in the end of 2023 of
reach at least 3,000 unique teachers trained (Project Report Valijas, 2023).
The target audience of the accessibility line are students with disabilities, teachers with
Disability or who work with students with disabilities and students of the students.
Regarding its coverage, the Traveling Tour
by CEIBAL with reach in some educational centers. In 2022, under the support of the initiative
It expands throughout the country through the purchase of ramps and the distribution of 23 suitcases in all
Anep jurisdictions. In addition to the above, in the second semester of 2022, its
Implementation with the hiring of a team of territorial references that articulate the work
with the referents of the educational centers. These teams drive and promote the project
accompanied with a communication and dissemination strategy. With data updated to January 16,
2023, the number of unique beneficiaries of the program amounts to 838, corresponding in its
majority (87%) to delivery or replacement of equipment and to a lesser extent to advice (16%), being
These non -exclusive options.
The accessibility change theory, developed during the evaluation process, is available
In Appendix 2.
2. Open Educational Resources (REA) 13
Open educational resources or "REA" (in English: Open Educational Resources, "Oer") are
teaching, learning, evaluation and/or free access materials that have been
published under intellectual property license that allows its use, adaptation and distribution
No charge14. Ceibal has an online repository of this type of resources.
12 teachers trained so that they can carry out the assessment processes to students, accompanied by
Certi-Ceibal reference.
13 Open educational resources are “learning, teaching and research materials, in any
format and support, of public domain or protected by copyright and that have been published with a
open license that allows access to them, as well as their reuse, conversion, adaptation and redistribution
at no cost by third parties ”(UNESCO, 2019).
14 https://rea.ceibal.edu
12
The general problem that seeks to solve with the intervention open educational resources (REA) is
The difficulty by teachers for the identification and design of educational resources
digital, as well as their application in teaching practices. In addition, we seek to bring the
Proposals for teacher training to the needs of teachers in the classroom.
From the developed diagnosis, the barriers to be attended are:
● Difficulty on the part of teachers for the identification and design of educational resources
digital, as well as for their application in teaching practices.
● Teachers and managers interviewed demand contextualized training opportunities
to the different subjects, with concrete situations of use.
● Tendency to the design of proposals by teachers, who do not promote the
interaction, contextualization, or collaboration, assuming the role of repositories
Waterholes.
● Under the domain of technology and little use of the REA repository by teachers.
The objectives of the intervention are: the democratization of access to open educational resources
by the entire educational community (more inclusion, more resources, better access, free access);
that teachers incorporate the use of area in their educational practice on a daily basis; foster the
Valuation of collaboration and philosophy of the open by teachers; Strengthening
of meaningful learning experiences in their students; The extension of the number of
Open educational resources available in the REA repository; that Ceibal is recognized as
International Rea reference; and that teachers turn their learning and new resources in
Your teaching practices.
The intervention in the framework of digital bridges contemplates two lines of work:
● At the level of the REA repository, it seeks to expand existing resources, advance in greater
Site accessibility level, and order its code to make it available to others
countries. Among these resources, the creation of 30 videos associated with themes of the
Primary education and secondary education curriculum, accompanied by use planning
for teachers;
● At the level of training instances, the proposal “Contest with course” 15 is implemented, for
promote the design and use of open educational resources, and the knowledge and use of the
REA repository. Such contest was accompanied by meetings/training instances
Optional on REA licenses, instructional design, and open educational practices, in which
Participants were trained in the creation and implementation of learning objects
In the classroom.
The target population of this intervention are teachers and teacher training students.
The REA change theory, developed during the evaluation process, is available in the
Appendix 3.
15 https://blogs.ceibal.edu.uy/formacion/concurso-con-course/
13
3. Language line (itinerant language and bridges to approach the tongue)
The language line (denomination adopted for this evaluation) is composed of two
pilot interventions directed to language learning: itinerant language; and bridges for the
Language approach. Together, interventions seek to solve the following problems:
● Lack of identity of the language as its own resource that enables creativity, the
imagination, socio -emotional well -being and community participation;
● Difficulties in the development of communication skills that allow participating in
social practices of the language that are part of the various situations and contexts of the
human communication;
● Reduced interest of young people for reading;
● Inequities in the development of communicative competence and digital competence that
they hinder access to learning in general, citizenship construction and integration
sociocultural;
● Difficulties for the implementation of didactic strategies with technologies integration
digital in the approach to the tongue focused on competencies;
● Low appropriation of techno-pedagogical tools for reading mediation
autonomous, critical and ethical;
● Low link between the selected contents for teaching and consumption
Cultural students.
A. itinerant language seeks the promotion of creativity through music, theater,
photography, or drawing, stimulating new ways of learning about the language through
Art and where students acquire an active role as forgers of the language.
An intervention consists of 3 stages and the development of a digital heritage is proposed:
● Stage 1: Program launch: face -to -face event that brings together activities, workshops and
shows around the language, literature and expression of the word, oriented to
teenagers from all over the country;
● Stage 2: Program: five weeks of work with educational centers, through a series
of activities aimed at working with teenagers and generating a final product to
present at the closing event. Each center will start from local referents and
Community proposals;
● Stage 3: Program closure: Festival format show where participants take
The word and expose their live productions: Slam, Freestyle, Microteatro, etc.;
● Digital heritage: acquisition of children's and youth narrative audiobooks, narrative texts
incorporated into the country library as input for the mediation and appropriation of the language.
Acquisition of didactic bibliography to complement the proposals of the program with
Theoretical materials that support teacher training.
The target audience of traveling language are teachers and students participating in the program and the
Educational community in general recipient of the digital heritage. As for the implementation,
works mainly with cellular devices due to the privileged use of the cameras of
Photos and WhatsApp, as well as (to a lesser extent) to some CEIBAL platforms
As Crea and Library Country.
14
B. Bridges for the approach to the tongue seeks to attend barriers and difficulties in the
implementation of didactic strategies with integration of digital technologies in the
Competency -centered language approach; the low appropriation of techno-
pedagogical for the mediation of autonomous, critical and ethical reading; and the little linkage
Among the contents selected for the teaching and cultural consumption of
students.
It is proposed, from two teacher training journeys and their corresponding application in the classroom,
The transformation of educational practice in educational centers. In both cases it is expected that
Teachers reach a disciplinary update around language teaching, literature
and the development of socio -emotional competencies. These journeys seek to facilitate appropriation
techno-pedagogical and the construction of didactic strategies linked to the development of the
Communicative competence and digital competence of your students:
● Ecuánime reading16: It consists of 3 lines of work that propose an education in citizenship
Through narratives and emotions:
a) Asynchronous virtual course for teachers, available in CREA (30 hours);
b) Workshops aimed at teachers (12 hours);
c) Text curatorship and elaboration of educational materials.
Image 1. Tour of the Workshops Cycle
Source: Systematization by Udelar
16 This journey is based on the book “Ecuánimes readers: a citizen education through the
narratives and emotions "in charge of Dr. Helena Modzelewski and her team of specialists.
15
● Mediation of digital reading (15 hours): Asynchronous virtual course in CREA that introduces
teachers in the concept of digital reading competence and the necessary strategies for
Develop it in your students. An approach to reading mediation is intended
digital that fosters transversality, informational literacy and thought
critical.
The target audience of bridges for the approach to the language are the teachers who are in
Exercise this year and actors working in educational centers (directors, attached,
reference figures) 17.
The language change theory, developed during the evaluation process, is
Available in Appendix 4.
4. CEIBAL in Intensive English (Intensive CEI)
This intervention seeks to solve intermittent teaching situations (situations where a
high teaching absenteeism and continuity is affected in the dictation of courses) in secondary education
English during the school year and tries to meet three main problems:
● Lack of English teachers nationwide;
● Low exposure to curricular contents by students (opportunities for
learning) because of teaching absences during the school year;
● Difficulties for the development of communicational skills in foreign language and for
Autonomous work of students.
The general objective of the intervention is to prototype and document a pilot experience of teaching
remote in secondary education, to generate inputs that allow to replicate and/or adapt the model to
future (scalability potential).
The specific objective is to strengthen the teaching of English in secondary education through a
specific solution that addresses the lack of teachers, and the intermittent teaching problem in
certain secondary education contexts (specific strategy that reinforces the offer of
Conversation Class18 implemented in secondary education by CEIBAL).
The implementation takes supplies of the proposal that CEI (CEIBAL in English) offers in Secondary
(Conversation Class), but increases the amount of weekly hours to four. As a pilot, I know
proposes the award of an English remote teacher who will work three times a week in
synchronous form together with a teacher or reference of the institution (secondary) who is not a teacher of
English. During the 4th hour of work (asynchronous) 19, tasks are assigned for students
Complete, accompanied by the reference figure of the institution, which can be an attached, the
Director or a teacher of another subject. For this modality, in addition to the remote English teacher
and of the reference teacher in the institution, the internet is required to connect the remote teacher, a
TV, videoconference system, and computers for students to work on activities.
17 Coverage was 13 teachers for the Equanime Reading Workshops cycle, 60 for the reading course
Ecuánime (128 registered) and 68 for the case of mediation of digital reading (198 inscribed).
18 https://ingles.ceibal.edu.uy/media
19 both the 4th hour and the activities carried out in the proposal were carried out mostly in
Create.
16
The work modality consists of a hybrid (remote/face -to -face) approach system of the
Contents of the language, where the English reference teacher participates, under the role of teacher
remote (provided by CEIBAL) and the teacher or institutional reference of the center, whose role is associated
to accompaniment and to guarantee the appropriate working conditions in the institution.
At the same time, the implementation contemplates the figure of mentors in territory, which visit the
educational centers where the proposal works, to act immediately and
ensure the correct implementation.
The target audience of Intensive CEI were 11 groups of secondary education students,
identified and designated by English inspection following the problem of intermittent teaching.
However, it should be noted that initially the proposal of Intensive CEI was aimed
More groups, which amounted to 100.
Intensive CEI change theory, developed during the evaluation process, is available
In Appendix 5.
5. Teaching Professional Development Strategy (EDPD)
EDPD is an intervention that results from the identification that teacher training alternatives
which offers CEIBAL they are presented in a dispersed way, closely linked to the departments and areas of
work that generates them, responding to the logic of the needs that the different lines of work
They demanded throughout the institutional growth. This reality makes many times to
The teacher is a difficulty to understand what options exist, how they are linked to each other and what
Mode could design a personalized training path. In this way, training would be seen
aligned and according to their needs and interests, and with a degree of flexibility that enables them to
Navigate traffic according to its times and spaces; At times in an assisted manner.
The initial problems found are: teachers declare that they lack strategies that
allow to accompany the needs of each student; teachers have difficulty understanding
What training options exist, how they are linked to each other and how they could design a
personalized training journey; limitations that operate as a barrier to educational equity
(Example: lack of knowledge and conviction of directors about the potential of resources
digital for teaching and learning); Lack of information regarding formations
carried out by teachers (nowadays it is not possible to track the journeys
chosen by teachers, identify profiles or analyze the most and less chosen paths); and missing
of a structured and systematic offer of training in technological and pedagogical innovation
This intervention seeks to enhance professional teaching development through the design of a
strategy - led by the Education Management - that integrates all the training proposals that
From the different areas of CEIBAL they are offered to the teaching community. The main idea is to allow a
easy to understand the journeys by teachers so that they can visualize the
alternatives, choose and motivate to continue with their professionalization.
Fundamental part of this strategy is to strengthen the entire content creation process
developed by CEIBAL through the creation of a new unit: media laboratory. The
same will investigate new formats and means of learning and actively support in your selection,
as well as in its incorporation into the processes of courses and content to offer.
As part of the EDPD, from digital bridges, the following aspects have been worked on:
● Pointeo of initial journeys that would be included;
17
● Incorporation of technological solution for assisted and massive paths (Openedx);
● Design of four formative journeys for pilot test in Openedx: two moocs (course
open and massive online) fundamental for teacher training in regards to the
Educational transformation that Uruguay is traveling: a course on accessibility; and a
Center management course based on data;
● Training to CEIBAL trainers and technicians.
The target audience of intervention are teachers in the exercise of direct and indirect teaching,
Teachers in training, directors, inspectors and content generators / designers of
Learning experiences
The EDPD change theory, developed during the evaluation process, is available in the
Appendix 6.
The following table presents the average contributions made during the year within the framework of the
project and for each of the interventions of component 2. the difference between
The total value obtained from the UNICEF Innovation Office for Project Implementation
(1.5 m USD) and the total presented in the table is due to the fact that the evaluation did not consider all the
Project components.
Table 1. Average total contributions and by intervention included in the evaluation
Lines of work / interventions Uruguayan weights USD
CEI 564 684 13 977
Language 9 490 709 234 919
Accessibility 13 094 287 324 116
REA 3 663 083 90 670
EDPD 4 809 261 119 041
Total 31 622 024 782 723
Source: CEIBAL
18
3. Framework and evaluation methodology
3.1 Purpose, objectives and scope of the evaluation
The evaluation has been developed while they apply, prove and develop innovations in the
previously mentioned interventions. In this sense, the main purpose of the evaluation is
generate evidence and facilitate learning, while aims to contribute to accountability
of the project regarding its objectives by verifying the results, scope and
Project execution processes.
The learning and evidence on the performance of the interventions were presented to the government
from Uruguay (ANEP and Ministry of Education and Culture) at the beginning of the school year in March 202320,
as well as to other UNICEF offices and governments of other countries to inform about forms of
Replicate and implement digital education interventions.
The specific objectives of the evaluation were:
1. Evaluate and facilitate learning on the relevance, efficacy and coherence of
interventions and actions supported by the project to improve and expand the quality of the
education, particularly among the most vulnerable girls and adolescents;
2. Evaluate and facilitate learning how supported interventions address barriers
gender and equity for the access and use of platforms and digital tools;
3. Generate learning on how the project promotes innovation and uses evidence
to adapt the interventions to achieve their objectives.
For each of the interventions they were defined, together with CEIBAL and UNICEF Uruguay,
Specific purposes for evaluation, namely:
Accessibility: Understand paths towards change in teaching and learning practices
from analyzing the development of an inclusive education initiative, which seeks to guarantee
Communication, participation, autonomy and educational accessibility through digital technologies
For all students.
REA: Understand paths towards change in teaching and learning practices, from
Promote strategies for the adaptation and use of open educational resources by the
teachers, qualitatively deepening the uses of the REA in teachers with different levels
of experience.
Language line: Understand paths towards change in teaching and learning practices
of the language from the exploration and analysis of the interventions offered by CEIBAL in this
line.
INTENSIVE CEI: Understand paths towards change in teaching and learning practices
from the documentation of a pilot experience of remote teaching in education context
Medium, generating inputs that allow replicating and/or adapting the future model.
EDPD: Understand the paths towards change in teaching -learning practices from
Release perceptions of teachers who participate in the courses on the new platform.
20 On March 29, 2023, the main results of the evaluation were publicly presented in a
Event organized by CEIBAL and UNICEF in Montevideo.
19
The evaluation was not intended to evaluate the learning results, so the scope of the
evaluation was the set of actions developed by CEIBAL in the framework of the 5 interventions
under analysis in this evaluation.
The temporal scope of the evaluation is the entire period covered by the initiative of digital bridges,
October 2021 as of December 2022. The geographical scope of the evaluation set is
National, although not all lines of the initiative were present throughout the territory.
Accessibility, REA and EDPD covered the entire country, while CEI intensive and the language line
They were more located pilots: CEI in Rivera and Canelones, and Language in Montevideo, San José and
Tacuarembó.
3.2 Evaluation framework
This evaluation was guided by a set of evaluation criteria and key questions to your
inside. These criteria are based on the proposal of the Organization for Cooperation and Development
Economic (OECD) and the Development Assistance Committee (CAD), in particular the criteria of
relevance, efficacy and coherence, as in two transverse criteria: gender and equity and
Innovation.
The questions guided the generation of evidence, evaluation feedback and support for the
Project adaptation. The evaluation questions by criteria were the following:
Relevance
1. How coherent are the design and logic of intervention intervention supported
by digital bridges with their declared objectives and the general objective of the project of
Improve access to quality education for girls, boys and adolescents
vulnerable?
2. To what extent are interventions adjusted for the purpose, that is, adequate and good
adapted to facilitating the access and use of platforms and digital tools of
Learning/teaching by users (for example, teachers, students ...)?
3. To what extent does the evidence available, the interest and priorities of all actors
involved, as well as different school contexts, are taken into account in the designs of
intervention to ensure the expected results?
Effectiveness
4. To what extent interventions and actions supported by digital bridges have contributed
To best teaching and learning practices among teachers and students?
5. To what extent interventions and actions supported by digital bridges have improved
The knowledge, competencies, access and adoption of digital platforms and tools
Among the planned users (teachers, students ...)?
6. How appropriate are support processes (such as teacher training and
teachers mentors) to facilitate the timely and effective use of platforms and
digital tools?
7. To what extent the actions promoted by digital bridges have increased coverage
and scope of existing platforms and tools?
20
8. What interventions or actions supported by digital bridges have a high potential for
be included in the learning portfolio to be replicated in other contexts?
Coherence
9. How well is the use of platforms and digital tools integrated into practices
face/learning face -to -face?
10. How well are the platforms/digital tools and processes of
support in the education system in general?
Gender and equity
11. To what extent do interventions reach the most vulnerable girls, boys and adolescents and
They adequately address your access barriers to quality education?
12. How well are they evaluated, monitor and address through the interventions the
Gender inequalities in the access and use of digital platforms and tools?
Innovation
13. How does innovation in the project be carried out, how solutions are introduced
new or significantly improved in interventions?
3.3 Evaluation methodology
The general methodological orientation of the evaluation was based on the evaluation approach on
Development (ED), for its ability to operationalize evaluation thinking in environments
complex, supporting innovation to guide adaptation to emerging and dynamic realities.
In this approach the evaluation team is an integral part of a team whose members collaborate
To conceptualize, design and test new approaches in a continuous process of improvement, adaptation
and change. This team includes members of UNICEF Uruguay and Ceibal. The main function of the team
Evaluation is to promote and systematize the discussions of the team with questions, data and logic,
facilitating decision -making and innovation development processes.
The evaluation also had an approach focused on use. This means that all stages,
including its strategy, it was flexible and adapted based on its usefulness for users
main. This was particularly relevant in the case of the digital bridges project, since
I was evaluating a program while being implemented and the needs or opportunities
They changed while the activities were developed.
Regarding specific data collection and analysis techniques, a strategy of
triangulation, using mixed methods. This strategy tried to integrate quantitative tools
and qualitative in the collection, analysis and interpretation of the data, with the objective of
take advantage of both approaches, intentionally and planned for
overcome your disadvantages.
The integration of gender issues in the evaluation was investigated in the workshops of change theories if
This dimension was included in the logic of the intervention; For example see if there were barriers
specific, which affect both women and men (who have worse results in the system
educational in general). It also investigated the gender disaggregation of the data of each
Intervention and these data were used when they were available.
21
The techniques implemented were:
• 31 in -depth interviews (teachers, directors, workshops);
• 14 focus groups (students and teachers);
• Documentary review;
• Secondary data analysis;
• 5 workshops for the construction of change theories of the 5 interventions;
• 1 Workshop for validation of preliminary findings.
Taking into account the main purpose of the evaluation, it was necessary to define products
intermediates that were useful to systematize emerging findings of field work. So,
For each of the 5 interventions there was a “Memo” 21 (brief document), which includes the
Methodological and specific data collection design and allowed to systematize the main
Findings of the techniques implemented, as well as the analysis of secondary data. These memos
They also include recommendations to improve their strategies, as a means of supporting the equipment
of the project to understand what adjustments are necessary to increase efficiency, efficiency or
relevance of interventions (individually).
In general terms, the work plan for evaluation was divided into 4 phases:
Phase 1 - Evaluation preparation
Review of the methodological strategy of the evaluation with UNICEF Uruguay and Ceibal; definition of
the products of the evaluation, its function/use and format; definition of common work rules,
report and communication; Definition of the macro calendar of the evaluation, including limit dates
For products delivery, general organization of the data collection phase, definition of the
Sampling to apply for each intervention and validation of interview guidelines and focal groups.
Phase 2 - Data collection for memos of the interventions
Realization of 5 workshops for definition of the theories of change of the 5 interventions; revision
documentary, including documentation of interventions and the project, or as reports of
Complementary consultancies of the project, secondary data analysis (quantitative and
qualitative) and performing interviews and focal groups for 4 of the 5 interventions (REA, Language,
CEI and EDPD) 22; Production and validation of Memms for the same 5 interventions.
Phase 3 - Analysis, triangulation and validation of data and findings
Once all primary data collection activities were finished, everyone triangulation was made
The data (primary and secondary), as well as its analysis. To ensure that the report contains
useful information for all interested parties, and guarantee the efficiency of the final stage of the
evaluation, a workshop for validation of the main findings (Validation Workshop was implemented (Validation
1) in which CEIBAL and UNICEF Uruguay teams participated.
Phase 4 - Preliminary and Final Report
21 Mems constitute an important part of the evaluation results, so they are available as
Annexes to this report.
22 In the case of the accessibility line, primary collection techniques were not applied, because
They analyzed the secondary data provided by the internal CEIBAL team (databases and records), as well as
The contribution of exploratory studies that relieved perceptions of teachers, students and their families.
22
After validated the preliminary findings, the evaluation team developed the version
Preliminary of the evaluation report. In this version, in addition to the responses to the
Evaluation questions, conclusions, recommendations and lessons learned.
UNICEF Uruguay and Ceibal teams analyzed the report and provided feedback to the team
evaluation. A workshop for discussion and validation of the recommendations was also held. By
Project activities programming issues, the public presentation of the main
Evaluation results was done at the end of March, before sending the final report, but
Based on the contents included in the preliminary version of the report and on the comments of
UNICEF Uruguay and Ceibal to this (PPT of the public presentation in annex).
During the entire evaluation process, weekly meetings were held between the team of
evaluation and teams of CEIBAL and UNICEF Uruguay, with the aim of guaranteeing a
close accompaniment of the entire process and anticipate in a reasonable time and useful the needs
of adjustment to the evaluation strategy required by the natural dynamics of the methodology of
evaluation used (development evaluation) and a process focused on the 5 interventions
Innovative in progress.
3.4 Ethical considerations
The evaluation team contemplated the considerations determined by Uruguayan laws, respect
of the right of girls, boys and adolescents, as well as what is defined in international regulations and others
guidelines suggested CEIBAL and UNICEF (such as group evaluation standards and standards
United Nations Evaluation (UNEG)). While the evaluation was implemented with a
Approach focused on the use with continuous participation of CEIBAL and UNICEF Uruguay, the team of
evaluation maintained its independence and impartiality through the review of external equipment to the
evaluation by Plan Eval and the UNICEF Regional Office. The interaction continues between the
Evaluation equipment and main users of the evaluation contributed to credibility and
Accountability. The evaluation team confirms that no member had a conflict of
interest23.
The data of girls, boys, adolescents collected were strictly determined with CEIBAL and
UNICEF as necessary for the purposes of evaluation. Since Ceibal is part of the system
Public Educational, data collection followed the protocols determined by the authorities
educational of the country. It was guaranteed that the identity and responses of the participants remain
anonymous Audio or videoconference recordings were made, explaining their purpose
investigative and requesting prior authorization in the informed consent of participation. These
Data were stored safely.
The informed consent was ensured, which was included in the collection instruments of
information and was obtained verbally (registering consent in the instrument) and/or by
written. Before requesting the informed consent, an explanation was made about the objective that
It has this study, which was also incorporated into all instruments.
23 During the hiring of the evaluation team a team member was replaced by a potential risk
of conflict of interest for his previous work with CEIBAL, thus contributing to the independence of the team.
23
3.5 Limitations and mitigation measures
The main limitations faced by the evaluation were:
• Taking into account that the evaluation was carried out in a close period at the end of the year
Academic in Uruguay, the evaluation team had limited time to collect
data, since in several of the interventions the audiences to consult were only accessible
During that period. To ensure that data collection will respect the requirements
Methodological evaluation, but also involved all the main actors
identified as key informants, two mitigation measures were taken: first
place, priority was given to the data collection of the interventions that were presented more
exposed to this risk; And secondly, a sampling strategy was used by
convenience, which allowed to consult the identified interest groups in a timely manner.
• In the case of accessibility line, and because several previous studies had been carried out
To the evaluation, the evaluation team, together with CEIBAL and UNICEF Uruguay, decided
Base the evaluation on the analysis of the available secondary data. This option allowed the
Primary data collection for all other interventions in a timely manner and
It turned out to be a good option, since the available data were quite complete. Without
However, it was not possible for the evaluation team to perform an additional exercise of
triangulation through interviews or complementary focal groups.
• Another limitation related to the previous point refers to the waiting time of the data
produced by the entities responsible for the aforementioned studies. The process of
Preparation of the reports of these studies was delayed, which forced the evaluation team to
Modify the schedule initially planned for the elaboration of each
intervention.
• In the case of EDPD, at the time of evaluation, many of the training activities
which make up the intervention had not yet been completed. This situation forced the team
of evaluation to carry out the focus groups with the beneficiaries of the various formations
weeks after the collection of data from the other interventions, which delayed the
Production of the final report.
• Finally, and perhaps the limitation with the greatest impact on the results of the evaluation, it fits
point out that the evaluation was carried out when the interventions were still in execution
(some close to its end, but others in a very embryonic phase). Therefore, the data
available on intermediate level changes (outcomes) were limited and hindered the
evaluation of relevant changes in terms of potential impacts on beneficiaries and
in the Uruguay Educational System itself.
4. Findings and data analysis
Relevance
1. How coherent are the design and logic of intervention intervention supported
by digital bridges with their declared objectives and the general objective of the project of
24
Improve access to quality education for girls, boys and adolescents
vulnerable?
The design and logic of digital bridge interventions are consistent with the objectives of the
project and with the ambition to improve access to quality education. Its design is also
adjusted to acting contexts and interventions include in their strategy answers
specific for the needs identified and that are in line with the expectation of the parties
involved.
The definition of the initiative, and the interventions that compose it, was based on a
Effective diagnosis of the main barriers that hinder access to quality education.
Although many of these barriers are not exclusive to the most vulnerable audiences, their overcoming is
fundamental to ensure that these can access, in conditions of greater equity, better
Personal, intellectual, inclusion and professional development opportunities.
The stipulated intervention logic for each of the actions undertaken reflects a
deep knowledge and a consequent adequacy of the measures implemented to the context,
to the intervention sector and the needs and expectations of the parties involved. It is important
mention that, to deal with identified problems, innovative solutions were sought
and that, in theory, they fit the existing resources and the project calendar.
During the initial stage of the evaluation, in which the theory of change of all the
interventions (available in appendices 2 to 6), it was possible to validate, not only the coherence between
initial problems and activities (strategy or intervention logic), but also between problems
initials and sought effects (immediate outcomes) and impacts. That is, the interventions of the
project are, from the point of view of their design, consistent throughout the entire chain of
defined results.
Despite the conceptual adaptation of the intervention logic, its practical application faced
Some challenges that limited its effectiveness and impact potential:
1) the practical application of the strategy designed (conceptualization vs reality);
2) the identification of the necessary assumptions to the implementation of the intervention strategy;
3) the adequacy of measures to prioritize the benefit of the most vulnerable audiences;
4) the inclusion of the gender dimension declared in the intervention strategy;
5) The articulation between project interventions.
While these challenges are transversal to the recipients of all interventions have a
particular effect in relation to the most vulnerable populations.
It can be concluded that the design had a clear approach to democratizing access to an education of
quality, but all the assumptions of departure were verified, which conditioned the effectiveness of the
interventions and the possibility that the most vulnerable could benefit fully from all
the opportunities created by the project. This last aspect is particularly relevant, in the
measure that was the main purpose of the project.
All interventions had a declared approach to reduce particular barriers to groups
more vulnerable. It was directly, by promoting greater equity between
regions of the country (for the benefit of the most remote areas or that face more difficulties) or through
of the creation of better conditions (tools and processes) for people with disabilities
They can benefit from better opportunities and access to quality education. Or form
25
indirect (but objective) through the development of better skills or tools for
Increase the level of teaching and learning processes.
At this level, the adequacy of the defined intervention logic was verified, but the strategy for
Its implementation lacks a better definition of clear criteria for public prioritization
more vulnerable.
On the other hand, the gender dimension was not clearly included in the logic of intervention of the
initiative. It would have been important to identify specific barriers related to gender, which
They can affect not only women but also men, and from them to evaluate the
relevance of defining specific measures.
Finally, although the interventions are consistent with the general objectives of the project,
He verified that digital bridges is more a "federation of interventions", than a project with
Linking between interventions, activities and opportunities. In other words, coherence
between interventions, activities and opportunities "within" (within) of the interventions were not
replicated "between" interventions (Between). That is, from the design the
interventions as actions, in some way, independent and were not considered potential
synergies between their activities and even among its most immediate results and products (outputs)
developed.
2. To what extent are interventions adjusted for the purpose, that is, adequate and
well adapted to facilitating the access and use of platforms and digital tools
Learning/teaching by users (for example, teachers, students ...)?
In general, interventions are adequate to facilitate the access and use of platforms and
Digital tools for learning, but with different levels. While in cases of
EDPD, area and accessibility The dimension of digitalization is very evident, in CEI cases
Intensive and language This dimension was below the initial proposal contemplated in the design.
The two years of pandemic also negatively impact the use of the CREA platform, with a
high level of rejection of the platform by students, aspect confirmed by teachers
and students interviewed, as well as through the secondary data analyzed.
The project developed and led to numerous tools for the use of platforms and resources
digital (in all its interventions), seeking to increase the access and use of these resources in
The teaching/learning processes particularly aimed at students, but also to
Teachers This is recognized as an innovative aspect of the project and valued by all parties
involved in data collection for evaluation.
An important element of the entire intervention strategy is the free nature of all
platforms and tools. Although, throughout the data collection activities
identified several improvement points and design problems of digital tools and
platforms (see Memos for each intervention in annex), in general teachers value in a form
They all positive and recognize having benefited from appropriate support for them to do
a correct use of its potentialities.
From the strategic point of view, the interventions were designed properly to
Facilitate access and use autonomously by teachers. As recommended in
initiatives that seek the introduction of new work tools, the project included a
26
strong formative component prior to the dissemination of digital platforms and tools,
which allowed the development of fundamental knowledge and skills for effective use.
However, many of the people consulted, in particular teachers benefited by more than
An intervention of the initiative, they report that the introduction of digital tools was very
fast and that there was not always time for the appropriation of each of those resources, about
All because they faced several new resources simultaneously. Added to the above, from
The educational centers consulted as a barrier is the lack of time to prepare all the
resources necessary for activities. This situation was repeated by different actors that
They identify that in some centers computers were missing in sufficient number or that connectivity
It was not the best and harms the use of some audio or video resources, which implied periods of
longer adaptation.
Analyzing the particular situation of each intervention, it is verified that in the accessibility line,
Teachers, family and direct beneficiaries positively evaluate the actions implemented in
function of what it represents in terms of digital inclusion. Both teachers and families
They consider that the delivery of digital ramps decreases obstacles and barriers to access to the
Digital Technology (Nomade Community Consulting Report, 2022). The assessment process of
individual needs prior to the allocation and delivery of digital ramps is adequate and allows
An effective response, however it is necessary to review the communication to teachers regarding
Prioritization criteria to access devices/equipment. According to the Nomade report
2022 consulting community, gratuity in the award and delivery of ramps also drives
to greater access to communication, information and educational inclusion of this audience
specific.
In this line, in another report prepared by the Faculty of Psychology of the University of the Republic
In 2022, it is noted that technological accessibility foster by the Digital Rampas initiative
(such as the mouse, the expanded keyboard and the button for students with motor disabilities), has
a strategic character to facilitate access to various content and pedagogical processes, in
particular to students with visual, auditory and motor disabilities.
Regarding the REA line, these resources acquired special relevance in the most acute phase of
Pandemia, where it was necessary to reinforce everything related to virtual resources. Many teachers not
They knew that open resources existed, the fact of knowing them in the pandemic made them follow
using these tools. The resources are considered very valuable for being created by the
Uruguayan teachers who know the educational system. It is valued that they are free as to
the way and way in which they can be used and adapted to the different classroom needs, but
also because they allow expanding pedagogical time since the student can work
autonomously.
Since the perception of teachers, the REAs are appreciated by students under their character
interactive. Motivate learning by digital format, text integration, questions of
evaluation (included at the end of each unit or advance in the area) that allow a rapid
student self -assessment, and videos. According to teachers, the REAs also promote the
Student independence, since students can carry out several activities or consultations
autonomously, but mention that these benefits are usually less visible to
More vulnerable students who do not have access to technologies in their homes.
Teachers also recognize that the strategy used in this intervention promotes the
collaboration between teachers, as a way to share what they have done and reuse/adapt
What other teachers have done. The training instances of the postgraduate course, the contest with course and the
27
Creatones are considered relevant for teachers to actively participate as
producers and users of REA. Additionally, the importance of having the repository is indicated
Because the resources available there are adequate and reliable, elaborated by teachers
Uruguayans and that can be reused.
In the case of the language line, the proposal to work with students through devices
cell phones was adequate and is very well valued by students and teachers, since it allows the
privileged use of other potentialities such as photo cameras and WhatsApp. In a sense
Otherwise, CREA was mainly used for the loading of materials and the exchange in the forums. No
It was used with students due to factors such as lack of time, computers or internet
in the educational and home. Coincidentally, the students consulted refer that
Crea is a platform that currently produces rejection perceptions, product of its use
Intensively during the last years of Pandemia by COVID-19.
Among teachers, the course on digital reading mediation was highlighted as a key resource
for the integration of platforms into teaching proposals, as well as for the promotion of
Digital skills, both in teachers and students. Teachers still identify the
need to know more about CREA, to have a previous leveling on the platform and its
Tools, and mention that the language platform is little known.
With regard to the country library, it is very well valued by teachers, highlighting that
Students like to travel different literary genres. In all cases, they reinforce the idea
that it is necessary to ensure devices and internet to students, so that access is effective to
Less in the educational center.
In the intensive CEI line it is verified that classes with a remote teacher are a solution with
potential to overcome the difficulties of lack of specialized teachers and to prevent groups of
students are without access to language learning. However, the 4th hour, which is what
presupposes a more relevant digitalization dimension (for implying a more autonomous work of the
student), could not be implemented, which decreases the potential of the intervention and prevents that
can be valued more positively in terms of adaptation (at present) for the purpose
to facilitate access and use of digital learning/teaching tools.
Finally, in the EDPD line, the assessment about the experience on the Edux platform is very
positive for all teachers consulted. The importance of having a platform stands out
Designed for teachers, that is different from CREA, which has a more school objective, to
students. The virtual modality is equally very well valued for allowing interior teachers
form on equal terms as those of the capital. Teachers value that there are no quotas
In this type of mass courses so that everyone has the opportunity to do so, and that the platform
Offer other dynamics such as peer evaluation.
In summary, interventions have a positive level of adaptation and adaptability for
Facilitate access and use of digital learning/teaching tools by
of users. However, the fact that some assuming cases were not verified
(Universal access to devices and quality connectivity) limits the potential of interventions for
Comply with that purpose, especially among students.
3. To what extent does the evidence available, the interest and priorities of all actors
involved, as well as different school contexts are taken into account in the designs of
intervention to ensure the expected results?
28
As previously detailed, interventions, and initiative in general, start from a
Diagnosis of needs that identifies specific problems, which are recognized as
relevant and priority by the parties consulted. In addition, digital bridges included in its design
specific measures to face each of those barriers, looking for their overcoming and the scope of
The expected results. This strategy of thinking about interventions from a complete diagnosis
It is recognized as a very valuable contribution for higher quality education, more
Equitative and innovative.
Despite this, intervention strategies follow a transverse model, without taking into account the
differences between the different geographical or socio -economic contexts covered by the initiative, to the
less in terms of availability of management equipment or skills, to name the most
relevant. It is important to mention that some of the interventions do not require adjustment
particular to the contexts in which the project intervenes, once they have a national coverage
generalized. They are examples of this more general nature of intervention or EDPD. On the other hand,
accessibility interventions, which faces difficulties to reach more remote areas or
remote, and language line, which faces particular limitations or characteristics in contexts
different, do not properly integrate these differences in their action strategies, and that result
of different economic, social and educational dynamics between urban centers and the most regions
remote (access to computer equipment, Internet connection, resources from educational centers,
Access to support services for equipment repair, etc.).
With accessibility, within the limitations of existing resources, cover various areas of the
country and collected improvement suggestions are more linked to the need to introduce
Socio -economic criteria in the definition of priority levels. In the particular case of this
intervention, what is indicated is that students with less economic resources were not always
the beneficiaries, since the priority criteria were defined individually by teachers or
Equipment of educational centers. This adjustment is a clear point of improvement that can be introduced to
future and that will allow contributing to greater equity on two levels, simultaneous or
Interscently: social inclusion and equity of people with disabilities, and contexts
socioeconomic.
One of the differences that according to the parties involved in the evaluation (particularly in cases
of intensive CEI and language line) is not reflected in intervention strategies, it is not
All educational centers have the same resources (human and technological) or
conditions. That implies that the starting budgets so that the results are reached
expected are different. Associated with this point, it also referred that the management teams of the
Educational centers do not have the same capacities and experience, so it would have been relevant
Make that survey before the intervention to determine the type of support specifically
that should be provided to each center.
In the case of language, the actors involved refer that the intervention has great potential,
so it should be extended in terms of coverage, to reach a greater amount of
groups per center, but also a greater number of centers, especially in the interior of the country,
where needs are more evident.
For its part, in the case of Intensive CEI, inequalities linked to the socioeconomic context
They emerged in the speeches of all the actors consulted, and who mention that they function as
An initial barrier for language learning. Students also highlight that, in some
more critical contexts, the only ones who managed to follow the classes, were the companions who already knew
English before. However, they also refer that for some the level was very low.
29
On the contrary, the strategy defined to promote teaching professional development (EDPD)
It is widely praised, precisely because the resource to Edux allowed interior teachers
form on equal terms as those of the capital.
Despite these improvement points, all parties involved in the initiative recognize their enormous
Value to improve access to quality education for all girls, boys and adolescents.
They highlight the support provided by referents and the entire team of digital bridges to correct failures
of design or obtain more information. They recognize that the barriers identification process was
effective, which allowed the design of interventions that, in general, reflects its ambitions and
needs.
Effectiveness
4. To what extent interventions and actions supported by digital bridges have
Contributed to best teaching and learning practices among teachers and students?
The evaluation results indicate that interventions and actions supported by bridges
Digital have contributed to best teaching and learning practices among teachers and
students from the educational centers participating in the initiative.
For teachers, new methodologies and tools are important support to address
Pedagogical contents in a more comprehensive and interactive way. The solid foundation about
didactic methodologies, they ensure the ability to work with tools and contexts of form
flexible and creative, according to the context and needs of the class.
According to the teachers interviewed, digital tools allow greater interactivity,
instant feedback and autonomy of students. Significant activities, the
communicative prominence of the different approaches and discussions about values and emotions,
motivate and hook students in classes. The learning process becomes more
Interesting and its effectiveness is more durable and expands out of the educational center.
Interviews with teachers and groups of students indicate that students learn to
communicate more effectively, develop creativity and self -expression, and learn to recognize
Your emotions. The prominence and autonomy provided by the methodologies and tools of the
Project increase self -esteem, perception of self -efficacy and the positive attitude towards studies.
The interaction between teachers present in the formations, in the itinerant language doubles (line
of language), CEI English or accessibility, as well as the possibility of adapting and using area elaborated by
Other teachers expand individual possibilities. The teaching profession becomes more
collaborative and this interaction expands the repertoire of each professional and allows practices
of teaching are more varied and adjusted to the specific needs of the groups of
students.
On the other hand, digital ramps allow students to present some disability
carry out the school activities assigned by teachers, favoring greater autonomy and
facilitating communication in some cases. The results evidenced in the use of the Van ramps
Beyond the classroom, they arrive at families that improve communication with their children and the understanding of
Your needs and desires, since children can express themselves with greater autonomy not only in the
school but also at home.
30
Additionally, autonomy provided by digital tools, as well as resources
multimedia and interactive turn the most interesting classes and motivate students in their
studies.
In relation to the REAs, they allow a more organized and directed planning to the objectives of
Learning, introduce new topics and provide more effectiveness in the learning process. He
development of contextualized and detailed activities are especially important to guide
to teachers on topics that are very specific or content that are more difficult, such as some
more advanced mathematics or science for primary, for example, where teachers are
Generalists
Teachers say that the REAs are appreciated by students for their interactive character. Motivate
Learning by digital format, text integration, evaluation questions that
They allow a rapid self -assessment of the student, and the videos. Promote independence, since
Students have instant feedback of their activities and can validate their
Hypothesis and deepen certain themes, organizing in your own time.
In the case of the language line, for the teachers interviewed, the equanimous reading methodology
helped the development of learning, focusing on self -expression and recognition of
own emotions. In all the groups in which students were worked, they had a high level of
participation which according to the teachers consulted is proof of the success of the methodology
implemented.
Itinerant language workshops provided a learning context in which students
They are protagonists in the use of the language to express themselves, turning the most motivating learning and
cash.
Of all the interventions, CEI intensive has been the one that has found the greatest difficulty in
Contribute to improving teaching and learning processes, as initially thought.
Technology provides the possibility of offering distance English classes for centers where there is no
specialized teachers. However, in order for effective classes to be offered, it is important
have a reference professional in the center in person, who is responsible for the
Remote teacher for the implementation and results of the intervention. The students of
Basic education still need a face -to -face teacher who accompanies class management, supporting
With motivation, discipline, organization and communication with the teacher who is remote. As in
Many centers were not a fixed reference teacher for the project and some powers were not
very clear, it was not possible to take advantage of the methodology in its entirety and thus enhance the process of
teaching/learning of students
In summary, the new methodologies and tools introduced in digital bridges promoted
changes and improvements in the planning and teaching process of teachers turning classes
more focused on the expected results, more attractive to students and more inclusive,
influencing learning and also socio -emotional factors, such as autonomy and self -esteem.
Even so, there are opportunities to improve interventions to make more classes and more students
Be benefited by these changes, thus contributing to the progress of educational equity.
5. To what extent interventions and actions supported by digital bridges have improved
The knowledge, competences, access and adoption of platforms and tools
digital among planned users (teachers, students ...)?
31
In general terms, initiative and interventions improved knowledge, skills and
The use of platforms and digital tools among users. The different interviews account
of appropriation of tools, specifically the use in other contexts (outside the centers
educational and for activities - school and extracurricular -) for both teachers and
students (particularly in cases of area and accessibility). However, it is recognized that this
appropriation is gradual and heterogeneous between interventions
Due to the characteristics of the interventions, as well as for the proposed objectives, there were
important differences in terms of the contribution of each intervention for the improvement of the
Knowledge, competences, access and adoption of digital platforms and tools. In
Interventions such as accessibility, REA or EDPD The dimension of digitalization plays a role
Very relevant throughout the action strategy, while for intensive CEI and language line
This dimension is less present.
According to the actors consulted, the use of digital ramps (accessibility) usually promotes a greater
Use of CEIBAL and External Educational Platforms.
However, its use is not frequent because its different accessibility needs are not
totally served, either because computers' screens are small or by
Platform specificities. Teachers use technological alternatives to the resources of the
CEIBAL ecosystem to serve students with visual disabilities, such as texts in
Braille or in macrotype (texts with typography and font size than of a common text), for
Support literacy processes.
Also teachers of visual disabilities report that the Platform Crea is little
accessible and its design does not facilitate the usability of some solutions such as screen readers
NVDA. For students who use this tool in CREA, there are elements that are not
verbalized by the reader which makes use difficult. In addition, for students with low vision
hinders navigability on the platform because there are no contrasts (colors, sizes, among others) in
The navigation buttons (Psychology Faculty Report 2022).
Observing the use of the platform creates from the students who received digital ramps,
(328) A low use of the platform is visualized, compared to the rest of the students. He
Average access for the March to November 2022 was 1.98 days per month. In addition to
These data are recorded important differences between students, varying 1.05 days in
Quintil centers most unfavorable to 3.82 in those students of centers belonging to the quintil
more favorable. A similar relationship is observed when analyzing the average actions carried out in CREA
For the same period, where 2.21 monthly actions are registered on average in the centers of the
most unfavorable quintile and 8.21 in those of the most favorable quintile.
In the case of REA, it is usual for teachers to upload resources on the CREA24 platform, so that
They are available for students and can access at any time, trying to facilitate
Your autonomous study process. Teachers recognize that it is a powerful tool to dispose
of a repository that offers reliable and quality resources, despite some they report that still
They have difficulty finding area for the area of knowledge, or educational level they require.
24 CREA is the most commonly mentioned platform by teachers, when they are consulted on
What tools or platforms use of Crea, other platforms mentioned by teachers, and
Shared by CEIBAL, they are the CEIBAL website, Language Platform, Matific or the Uruguay Educa portal.
Those who do not know other portals at the national level, resort to sites in Argentina or Mexico.
32
Also, a platform still has problems, because it does not record the students' responses, so
That teachers lose their records.
Most of the teachers consulted seek content in the repository, adapt them when
It is necessary and share them in Cre with their students. Your students carry out activities in
Create, but they report that the platform still has problems, because it does not record the responses of the
Students, so teachers lose records.
Also the contest with course, developed within the framework of the REA line, performed a role
relevant in the dissemination of technological tools for teachers, to the extent that it motivated, to do
new things and learn more from technology to apply in the classroom.
With respect to the intensive CEI line, it did not have such a marked digitalization dimension
as the interventions mentioned above. However, together with virtual teaching
I hoped to enhance the use of these tools, but the faced obstacles limited
That potential.
Remote teachers argue that they need to have more time to work
as the exchange between students and with the teacher, repetition of videos, explanation/review
of the CREA platform, etc. They also mention the lack of technological resources in the centers
educational and the low quality of the connection, which limits the use of videos and audios, well as others
heavier resources and that require a stable and fast connection.
For students, virtual learning experience is not valued very positively,
All because the modality hinders individual feedback by the remote teacher.
In addition to the above, the fourth hour, which should accelerate the use of the tools and platforms of
autonomous way by the students, did not work given the difficulties of having
referents of centers to sustain it. In general, in intensive CEI, there is no proper use of
Platforms due to lack of devices, difficulties with connection in some centers, or
Accompaniment in the educational center. Overexposure to creates during pandemic, coupled with
difficulties to access the platform for connection limitations, ended up generating a lot
Resistance to the use of the platform by the students. But students refer
also as difficulty that it creates does not allow cell phone notifications, or that teachers take
In responding to consultations.
Despite the difficulties reported with respect to the different interventions, teachers are
They are motivated to follow the innovation route of teaching practices, through the
Introduction of new tools that facilitate their teaching.
In this sense, it is important to consider the evolution of the digital bridges project that from the
Initial general idea of increasing the use of platforms, overcoming access barriers, step to
foster specific developments of digital tools as complementary support in
teaching/learning practices. Even so, the project introduced many innovations or new
methods simultaneously and it would be important to have more time to facilitate its adoption of
more adequate and generalized way.
6. How appropriate are support processes (such as teacher training and
teachers mentors) to facilitate the timely and effective use of platforms and
digital tools?
33
Teacher support processes were, in general, adequate terms and contributed to the
effectiveness of the implementation and effective use of platforms and digital tools, although
There are relevant improvement points. These processes include the training provided to
teachers and support of mentors, referents and inspection in the implementation of the different
interventions
The most praised and detailed way of support is teachers training. According to the information
collected by the evaluation team, two factors that were preponderant for
ensure adaptation and facilitate the appropriation (timely and effective use) of the platforms and
Digital tools promoted by the initiative: format of the training courses and methodology.
First, the format of the courses implemented to strengthen knowledge and skills
of teachers. The online format is considered very positive because it allows the access of teachers of
The whole country, even rural or further areas. In addition, the asynchronous and self -managed format
provides the necessary flexibility so that they can combine assistance to these courses with their others
daily obligations of the profession. This point is relevant because this format allows more
teachers attend the course and effectively prevent the risk of dropout during the process
of training, which, consequently, ensures that more teachers benefit from courses
offered.
A relevant aspect refers to the adequacy of the platforms in which the courses are offered,
Fundamental element for the successful implementation of this support mechanism. The platforms
The courses are, in general, considered clear, organized, well designed and easy to handle.
Second, the training methodology of the courses for teachers enhances the appropriation and
the qualified use of platforms and digital tools. In particular because it is based on a
Solid theoretical foundation about the pedagogical use of tools, presents strategies
clear for use, and promotes the application and group discussion of said application throughout
of the courses. In this way, teachers finish training programs having studied
The foundations, practiced the implementation and reflected together with other teachers about their
practice.
The training initiatives in REA and in the language line are examples of how teachers
They learn to work flexibly and critically with the different digital resources available, from
of a solid conceptual foundation about the potentialities of the re -resources, of the
Equanimous reading and digital reading. In this regard, equanime reading is considered by teachers
Accessed an innovative methodology, capable of developing new competencies for
Reading teaching; It is valued as very beneficial because it allows a sheet of
Route for approaching emotions with students.
Another support process that proved to be, in general, appropriate to bridge purposes
Digital and specific needs of the educational centers, was the monitoring of the referents. Of
according to the persons consulted during the evaluation, the support of those referring to the centers
It is essential to clarify doubts, provide complementary information and facilitate the resolution of
problems when necessary. The territorial references - that make up work teams with
The referents of schools - are essential to promote and promote initiatives such as
Traveling suitcases (accessibility), with a communication and dissemination strategy that speeds up the processes
and problem solving, when they occur.
CEIBAL's dynamic teachers, who work at the primary level supporting teachers, are
Keys for the promotion of REA in the teaching community. They work in the appropriation of
34
Area by teachers, so that they are empowered in their use and implement them with their
students. The support of school coordination is also key to the promotion of the US and
of the exchange of practice and resources between teachers of the same center.
In the opposite, it is evident that the institutional articulation was the most challenging aspect of
Support processes, because many actors can involve in various instances (directors,
teachers, students, families, inspection referents, among others), and this can generate failures in
the communications required for the search for solutions. The level of support of support
provided in the articulation of the actors involved, it is variable of intervention to
intervention, especially since the actors and the necessary level of support are usually different. In the
Language cases and the support offered was adequate for its implementation, although it could be
promote a greater exchange between teachers from the same educational center, as between
different centers. In accessibility this joint is more complex due to the need for support
Related to the valuation, delivery, use and repairs of computers, tablets and ramps, the
necessary collaboration of families and the many specificities of the different disabilities
existing. Although teachers benefit from the support of the references, the needs are
superiors, more complex and varied, and the data collected indicate that they are not always addressed
properly.
In the case of CEI, although the implementation support is available, there are important challenges
of human resources for the project within the educational centers: a fixed reference professor
For this initiative, which can centralize demands and have external support for
effectively implement the program in the center. CEI teachers interviewed indicate
communication difficulties with the General Directorate of Secondary Education and that the description
Of the tasks and roles it was not clear from the beginning, especially about the evaluations.
There is a perception of the different actors interviewed that inspection did not get involved
enough in the program.
About the format of the courses, it is necessary to ensure that their duration is appropriate to the
teachers' expectations. Some courses, such as those of REA for example, benefit from more
time for teachers to have more flexibility to choose at what time do the
Activities required in the program, coordinating with their daily teaching tasks. It is also
important to ensure that the schedule of delivery of courses does not match the
end of the year, while teachers are highly demanded with evidence and other obligations.
Courses that deal with specific topics or tools are also needed, such as the rubrics of the
CREA platform, language platform, tools for classroom work with students with
disability and the operation of specific ramps, advanced exelearning for elaboration
of Rea, among others.
In any case, in general, the support processes contributed to facilitate the implementation of
interventions and the timely and effective use of digital tools with positive highlight for
Teacher training initiatives and specific challenges in some initiatives.
7. To what extent did the actions promoted by digital bridges increased the
coverage and scope of existing platforms and tools?
According to the testimonies collected, the interventions carried out in the bridge framework
Digital have contributed, although modestly, to increase the coverage and scope of
existing platforms and tools. The promotion of students' autonomous work, as well as
35
The possibility of performing tasks in a collaborative and asynchronous way are mentioned as the
Main aspects to highlight of this type of platforms.
In the accessibility line is where the use of technology is more evident for the objectives of the
intervention. The rapid expansion of the Valijas program, from a pilot to a coverage
National, requires the extended and intensive use of existing technological tools. For this
purpose, teachers claim more training regarding type of digital ramps, ask for
practical, concrete formations and that effectively help them to know the potentialities and
better use the equipment received.
As for its coverage, the Traveling Vali Project, which in 2021 begins as a pilot with
A scope in some educational centers (promoting the delivery of 22 digital ramps), in 2022
It expands to the whole country. With data updated as of January 16, 2023, the number of beneficiaries
Uniques of the program amounts to 838, mostly corresponding (87%) to delivery or replacement of
teams and to a lesser extent (16%), these options being non -exclusive. HE
They delivered 387 digital ramps awarded to a total of 328 students. For his part, he trained
Personalized 330 teachers also offered group training instances through
of workshops, courses, conferences and webinars. More than 1,500 teachers and inspectors are estimated
formed in issues of inclusive education and accessibility (Project Report Valijas, 2023).
In the case of REA, especially within the framework of the “Contest with course”, the use of
Exelearning for the creation of learning objects and the use of the
CREA platform, where teachers share the created objects and propose tasks so that
develop students. Teachers state that students feel motivated by the
format and themes addressed in the areas and that has the potential to positively impact
Your learning.
Despite this incentive, the variety of available objects is still limited (in particular for
some issues, disciplines and educational levels) and the navigation and search interface can follow
improving to achieve a better user experience. Other platforms such as the platform
Language or Matific are marginally mentioned and their use is less widespread.
In terms of coverage, the resources created by teachers between 2020 and 2022 totaled 553, and
The active users in 2022 were 144,565, being the highest value of the last three years (KPI,
REA, 2022). For its part in the contest with course 168 teachers participated, of which 58
presented learning object (OA).
Similar situation is found in the language line. Itinerant language workshops were a
opportunity recognized as very successful for the approach of the language, creativity,
communication and emotional development of students. Although the platform of
Language for workshops, and the itinerant language proposal did not focus on this possibility since its
design, its potential use is identified for the performance of tasks or delivery of products
contemplated at the close of each workshop. Likewise, some students recognized the importance of
have a tool as a country library to ensure access to everyone to
resources.
The CREA platform was only used as a repository, to access the materials (texts and videos),
Upload tasks and slogans, not for the development of the learning strategy, according to teachers.
Of focal groups with students arises that it creates is a platform that currently produces
rejection perceptions, product of its use intensively during the last years of
Pandemia by COVID-19.
36
For its part, the language platform is little known by teachers, and those who manifest
Know and/or use it are mostly primary school teachers (they understand that it is a platform
with great potential). Among the barriers for this use, teachers propose that they have not had
time available to investigate and integrate it into its proposals. Some teachers stand out as
a weakness its excessive rigidity, to the extent that new texts do not allow to upload, or adapt
Learning sequences.
Teachers trained in language platform in all their modalities (face -to -face,
videoconference or self -assisted) were 703.
In the course on digital reading mediation, 198 teachers were registered (68 teachers
They indeed attended and approved the proposal), while 128 teachers enrolled in the
Equanimous Reading Course (of which 60 effectively attended and approved). For its part, 12
Teachers participated in the complete cycle of Equanimal Reading Workshops. Finally,
In the traveling language, 11 workshop proposals were developed in the same number of educational centers.
In the case of intensive CEI, there is no proper use of platforms due to lack of devices,
connection and/or accompaniment difficulties in some centers. These difficulties in accessing
Creates, as well as limitations of the platform (eg not allowing cell phone notifications) produce
resistances in its use. The follow -up by teachers accounts for these resistance. Of
according to the record made by remote teachers, the number of students who do not participate
On the platform it exceeds those who participate. good or very good.
In addition, students' participation in the platform through reactions or
Comments to proposals made by the teacher.
The program was implemented in 11 groups belonging to 5 educational centers of different
locations. The total number of students in these groups amounts to 297. It should be noted that initially the
Intensive CEI proposal was aimed at a greater number of groups, which amounted to 100.
Finally, in the EDPD line the highly positive assessment about the experience stands out
on the EDUX platform. Teachers particularly highlight the importance of having a
Platform designed especially for teachers, different from CREA, as already mentioned
previously.
For this intervention, teachers enrolled in the Available MOOC were to January 2023,
58,697, of which 30,268 began the course. The percentage of approval among those who
They indeed attended 49.3% (Kpis EDPD).
8. What interventions or actions supported by digital bridges have a high potential
To be included in the learning portfolio to be replicated in other contexts?
Social innovation processes have three marked stages: first, the definition of a solution;
second, test the solution, and third, climb or multiply the solution with the necessary adjustments. The
points 1 and 2 were treated by digital bridges and the results achieved indicate that there are
Conditions to apply and test the solutions on a broader scale.
All interventions start from a diagnosis of a specific problem and needs of
intervention seeking educational equity that, in many cases, transcends the context of
Uruguay. The design of the interventions was made from the solid knowledge of the public
beneficiary and the premises for the use of technologies for education. The interventions have
tested in contexts and with diverse audiences in schools in Uruguay, and adjustments have been made for
face the challenges that the implementations of the different interventions have faced.
37
Despite the adjustments that are required for interventions, and the project as a whole,
They can be more effective and, above all, they achieve better results at the level of the inclusion of audiences
more vulnerable, all interventions have an interesting potential to be replicated in others
Contexts, even internationally. However, there are different levels of maturity of
interventions that must be taken into account when you begin to define the future strategy of
Replicability
Accessibility and area are interventions with a high level of maturity and that could easily be
Replicate in other contexts, whether in basic education or also at the upper level. The line of
Accessibility has a very high potential for replication due to its universal character. This intervention is
quite complete and innovative, for offering broad support to the centers, from the orientations
clear to teachers for the assessment of the need for ramps for each student,
equipment necessary for each case, until the support for pedagogical use, acting for
reduce inequities of access to education by students with disabilities. This
intervention can provide a great contribution to the effective inclusion of students with
disabilities in different contexts and countries, since they have the economic resources and
necessary technology, in addition to the training of human resources.
In the case of REA, the intervention develops with an open character, from its organization and
Availability of the code, being accessible from different parts of the world. In this sense, I know
can promote use by other countries through technical cooperation with teams of ministries of
Education, perhaps starting in Spanish language countries, especially in Latin America or the cone
South of the continent, which have the same language and cultures with important similarities. By his
open and flexible orientation, teachers from different countries could adapt content to the
specificities of your curricula. The intervention and its repository can also be adapted to countries
with other languages that would organize their own repositories.
The language line and intensive CEI are interventions that also present a lot of potential to be
replicable to other countries or contexts (vertical replicability as well as other themes or areas of
Knowledge (horizontal replicability), but need more time to improve some processes.
Intensive CEI has great potential to consolidate a methodology that provides access to
Learning for which there are no specialized professionals in each educational center. This
Methodology can be used for other languages in a first phase and then also for courses
advanced from other areas of knowledge in which there are teachers' lacks. Teaching
Remote is a powerful tool to respond to problems of lack of teachers. For this,
It is necessary to have a person in charge for this function in each center, define clearly
What competences have to possess and ensure that the same person is present in the classrooms and gives
monitoring of intervention. His effective participation is fundamental for the event of the
intervention.
The language line has the specificity of the Spanish language and that is why it would be easier to replicate
First for other Spanish language countries and thus scaing faster. Although with need
Of adjustments, the possibility of replicating intervention could also be analyzed as support for the
Teaching other languages, such as English.
Beyond its different levels of maturity and opportunities for improvement, all interventions
analyzed have the potential to be replicated in other contexts, for other subjects or cycles of
teachings, due to the innovative character of its design and implementation strategy.
38
Coherence
9. How well is the use of platforms and digital tools in the
face -to -face teaching/learning practices?
Digital tools and platforms are visualized as an important support as a complement
to face -to -face teaching. However, the degree of integration of these tools for practices
face -to -face pedagogical, presents a high variability between interventions, being in REA and
Accessibility where this complement with face -to -face becomes more evident.
In all interventions positive assessments of these tools are collected by
Teachers and students, although the intensity in their use is still low. Overexposure to these
Platforms (especially creates) during Covid 19 pandemic is a contextual aspect that
It must be considered to explain this low use. Teachers make efforts to integrate these
Tools, although they recognize difficulties to the extent that they self -identify as analogical
while they see their students as digital natives and understand that the processes of
Transformation of their teaching practices have been.
Also, prior to considering the integration of technologies, some barriers of
Structural character. Aspects such as student feeding, or access to electricity in
Centers far from the interior, arise as necessary conditions to achieve greater use of
Platforms From satisfying these conditions, it is necessary to ensure access to devices and
Internet to students, so that access is effective at least in the context of the educational center.
Regarding the accessibility line, it is observed that the use of digital ramps facilitates use
of the educational and external educational platforms. However, the intensity in use is maintained
at low levels. Considering access, interactions and deliveries, the platform use numbers
Crea are low in all cases, especially for urban context schools
most unfavorable socioeconomic.
In the case of REA, this integration is facilitated by the possibility of adapting and reuse of
educational resources, which is consistent with the culture of open educational resources. Resources
They are valued as easy to use, although teachers understand that they have not had dissemination
necessary, as if they have had the courses. Teachers who state do not know what do you
They refer to factors such as not having gone through the posttegure, or not having the support of a teacher
Ceibal dynamizer, key role for the promotion of REA in the teaching community.
In the case of the language line, teachers highlight the possibilities of achieving connection between
The texts, resources and platforms, elements that contribute to the development of reading skills
On screen in students, and teachers. The integration of these tools allows to work with
students who are at a distance and are useful for learning evaluations. Likewise, I know
It highlights the autonomy promoted by these platforms and the possibility of self -management their own
Learning.
However, there are challenges for the incorporation of technologies in learning proposals
by teachers due to the mostly intensive use of CREA and other CEIBAL platforms
In primary. Greater articulation needs between the contents are also identified
Language program for primary and secondary since the approaches are very different.
In the itinerant language workshops, the technologies used were cell phones and the Internet for the
Search for information, communication, or photos and videos. Also in some cases
He worked with applications for the production of musical pieces. Teachers account for a greater
39
Use of platforms such as CREA OR LIBRARY COUNTRY, but require more time for their effective
Integration in learning proposals. In photography or music workshops the direct link with
Technology was much greater than in others, such as theater or body expression. However, in all
The cases the students valued the knowledge acquired in the field of oral, written expression,
Photography, theater, or music, and expressed in many cases the interest in developing them on the outside
of the educational center.
On the other hand, the digital reading mediation course is valued by teachers as a first
Approach to the subject. It is recognized that the course promoted the use of technologies from
The different CEIBAL platforms (CREA, Country Library, CEIBAL VALUES, Language Platform).
In the case of Intensive CEI, both teachers and classrooms have a
good assessment of the contents and understand that the approach from orality for this type of
program is correct. In this sense, although many actors are cautious, understanding that it is
Very soon to evaluate learning results, they agree that it is in orality it is
where greater results are seen. Also, although the proposal was originally born from a lawsuit
particular received by the DGES and transferred to CEIBAL, the design of the contents was joint and not
tax, which is valued as a positive aspect.
However, to improve teaching practices it is necessary to continue promoting the
Student participation. Some testimonies demand the possibility of having content
more adapted to the level and particularities of the educational center. For students, in general
The proposal in Crea is not clear. It is proposed that the slogans and delivery dates often
They are not clear, and they do not have the feedback of the teacher. In this sense, a better
Communication between students, teachers, and a classroom reference that articulates the instances
formative, would allow greater use of the platform
Finally, regarding the professional development strategy the flexibility of the platform
Edux, aesthetics and design, as well as the assisted auto mode were especially aspects
valued. Teachers stated that exchange spaces are always positive, and that
It has the highest communication channels between teachers and the person in charge of the course.
10. How well are the platforms/digital tools and processes of
support in the education system in general?
Developed tools and platforms are considered important resources to support the
teacher training within the national education system, although the degree to which it is achieved
The effective integration of these tools into teaching practices varies according to
Characteristics of the different interventions.
Within the accessibility line, we seek to collaborate with the development of an inclusive education
that guarantees communication, participation, autonomy and educational accessibility through
Digital technologies for all students, focusing especially on those students
with disabilities. This is aligned with the regulatory framework that the country has developed in recent
years, especially the National Policy Plan 2020-2025, in which within the General Principle 4
(Quality learning, with emphasis on the most vulnerable)
provide assistance to the public beneficiary with situations of disabilities and training for teachers to
Access and use of digital ramps (National Educational Policy Plan 2020.2025, MEC).
Teachers, family and direct beneficiaries positively evaluate the actions within the
developed line based on what it represents in terms of digital inclusion. Both teachers
40
As families, they consider that the delivery of digital ramps decreases obstacles and barriers to the
Access to digital technology.
Teachers consider important to form an exchange and socialization space of
experiences around disability and technologies for inclusion. Mark or programs are requested
counselors of pedagogical and computer practice, as well as external interlocutors that
Orient and accompany their activities (nomady consulting report, 2022).
In the case of REA, the contents and sequences of the repository are developed by teachers of
national educational centers, which allows them to be consistent with educational policy and
context of the basic education of the country and allows its potential use by other teachers to
from promoting an educational community of teachers and students to create and share
resources under the culture of the open. In this sense, each situation of use in a center or class
Specific can demand adaptation needs, as well as the autonomy and creativity of each
Teacher to follow your plan, methodology and pedagogical objectives.
Within the language line, through the training processes in mediation of digital reading,
Training and adjustments in the contents of the language platform, teachers learn to work
in a flexible and critical way with the different digital resources available.
Regarding CEI intensive, the proposal was well received by the actors consulted, from the
budget that this type of proposal is a suboptimal solution that cannot replace the
face -to -face teaching. From this budget, the actors consulted consider that the
Main objective of the program that implies strengthening the teaching of English in Secondary Education
through a specific solution that addresses the lack of continuity in the instruction of the language
In certain contexts, seeking to prevent students from losing class school hours. The
Teachers also highlight CEIBAL's support through the formation of mentor figures.
The mentors attended together with the CEIBAL team at the beginning of the program in the centers attended,
then continuing a support on demand.
Among the difficulties that have hindered compliance with the objectives of the program
mentions bureaucracy when assigning groups to teachers, lack of human resources and
Technological, processes definition, system definition and evaluation metrics. Another barrier
mentioned, refers to aspects of institutional communication. Information about the performance of the
program did not circulate among all the actors, but each person in their role managed the information
of its centers, without knowing the general framework of the whole of the centers. Ensure that the results
of the program are known by all actors, from socialization of results for various
Ways, would contribute to the participation and commitment of all parties.
In the case of the Teaching Professional Development Strategy, the initiative sought to enhance development
Teaching professional through the design of a strategy that integrates all training proposals
scattered that from the different areas of CEIBAL are offered to the teaching community. The bet is
Provide traffic flexibility to teachers by the different training instances so that
They can continue to form continuously, but respecting their times, their spaces and their
interests.
This strategy aligns the guiding lines in the field of educational policy, in particular to the plan
National Educational Policy that proposes to advance in a reform of education in education that
allow increasing teachers' degree rates and strengthens your preparation for
Challenges that impose technological evolution, the development of the knowledge economy, the
41
educational inclusion and the growing demands associated with the exercise of citizenship (National Plan of
Educational Policy 2020.2025, MEC).
In this sense, aspects such as the promotion of collaborative work and competency approach
They were very well valued, being elements that recognize is not yet integrated into their
Training and teaching practice, beyond concrete courses of CEIBAL or work with the global network
of learning.
Gender and equity
11. To what extent interventions reach the most vulnerable girls, boys and adolescents
And properly address your access barriers to quality education?
Interventions have allowed more equitable access to quality education,
favoring the participation of educational communities and students with greater vulnerability
Socioeconomic. Next, the mechanisms are presented for each intervention through the
which has been addressed, and its contribution to overcome barriers to the education of
quality.
Accessibility intervention has a direct impact on equity. So much because he works
directly with people with disabilities, how much to include in the learning process to
students presenting barriers (mainly cognitive and/or motor) and not necessarily
They would have this opportunity without specific devices such as digital ramps.
In terms of design, the intervention responded to the demand that came to Ceibal from their own
communities and educational centers. The extension of the scope of the intervention to the different
departments during 2022 is a relevant aspect that has allowed improving access to a
quality education to a greater number of students in areas that traditionally have
Less inclusion opportunities.
Despite the markedly inclusive dimension of this intervention, the prioritization for delivery
of ramps is done by each teacher according to their own criteria, which can generate distortions
in the purposes of the intervention associated with equity. In this sense, teachers perceive
shortage of time and resources in the intervention and therefore tend to prioritize students who
They seem "more capable of taking advantage of the program." That can amplify the problem of equity,
to the detriment of students with more severe disabilities (nomady consulting report,
2022). The need to review the ramp prioritization criteria to the centers is linked to another
More general challenge associated with ensuring a use of resources by students
of low socioeconomic level25.
In area, the main barrier in schools located in rural areas is the access and use of the Internet.
Once the laptop is broken, not everyone can go to the repair center in the city, and stay
No computers. Baccalaureate students do not have access to devices or services
for repair. In general, high school students can work in the library or
Informatics classroom, but if it is busy with other activities, they cannot access. When I know
Solve access to technology, REAs are a great opportunity for experience, knowledge
and interactivity that provide this type of resources. Rea has approached the specific barriers of
25 especially if we consider, as seen above, that the use of CREA in the accessibility line is
minor in students of unfavorable contexts.
42
vulnerable audiences by introducing digital learning tools in centers
With greater vulnerability. From teachers' perspective, the use of technology allows
work with the diversity present in each class, providing more autonomy to students than
they have ease and enable the teacher to grant more attention to the students who need
Work in small groups. Likewise, there are cases in which teachers worked with REA
From an accessibility perspective, using the resources available for specific situations
as difficulties for reading.
The language line addressed the equity of girls, boys and adolescents through the introduction of
Digital learning tools. We worked with primary students, basic cycle (both
high schools), as well as with non -formal education proposals. In the itinerant language the
Selection criteria of the participants took into consideration some variables identified in
The diagnosis, linked to more vulnerable socioeconomic context centers, students with
extraity and those of more remote locations.
The activities within the framework of traveling language tried to integrate all students who
They participated in the workshops, valuing their different skills and interests. In the case of contexts
More unfavorable is raised as a challenge to raise and maintain students' interest in
A playful workshop, but at the same time its potential capacity to promote the
Interests of students outside the traditional school environment.
The exits to the territory during the workshop cycle were of the most prominent aspects by all
The actors because they allowed a greater relationship between the group, and with the community of the
neighborhood. Students could observe new things or daily elements of the neighborhood, to
through art. To approach technologies from an equity perspective, the
Use of the CEIBAL tablet as a way to standardize the quality of the photographs. It was also counted
with instruments available by CEIBAL for the production of an audio book. On the other hand, it arises
that not all and all students could use the available material, nor did they
opportunity to participate in the same measure of the proposed activities.
In the case of the Digital Reading Mediation Course, teachers highlight the opportunity generated in
Students Reading in digital format, since it motivates more than paper reading. But also
It is important to recognize that not all students have access to digital technologies
In your home and in many cases it is the educational center the main place from which students
They access technologies for educational purposes.
It is remarkable the possibility of a country library to have a book in digital format
for those students who do not have access to the paper book; This is highly valued by
teachers and students, especially in centers in which only one or two copies are available
of the most used books. In this sense, country library constitutes a platform that reduces
knowledge gaps facilitating access to reading for educational purposes, such as
also recreational.
In the CEIBAL intervention in intensive English the approach to equity was very clear, since
allowed groups of students from remote educational centers and socio -economic contexts
critics, who did not have an assigned English teacher, access the subject through a
Remote English teacher.
Once this great gap on access to the subject itself, challenges were identified
associated with the departure level in which students are regarding the language. In this
sense there are important levels of frustration by most students, who
43
They do not have solid English bases, and found very difficult to follow up on the contents of the
Classes with a virtual teacher. Among those who have more knowledge of the language (for attending
private teachers or classes or have more ease), find boring contents or
Too simple. This challenge is linked to the lack of a stable classroom reference, which gives
follow -up to the remote teacher, facilitate communication with students, and collaborate in the
organization during class.
Finally, in the case of the Teaching Professional Development Strategy, for teachers
Consulted it is very important to have a platform like Edux that allows access to
quality training to the entire teaching community, from anywhere in the country and in any
moment. It is also relevant the massive nature of courses to the extent that they do not exist
quotas and the training of all teachers equally is promoted.
12. How well are they evaluated, monitor and address through the interventions the
Gender inequalities in the access and use of digital platforms and tools?
During the design of interventions the genre was not a specific aspect to consider, so
that it is not possible to present sufficient results. The results produced by interventions
They drain data by sex, but they refer only to the level of participation of girls and boys, I do not know
They measure differences in terms of results, nor are specific barriers based on
Gender issues. However, some findings have been found that can contribute to
Develop an approach to different interventions with a future gender perspective.
For accessibility, greater award of ramps to male beneficiaries (62.5%) is identified, which
Open the way to obtain more information regarding how the needs of this
population in terms of gender and consequently to review the award processes for
Equitable access.
With respect to the interventions associated with the language line, and in particular in the itinerant language
which also integrated the art, participation and involvement of girls in several groups was greater
than that of children. However, the students themselves recognized as very valuable to have
counted with mixed work spaces, in which men also participated by expressing themselves to
through art. The possibilities of working the cultural barriers that impose the inequalities of
gender, through traveling language initiatives such as bridges for the approach to the tongue
They are diverse. These types of spaces can cause reflection, as well as the transformation of
own cultural practices between boys and girls.
In terms of participation, in the case of Intensive CEI, difficulties were identified in a group,
due to obstacles placed by boys who dismissed the participation of girls. This
situation was reported by a teacher to the CEIBAL team, and although everyone cannot be generalized
The groups, light on the need to work aspects associated with mutual respect and
Importance of collaboration between boys and girls. Above all, in the case of this intervention
in which the students are alone with the remote teacher most of the time.
Innovation
13. How does innovation in the project be carried out, how solutions are introduced
new or significantly improved in interventions?
44
Innovations develop in response to specific and relevant problems, from
Pilot interventions that are evaluated before multiplying and generalizing. This is a very
positive for the promotion of access and use of digital technologies by students and
Teachers The existence of a coordination team to articulate the different interventions that
They integrate digital bridges, since there is capacity to make adjustments and
Improvements during the course of the initiatives.
From each of the interventions, tools and platforms were designed and available
Innovative and specific, appropriate to the needs proposed by education in societies
current. In the same sense, teacher training for the use of said tools was promoted
providing adequate strategies for support during implementation.
In the case of accessibility it is noted that working with students with disabilities defies the
teachers to use their energy and creativity in the search for specific solutions for their
needs. Teachers innovate with the use of tools or media, combining ramps,
Digital resources and pedagogical strategies consistent with its context. In addition to the effects
cognitive, the inclusion that is provided with the ramps has effects on the gain of autonomy and
Greater self -esteem of students.
As follows from the report prepared by the consulting firm (2022) the innovation of the
educational practices comes from initiatives that promote collaboration and search for support,
Information and resources between teachers, referents and families. CEIBAL resources are combined with
External resources, exercising creativity and problem solving in students. This guy
of joints and exchanges within the educational community is essential for
respond to student needs, through adequate pedagogical solutions to
contexts
In the case of REA, resources constitute an area of educational innovation highly valued by
Teachers Its use, the adaptations that are made to them, such as their reuse by
Of teachers, it encourages constant innovation. When teachers adapt the do the contexts
of its classes or to specific pedagogical purposes, a culture of exchange and
Improvement of pedagogical practices among teachers. In addition to learning to use new tools
digital, teachers become producers of content and the exchange and joint work between
Teachers become a new meaning and importance. Many of the teachers consulted
In the curriculum transformation an opportunity for them to be centralized in resolution of
problems, or practical situations that require the development of transversal skills, before
than in purely theoretical content.
In addition, the quality and complexity of the REA has evolved. The ex -to tool with which
Rea is designed has evolved in recent years, and according to teachers the more you learn
To use its functionalities, more complete and interesting are the results produced. On the one hand,
That brings a new freshness and energy for the profession, for the relationship with the students, taking them out
of his routine, and promoting new learning. On the other hand, some teachers understand that
It requires more working time when many times they already have a very agitated routine.
Pedagogical innovations are also given by the potential of REA for students
study autonomously, who receive instant feedback from their learning, which
It facilitates working diversity in class and using different approaches to active methodologies
teaching. A very interesting story of innovative experiences is the creation of digital resources
for class students themselves. This approach makes the creative students themselves of
contents, enhances creativity, motivation and authorship of students, problem solving
45
and also changes the form of evaluation, of standardized tests focused on content to
Evidence of achieving more complex skills by students26
On the other hand, for the language line, the three initiatives have been innovative for all actors
consulted. Learning strategies, implementation and content modalities are
recognized very positively.
Particularly, in the itinerant language the students expressed interest in continuing
Learning about artistic discipline addressed in the workshop (play instruments, camera management
and video edition, conduct interviews with different people), or in the development of
writing skills, which can also be used for other subjects/tasks in
His educational trajectories.
For teachers and workshops, the experience was successful because it allowed to address the
contents of the curricular subjects with the art that motivated the students a lot,
promoting the development of learning. The experience was not limited to the contents, but
It allowed to address skills such as communication, teamwork, and creativity. This
socio -emotional dimension is essential for the promotion of innovative processes, and results
even more enhanced from the use of digital technologies. Departures to territory, such as
instances of presentation of results before the community of the educational center, were instances
remarkable that allowed to "get out of the box" to students, workshops and teachers.
On the other hand, bridges for the approach to the language deepened in innovation processes equally
relevant.
Equanimous reading allowed to develop a new learning methodology in a context of
Emotional opening that was highly valued by teachers. They understand that this approach to
Teaching and learning processes are fundamental and increasingly necessary in classrooms.
In this initiative, the inclusion of technologies is a component that can be much more
used and developed in future instances.
As for the Digital Reading Mediation course, teachers highlighted the importance of accessing
These types of formations that allow them to integrate key knowledge for current teaching
Mediated by technologies. A remarkable aspect in this regard is the approach of teachers to
digital reading, which is recognized as very relevant to understand the habits of
Student reading, and on which teachers propose to know in general little. Teachers
They recognize digital reading as an area in which it is necessary to continue developing learning
and the course is valued as a first approach to the subject.
Regarding the language platform, teachers value being able to use resources and content
according to the reality or the needs of the group. Likewise, its innovative character in the
measure that allows a rapid self -assessment by the students.
In the case of Intensive CEI, innovative aspects associated with the design of the proposal are identified, the
which contemplates greater time load than the conversation class program, also introducing a
Fourth hour to be implemented in Crea. While this fourth hour can not be carried out by
difficulties in implementation, it is a relevant aspect on which to continue doing
26 Some examples of creation of REA by students include: video-editions: a list is delivered
of solved exercises and one is chosen to make a video tutorial explaining how this exercise is solved;
Creation of Excel programs to solve problems that would be very long to solve on paper; and
Activities in which students publish resources on their web pages and also in CREA.
46
Improvements for your effective use. For its part, the program introduces the referent figure
of the center (ascribed or teacher assigned to said role), which articulates with the remote teacher. Yes ok
the difficulties in having a single person who is referring to the center throughout the course have not
allowed an adequate articulation between both figures, is a relevant component of the design
of the proposal, on which you must continue working. For their part, students, teachers,
CEIBAL and Inspectors referents, highlight the opportunity offered by the intervention to the
students to make decisions, solve problems, and have more freedom in the classroom.
For the Professional Teaching Development Strategy, the Edux platform is a qualitative leap in the
As it is a platform designed for teachers, different from CREA. The flexibility of the
platform, aesthetics and design, as well as auto assisted mode are very good aspects
valued. Also, teachers highlight the possibility of having spaces for exchange
With colleagues from other centers, teaching levels, and areas of the country.
Both the availability of digital resources and tools, and the promotion of strategies of
alternative training constitute key elements for the promotion of innovation in all
Digital bridges initiatives. Digital technologies are used as a means to put in
New learning game, which allow to develop digital and socio -emotional competencies. The
Training strategies oriented to students and teachers respond to pedagogical needs
current, which have the focus on knowing how to do and experience, taking advantage of the flexibility that
digital technologies offer.
5. CONCLUSIONS, LESSONS LEARNED AND RECOMMENDATIONS
6.1 Conclusions
1) the design of digital bridges, and the logic of intervention, are consistent with the objectives of the
initiative and with the purpose of improving access to quality education. Its design includes
Specific responses for identified needs, aligned with the expectation of
Parts involved. However, there are several challenges related to the practical application of
the idealized strategy that result from the non -verification of all the necessary assumptions to their
implementation, the lack of clear criteria to guarantee the prioritization of the public
vulnerable, the non -inclusion of the gender dimension declared in the strategy of
intervention and articulation difficulties between interventions.
2) Interventions are adequate to facilitate access and use of platforms and tools
digital to favor teaching/ learning processes, having been disseminated
numerous tools and platforms. This is recognized as an innovative aspect of
project and valued by all parties involved in data collection for
assessment. Even so, there are important differences between interventions at this level. In cases
of EDPD, area or accessibility there are evidence that proves the adequacy of interventions
To facilitate that appropriation of digital tools, but in cases of intensive CEI and line
This dimension was below the initially defined.
3) Digital bridges, and their interventions in particular, are based on a robust diagnosis
of needs that allowed the definition of specific measures to face each of those
barriers, visible their overcoming and contribute to a higher quality education, more equitable and
47
Innovative Although interventions appealed to different audiences, and took
Account specific criteria defined by the diagnosis for the definition of centers
participants, each of the interventions follows a transverse strategy of implementation,
without taking into account the differences between the contexts covered by each.
4) The evaluation results indicate that interventions and actions supported by bridges
Digital have contributed to best teaching practices in teachers of the centers
educational participants in the initiative. Teachers benefit from new methodologies and
tools, which recognize as important support to do their teaching job of
More comprehensive, interactive, flexible and creative form. In students there is one more attitude
positive before studies, as a result of improvements at the level of their autonomy, self -esteem,
Self -efficacy, communication, creativity, self -expression and emotional management.
5) The support processes implemented from digital bridges were adequate and
contributed to the effectiveness of the implementation and effective use of platforms and tools
Digital, although there are relevant improvement points. Among the processes that contributed the most
For this efficiency, the training provided to teachers (format and methodology) and the
monitoring provided by mentors, referents and inspection.
6) The interventions of the Digital bridges initiative have contributed, although in a modest way,
to increase the coverage and scope of existing platforms and tools. The promotion of
Autonomous work of students, as well as the possibility of performing tasks in a way
Collaborative and asynchronous are the main aspects to highlight.
7) All digital bridges interventions have a high potential to be replicated in
Other contexts, even internationally. However, there are different levels of maturity of
the interventions that must be taken into account. Rea and accessibility interventions
They have a high level of maturity and could be replicated in the future close to other contexts
(more educational centers and other countries), while the language line and intensive CEI present
Potential for vertical replicability (to other countries or contexts/educational centers) and horizontal
(To other areas of knowledge), but they need more time to improve some processes.
8) Digital tools and platforms developed and/or disseminated in the bridge framework
Digital are an important support as a complement to face -to -face teaching. However, the
degree of integration of these tools for face -to -face pedagogical practices, presents
a high variability between interventions. Overexposure to this type of platforms
(especially creates) during the Covid 19 pandemic, generated some resistance from
Teachers (who self -identify as analog) and limitations in terms of resources
technological and connectivity of educational centers are contextual aspects that help
Explain the low level of use of these tools.
9) Interventions have allowed to guarantee more equitable access to quality education,
favoring the participation of educational communities away from cities, and students
with greater socioeconomic vulnerability. However, the strategy for its implementation
It requires a better definition or clarification of the criteria for prioritization of public
more vulnerable, so that these can be fully benefiting from all opportunities
created by the project.
48
10) the innovation process that emerges from the initiatives supported by digital bridges and that
It reaches educational practices in general in Uruguay, it develops in response to problems
specific and relevant and through pilot interventions. From each of the
Project interventions disseminate innovative and specific tools and platforms,
appropriate to needs, teacher training is promoted for the use of said
Tools and adequate support strategies are provided. In addition, innovation is promoted
through the promotion of collaboration and search for support, information and resources between
Teachers, referents and families.
6.2 Lessons learned
Developed interventions have allowed identifying a set of practices for promotion
of quality education mediated education. These practices are focused on the generation of
Opportunities for the most vulnerable girls and adolescents. They are practices that, although they arise
From the evaluation of digital bridges, they can be analyzed for application to other initiatives.
Involve interested parties in the design of interventions. Participation from the beginning
Of all the parties involved it is key to the effective achievement of the objectives set. For
This is important that organizations that carry out initiatives involve
Interested during all the phases involved in the intervention. That students, teachers, and
referents are part of the design stage is very important for the real needs of the
Actors in educational centers are the focus of the solution. But also to promote your
involvement in interventions, and the interest in finding and promoting improvements to solutions
implemented.
Greater integration of CEIBAL platforms would favor learning opportunities.
Ceibal has developed a set of digital platforms that live together, and can contribute
to the generation of synergies between interventions. There are various articulation opportunities
Among the interventions from the use of platforms, and their use for the development of
digital and socio -emotional competences. It is possible to take advantage of the REA repository for the
Development of student autonomy, highlighting programs such as CEI intensive, and accessibility.
The REA repository, the language platform, and CEIBAL library can be much more exploited
for access to texts, contents, and evaluation activities. These types of practices can
Contribute to distribute among several platforms the use made by children and adolescents,
avoiding wear in the perception they have on platforms widely used as in this case
The Platform Crea. Also, this integration strategy must be flexible enough
as to recognize and adapt the type of real needs of each center.
Articulation between initiatives. A greater articulation between the different initiatives is possible than
It includes digital bridges. This joint can be provided through the shared use of
The platforms themselves, as mentioned in the previous point, as through activities
of learning, the instances of feedback between the technical teams that carry out the
interventions, and/or exchange spaces with the beneficiaries.
It is necessary to include the gender approach in the design of the interventions. It is not enough to count
with descriptive information in the interventions on the type of use made by girls and boys of
Technologies. It is necessary that the initiatives contemplate among their objectives the reduction of
Barriers in access to quality education by children and adolescents, the
49
transformation of cultural practices that promote inequality, and empowerment about
your own rights.
The simultaneous implementation of several interventions makes it difficult to obtain the full potential of the
Innovations introduced. The introduction of many tools, platforms and processes
simultaneously causes many changes to occur in a short time and it is difficult to identify what
aspects could be optimized.
6.3 Recommendations
The recommendations were raised by the evaluation team in the corresponding memos
to each intervention, which can be found in the annexes. These recommendations were later
synthesized for the report on the project as a whole and validated with the teams of all the
interventions through a workshop.
According to the findings and conclusions of the evaluation, it is recommended:
R1. That for the following school years, or for possible plans to expand
interventions, proceed to a clear definition of the required conditions or assumptions
necessary to the successful implementation of each of the interventions.
To whom: Ceibal
R2. That for future implementations, articulation instances are created not only "inside", but
also "between" the different interventions of digital bridges, as well as with other programs and
CEIBAL Badge Platforms (being the clearest example country library). Promote joints
Among the coordination, as well as instances of exchange between referents, technicians, teachers and
beneficiaries of the different interventions - and other educational innovation projects
supported by digital technology - could increase the articulation at all levels of the project.
To whom: CEIBAL and ANEP
R3. That the implementation strategy of each intervention can be adjusted to
characteristics, conditions and specific needs of each context/educational center. That is to say,
that in addition to taking into account the specific criteria defined by the diagnosis for the definition
of the participating centers in each of the interventions, that it is taken into consideration that
These selected centers have different characteristics, which require that each of the
interventions is adjusted (without altering its logic and purposes) to conditions, difficulties and
expectations of each educational center. This definition must be defined in collaboration with
the counterparts of each educational center at the beginning of the school year.
To whom: CEIBAL and educational centers
R4. That in the future an impact assessment is implemented that allows to know, qualify and
quantify structural and long -term changes at the level of teaching practices, processes
of learning and effects on the academic results of students, in the practices of the
Educational centers and in the education system in general, generated or influenced by the project.
To whom: Ceibal and Unicef Uruguay
50
R4. That a detailed study on the barriers that continue to limit the coverage and
Scope of platforms and tools in each of the interventions and contexts/centers
educational. This study must generate evidence and detailed information about the origin, typology
and effects of these barriers, or how to identify what measures are usually more effective and efficient for
overcome those challenges. It is possible that for this type of studies new instruments must be generated
of measurement and monitoring.
To whom: CEIBAL, UNICEF Uruguay and ANEP
R6. That active and passive listening instruments are generated, that allow detecting changes in the
Uses and valuations of key educational platforms as CREA. Student feedback
and teachers about CREA and other cross platforms can collaborate with early design
of strategies to reduce the negative impact of episodes such as overexposure following
Educational emergency following COVID-19.
To whom: CEIBAL and ANEP
R7. That are defined and/or clarified the criteria for prioritization of the most vulnerable public in
The specific case of each intervention (when appropriate), so that they can benefit
fully of all the opportunities created by the project.
To whom: CEIBAL, UNICEF Uruguay and ANEP
R8. That the diagnosis already made with a specific diagnosis of needs is complemented
specific and challenges or barriers related to gender issues and that limit access to
an inclusive and quality education. Intervention strategies must be reviewed and
updated to integrate the gender dimension more effectively in the strategies of
Implementation of interventions.
To whom: Ceibal and Unicef Uruguay
R9. That a strategic plan is developed for the replication of each of the interventions. This
Plan must contain: a strategy for replication nationwide (in other contexts
geographical or more educational centers, it can even make sense to consider the option of
universalize some practices introduced by the project in the education system in Uruguay),
defined together with ANEP and that, eventually, can lead to the institutionalization of some
of interventions in the educational system (be an integral part of the public education policy);
and a strategy to disseminate methodologies and results internationally, with priority to
The Latin America region, together with UNICEF. The plan must include the identification of
priorities, strategic objectives, necessary resources, responsibilities, calendar of
implementation and monitoring and evaluation system.
To whom: CEIBAL, UNICEF Uruguay and ANEP
51
6. Bibliographic references
Internal supplies for evaluation
CEIBAL (2022) BITACORAS CEI EQUIPMENT INTENSIVE
CEIBAL (2022) BRIEF Implementations
CEIBAL (2020) CEI Methodology Statement
CEIBAL (2022) CREA DATA - INTENSIVE CENI CENTERS 2021
CEIBAL (2023) PROJECT REPORT VALUJAS
CEIBAL (2023) KPIS Accessibility
CEIBAL (2023) KPIS Professional Professional Development Strategy
CEIBAL (2023) KPIS REA
CEIBAL (2022) ECUANIME READING
CEIBAL (2022) itinerant language
CEIBAL (s/f) Meeting with Ics and RTS
CEIBAL & UNICEF (s/f) Presentation Digital bridges for educational equity
CEIBAL (2022) PROPOSAL FOR PLAN EVAL
CEIBAL (2022) Open Educational Resources Project
CEIBAL (2022) Adolescent Feedback Summary + Teachers.
CEIBAL (2022) CEI courses monitoring
CEIBAL (s/f) Synthesis edt bridges
CEIBAL (2022) Visits to educational centers: CEI operation registration.
CEIBAL & Nomade Consultant (s/f) Language Platform, Reading Clubs and Country Library.
CEIBAL; CERTI, ANEP, UNICEF (s/f) Traveling suitcase: TECHNOLOGIES FOR INCLUSION
CEIBAL & CERTI (s/f) Presentation reference center in technology for inclusion
CEIBAL & UDELAR (2022) Exploratory study on visual disability: Research Report
Consulting Nomade (2021) CEIBAL Qualitative Research
Consulting Nomade (2022) Digital Rampas Program report
Eval Plan (2022) Evaluation of 'Digital Bridges for Educational Equity'
Proman (2022) Diagnostic study to identify the main barriers that hinder access and
The use of the CEIBAL Plan, with particular focus on children and more adolescents
Vulnerable
Public Access References
CEIBAL and UNICEF (2022) Challenges and opportunities for educational equity.
52
Available at: https://www.unicef.org/uruguay/informes/desafios-y-opaños-para-la-equidad-educativa
Cesteros, A; Romero, E; Ranero, I (2012) Tool for the quality evaluation of objects of
Learning (Coda tool). Complutense University of Madrid.
Available at: https://eprints.ucm.es/id/eprint/12533/1/codav1_1_07jul2012.pdf
FACHAL, A; Guerrero, M; Sanz, Z (2010) Experiences in the use of ICT and digital ramps in the
Computer teaching to tertiary education students with visual or auditory disabilities: XXV
Argentine Congress of Computer Sciences (CACIC). National University of Río Cuarto,
Cordova
Available at: http://sedici.unlp.edu.ar/handle/10915/90556
Fajardo, I; Villalta, E.; & Salmerón, L. (2016). Are digital natives really so good?
Relationship between digital skills and digital reading. Annals of Psychology, 32 (1), 89–97.
Available at: https://doi.org/10.6018/analesps.32.1.185571
Guàrdia Ortiz, L & Sangrá Morer, A. (2005). Instructional design and learning objects; toward
a model for the design of on-line learning evaluation activities Magazine of Education A
Distance (Red).
Available at: https://revistas.um.es/red/article/view/24531
Kaplan, G. and Reyes, A. (2022) CEIBAL in English. Against all odds. Pandemic edition. CEIBAL
Available at:
https://ingles.ceibal.edu
Menese Camargo, P (2020) Educational inequality in Uruguayan secondary education. Pages
Education, 13 (2), 34–58.
Available at: https://doi.org/10.22235/pe.v13I2.2177
Ministry of Education of Argentina (2022) Read in community. Education Collection
Community
Available at: https://www.argentina.gob.ar/sites/default/files/el008028.pdf
Modzelewski, H (2021) Ecuánimes readers. An education in citizenship through narratives and
Emotions Equanimous Reading Collection. Faculty of Humanities and Education Sciences,
University of the Republic.
Stanley, G (2019) Innovations in Education: Remote Teaching. British Council & Ceibal
53
Available at: https://www.teachingengu.org.uk/publications/case-studies-insights-and-
Research/Innovations-Education-Remote-Teaching
WHO & UNICEF (2022) Global Report on Assistive Technology
Available at: https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/9789240049451
54
Appendices
Appendix 1. List of people consulted according to role and subsystem/institution
Intervention Role Subsystem/Institution
Teacher DGES
DGEIP teacher
CFE teacher
Teacher DGES
DGEIP teacher
Teacher DGES
DGEIP teacher
Teacher DGES
CFE teacher
DGETP teacher
DGEIP teacher
DGEIP teacher
DGEIP teacher
DGETP teacher
Teacher DGES
Teacher DGES
CFE teacher
DGETP teacher
Teacher DGES
Teacher DGES
Teacher DGES
Teacher and workshop language line Liceo 2 Tacuarembó
Teacher and Workshop Liceo 2 Tacuarembó
Teacher and Workshop Liceo 3 workshop, San José
55
Teacher and Workshop Liceo 2 San José
Teacher and Workshop Liceo 1 Tacuarembó (PUE Group)
Liceo 62 Workshop from Colón Montevideo
School 317 Balearic Islands
Teacher and workshop duo
Montevideo
Teacher and Workshop Agrarian School of Rigón San José
Technical School Piedras Blancas
Teacher and workshop duo
Montevideo
TEACHER AND WORKSHOP TEACHER UTU RAIGÓN
DGEIP teacher
DGEIP teacher
DGEIP teacher
DGEIP teacher
DGEIP teacher
DGEIP teacher
DGEIP teacher
CEIBAL TEACHER
Teacher DGES
DGETP teacher
DGEIP teacher
DGEIP teacher
DGEIP teacher
Teacher DGES
CEI Intensive Equipment Inspector DGES DGES
DGES DGES Inspector Team
CEIBAL REFERENCE ANEP ANEP
CEI / CEIBAL COORDINATION
CEI / CEIBAL COORDINATION
56
Ceibal Mentor
Ceibal Mentor
Ceibal Mentor
Ceibal mentors
Director Liceo de Soca
Remote Teacher Liceo de Soca
Remote Teacher Liceo de San Luis
SCREEN SAN LUIS ASSCRIPT
San Luis Liceo Director
CORRAL MINES LICEO DIRECTOR
Remote Teacher Liceo de Mines de Corrales
San Antonio Liceo Director
CLASSROOM OF CLASSROOM LICEO DE SAN ANTONIO
Remote Teacher Liceo May 18
Axcript Liceo May 18
Director Liceo May 18
EDPD Teacher CFE
CEIP teacher
Teacher CES
CFE teacher
CFE teacher
CEIP teacher
CETP teacher
Teacher CES
CEIP teacher
CETP teacher
CEIP teacher
57
CEIP teacher
58
Appendix 2. Theory of change accessibility
59
APPENDIX 3. CHANGE THEORY OPEN EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES (REA)
60
Appendix 4. Theory of change Language line
61
Appendix 5. Theory of Ceibal Change in Intensive English (Intensive CEI)
62
Appendix 6. CHANGE THEORY STRATEGY PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT (EDPD)
63
Annex list
Documents that, due to their dimension, are presented separately in this report.
● Terms of evaluation reference
● Memo accessibility
● Memo Rea
● Memo Language Line
● Memo CEI Intensive
● Memo EDPD
● Interview guidelines
● Focal group guidelines
64