EVALUATION OF LAO PDR - UN
PARTNERSHIP FRAMEWORK (UNPF)
2017-2021
Evaluation Report
Prepared for
UN Resident Coordinator’s Office
(RCO)
April, 2021
LE GROUPE
CONSEIL BAASTEL
Le Groupe-conseil baastel ltée
92, rue Montcalm, Gatineau QC, Canada
Boulevard Adolphe Max 55, Brussels, Belgium
P: +1 (819) 595-1421
E: miner.michael2@gmail.com
W: www.baastel.com
Final Evaluation Report i
Acknowledgements
The evaluation of Lao PDR - UN Partnership Framework (UNPF) 2017-2021 was conducted by a team of
international and national evaluators working under the direction of the UN Resident Coordinator, in
cooperation with the UNCT and Government of Lao PDR who form the Joint Steering Committee.
The evaluation team first wants to thank Ms. Sara Sekkenes Tollefsen, Resident Coordinator, United
Nations Lao PDR and her Resident Coordinator Office’s team members, including: Ms. Lin Yang, Ms.
Banthida Komphasouk, Mr. Matthew David Johnson-Idan and Mr. Wesley Ramnauth for their help
arranging and supporting the evaluation, in providing documents, offering input on evaluation
questions, methodology and on the evaluation report. We also want to thank the RCO team for linking
the evaluation team with the government and development partners’ stakeholders and other UN
evaluations’ teams taking place at the same time.
We would also like to thank the Joint Steering Committee, including the leaders and members of the
Government of Lao PDR as well as UN agencies’ representatives who participated in interviews and
provided feedback on the draft report and to the UNCT members who also participated in interviews
and also provided valuable feedback.
Very importantly, we also want to acknowledge the time, readiness and interest of the 141 respondents
who participated in the evaluation through a variety of modalities including individual and group
interviews, focus group meetings, completing the evaluation survey and reviewing drafts of the report.
The evaluation team leader very much wishes to thank the evaluation team he led, which included Mr.
Alexandre Daoust, Ms. Latsany Phakdisoth, Ms. Dalaphone Sihanath, Dr. Melinda MacDonald, Ms.
Arnelle Blain and our company, Le Groupe Baastel, and the staff there and in particular Ms. Amelie
Falcon-Borduas.
Michael Miner, Evaluation Team Leader.
Final Evaluation Report ii
TABLE
OF CONTENTS
1. INTRODUCTION ................................................................................................................. 1
1.1. Purpose, Scope and Evaluation Objectives ....................................................................... 1
1.1.1. PURPOSE ........................................................................................................................ 1
1.1.2. SCOPE ............................................................................................................................ 2
1.1.3. OBJECTIVES .................................................................................................................... 2
1.1.4. PRINCIPLES AND PILLARS ................................................................................................. 3
1.2. Evaluability Assessment and Approach ............................................................................. 3
1.2.1. EVALUABILITY ASSESSMENT ............................................................................................. 3
1.2.2. APPROACH ...................................................................................................................... 4
1.2.3. KEY EVALUATION QUESTIONS ........................................................................................... 7
1.2.4. STAKEHOLDERS MAPPING AND ANALYSIS ........................................................................... 8
2. EVALUATION METHODOLOGY .......................................................................................11
2.1. Data collection strategy ....................................................................................................11
2.2. Primary Data Sources, Analysis and Triangulation ...........................................................13
2.2.1. DATA ANALYSIS ..............................................................................................................17
2.3. Data Protection Protocol and Evaluation Ethics ...............................................................18
2.4. Quality Assurance ............................................................................................................19
2.5. Limitations ........................................................................................................................19
3. FINDINGS OF THE EVALUATION.....................................................................................20
3.1. Relevance ........................................................................................................................20
3.2. Effectiveness ....................................................................................................................27
3.3 Efficiency ..........................................................................................................................35
3.4 Sustainability ..................................................................................................................39
3.5 Cross-cutting issues ..........................................................................................................44
3.6 Forward Looking Perspectives ..........................................................................................55
4 LIST OF FINDINGS, CONCLUSIONS AND LESSONS LEARNED ....................................58
Final Evaluation Report iii
4. RECOMMENDATIONS ......................................................................................................66
ANNEXES ................................................................................................................................71
ANNEX 1: EVALUATION MATRIX ...........................................................................................71
ANNEX 2: UNPF- DOCUMENT REVIEW ..............................................................................80
o Inclusive Growth, Livelihoods and Resilience ............................................................81
o Human Development .......................................................................................................93
o Governance, Rule of Law and Participation in National Decision Making ............ 103
o Issues Emerging from Preliminary Desk Review of Documents: Initial Thoughts
on Thematic Challenges ..................................................................................................... 111
ANNEX 3: DATA COLLECTION TOOLS/ PROTOCOLS-DISTRIBUTION LIST .................... 116
ANNEX 4: UNPF STAKEHOLDERS ...................................................................................... 142
ANNEX 5: LIST OF DOCUMENTS CONSULTED .................................................................. 148
ANNEX 6: LIST OF PEOPLE CONSULTED .......................................................................... 150
ANNEX 7: LIST OF ORGANIZATION CONSULTED ............................................................. 156
ANNEX 8: SURVEY RESULTS .............................................................................................. 157
ANNEX 9 : TERMS OF REFERENCE .................................................................................... 172
Final Evaluation Report iv
ACRONYMS
Acronyms Significance
AFML ASEAN Forum on Migrant Labour
AFP Agencies, Funds and Programmes
ASEAN Association of South East Asian Nations
BRI Belt and Road Initiative
CFS Child-Friendly Schools
CIIE China International Import Expo
CPD Country Programme Document
CPN Child Protection Network
CSO Civil Society Organizations
DESA United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs
DDF District Development Fund
ECE Early Childhood Education
ET Evaluation Team
EST Eastern Standard Time
EU European Union
FAO Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
GDP Gross Domestic Product
GE Gender Equality
Final Evaluation Report v
Acronyms Significance
GEEW Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women
HR Human Rights
HRH Human Resources for Health
HSRS Health Sector Reform Strategy
IAEA International Atomic Energy Agency
IFAD International Fund for Agricultural Development
ILO International Labour Organization
INGO International Non-Governmental Organization
IDR Issuer Default Rating
IR Inception Report
IRIS International Recruitment Integrity System
ITC International Trade Center
IOM International Organization for Migration
JSC Joint Steering Committee
KII Key Informant Interview
LANITH Lao National Institute of Tourism and Hospitality
Lao PDR Lao People’s Democratic Republic
LDC Least Development Countries
LFTU Lao Federation of Trade Unions
LNCCI Lao National Chamber of Commerce
Final Evaluation Report vi
Acronyms Significance
LYU Lao Youth Union
LWU Lao’s Women Union
LSB Lao Statistics Bureau
MAF Ministry of Agriculture
MECG Mother and Early Childhood Grant
MDD Minimum Dietary Diversity
M&E Monitoring and Evaluation
MOFA Ministry of Foreign Affairs
MoIC Ministry of Industry and Commerce
MoJ Ministry of Justice
MoH Ministry of Health
MoLSW Ministry of Labour and Social Welfare of Lao PDR
MoNRE, Ministry of Natural Resources and Environment
MoPS Ministry of Public Security
MPI Ministry of Planning and Investment
NA National Assembly
The National Commission for the Advancement of Women, Mothers and
NCAWMC
Children
NEET Youth Not in Employment, Education or Training
NGO Non- Government Organisation
NHI National Health Insurance
Final Evaluation Report vii
Acronyms Significance
NPA Non-Profit Associations
NRES National Rural Employment Strategy
NSEDP National Socio-Economic Development Plan
NSPS National Social Protection Strategy
NSSF National Social Security Fund
ODOP One-District-One-Product
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development -Development
OECD-DAC
Assistance Committee
OLS Online survey
OOP Out of Pocket
OSPP Office of Supreme People’s Prosecutor
PBG Performance based Grants
PFM Public Financial Management
PMF Project Management Framework
PPA Provincial People’s Assemblies
PPT Power Point file
PSIF Public Service Innovation Facility
RASaL Resilient Agriculture Systems and Livelihoods
RBM Results Based Management
RCO Resident Coordinator Office
SDG United Nations Sustainable Development Goals
Final Evaluation Report viii
Acronyms Significance
SME Small and Medium Enterprises
ToC Theory of Change
TOR Terms of Reference
TVET Technical, Vocational and Education Training
UFE Utilization-Focused Evaluation
UHC Universal Health Coverage
UNAIDS Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS
UNCDF United Nations Capital Development Fund
UNCITRAL United Nations Commission on International Trade Law
UNCT United Nations Country Team
UNDP United Nations Development Development Program
UNEG United Nations Evaluation Group
UNEP United Nations Environment Programme
UNESCO United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization
UNFCCC UN Framework Convention on Climate Change
UNFPA United Nations Population Fund
UN-Habitat United Nations Human Settlement Programme
UNICEF United Nations International Children’s Emergency Fund
UNIDO United Nations Industrial Development Organization
UNJP UN Joint Programme
Final Evaluation Report ix
Acronyms Significance
UNPF Lao PDR - United Nations Partnership Framework
UNSDCF Lao PDR - UN Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework
UNODC United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
UNV United Nations Volunteers
UN Women United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women
UPR Universal Periodic Review
Socio-Economic Response Plan
QA Quality Assurance
VSS Voluntary Sustainability Standards
WASH Water Sanitation and Hygiene
WFP World Food Programme
WHO World Health Organisation
Final Evaluation Report x
Executive Summary
1. Purpose
As described in the Terms of Reference (TOR), the overall purpose of the UNPF evaluation in
Lao PDR was to assess the extent to which the UNPF outcomes (2017-2021) are aligned and
contributed to the national development priorities set forth in the 8th NSEDP and to determine the
extent to which UNPF outcomes have been achieved. In addition, the evaluation examined the
relevance, efficiency, and effectiveness of UNPF results as well as the sustainability of the
UNCT’s support to national development priorities. The evaluation is intended to feed into design
of the forthcoming Lao PDR - UN Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework (UNSDCF)
2022-2026.
2. Objectives
As per the TOR, the overall objectives of the UNPF evaluation were to:
• Assess UNPF’s overall effectiveness in advancing Lao PDR’s national development
agenda (8th NSEDP);
• Review results achieved during the UNPF 2017-2021 cycle;
• Review UNPF’s relevance, efficiency, effectiveness, and sustainability against Lao PDR’s
national development agenda (8th NSEDP);
• Examine how the five UN programming principles have been mainstreamed in the results-
based management cycle (design, implementation, and M&E) of the UNPF; and
• Provide clear, actionable strategic and programmatic recommendations for improving the
UNCT’s contribution to Lao PDR’s development priorities, taking into consideration the
Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs).
3. Principles and Pillars
The UNPF is underpinned by the five programming principles of: gender equality, human rights-
based approach, environmental sustainability, results-based management and capacity
development. It also considered the specific context of Lao PDR focusing on its cultural and
national heritage, its very diverse number and variety of ethnic groups, its phased reform process
and agricultural economy with a pronounced rural-urban divide. The UNPF is supported by three
key pillars: 1. Inclusive Growth, Livelihoods and Resilience; 2. Human Development; and 3.
Governance, Rule of Law and Participation in National Decision making under which the key
outcomes are framed.
Final Evaluation Report xi
4. Evaluation Methodology
Beginning in September, 2020, the evaluation team (ET) met with members of the UNCT followed
by a meeting with the UNCT and evaluation team members conducting evaluations of particular
UN agencies including UNDP, WFP and UNFPA. The UNPF Evaluation Team then began with
carrying out an Evaluability Assessment and the first line of evidence which was a desk and
document review which was carried out and informed development of the Inception Report
submitted in October, 2020. The agreed 5 lines of evidence are described below:
Table 1 : WORK PLAN – 5 LINES OF EVIDENCE (LOE)
COVID-19 considerations:
n oEvaluability n o LOE 2: Key g n Preparation
it passessment it c informant it r of Draft Since COVID 19 prevented Baastel’s
e c
nLOE 1: Desk
e llo interviews o p
e
Report international team members from
I :I
e s a h P
a
d re
n
o v
d
c i u e m w ent
c a
t a D :II
e
L
g d
L
O
O
r is o
E
E
c u u
3
4
p s
:
:
s
F
io
o
n
c
s
us
:III e s a
h
RL
R t
fi
o
O
n
o
d
u v
E
e
i
n
5
n
r d
:
g
i f t
s
y a
,
ble
c
c w
o
a h
m
r i r c i
i
e h
n
d
g
w o
t
u
o
a t s
L
in
a
t
o
h th e e
P D
m p
R
r o e
,
r v n i
Z
i o n
o
u g
o
s
m
in e
c
v
a
L e
l
a n
ls
o in
w
g P D
er
i R
e
n
Deliverable: s a P conclusions Eastern Canada.
Inception
hSurvey
P and
Report Data Analysis recommenda Interviews in Lao were carried out by the
and
tions two local team member s during the days
triangulation
Final in Lao PDR. To ensure consistency, the
deliverable: same tools/templates were designed
Final
and used for a ll parts of data collection
Evaluation
and analysis.
Report
In November and December, 2020, the data collection phase including key informant interviews
(KIIs), focus group discussions and an on-line survey. Table 2 and Table 3 indicate the number
of respondents which overall included interviews with 97 participants from 48 organizations plus
7 UN in 2 focus groups and 37 survey respondents for an overall total of 141 respondents from
61 organizations. Aside from the anonymous survey results, sex disaggregated numbers were:
34 male and 18 female for the Government’s 52 stakeholders, 17 male and 18 female for 35 UN
representatives and 11 male and 6 female for 17 other stakeholders for a total of 104.
Table 2: Primary data collection from organizations
# of KIIs # of KIIs
Org. Remarks
requested done
UNCT 18 18
Final Evaluation Report xii
# of KIIs # of KIIs
Org. Remarks
requested done
One government partner preferred to provide written comments
Govt. 20 19
instead of remote interview
DPs 13 11 One DP and one INGO declined the KII requests
Total 51 48
Table3: - Primary Data Collection – Survey
Government UN Agencies Development partners survey
representatives Survey
survey
Population 85 23 14
Emails sent 85 23 14
Questionnaire filled 8 8 2
through email
Anonymous 14 5 0
questionnaires
completed
Total of responses 22 13 2
Response rate 26 % 57% 14%
The data gathered in the 4 lines of evidence were recorded by the 4 interviewers on templates
based on the 20 specific evaluation questions under relevance, effectiveness, efficiency,
sustainability, cross cutting themes and forward-looking perspectives. In January, 2021, the team
carried out a content analysis and triangulation of all the data and presented a set of findings on
Feb 7 followed by sharing Draft 1 of the Report with findings, conclusions and recommendations
on Feb 8. A few comments which were received on Feb. 15, 2021 were integrated into a revised
power point which was presented and discussed with the UNCT on Feb. 16, 2021. Several
additional ideas were suggested at the meeting and 3 regional comments were received
afterwards which were considered and responded to in developing draft 2 of this final report.
Final Evaluation Report xiii
Taped input from all the meetings were used to help the Evaluation Team to finalize Draft 2 of the
Report. This Executive Summary and report include an updated version of the findings,
conclusions and recommendations which were presented in a PPT to the JSC roundtable on Feb.
26, 2021. Following that presentation, feedback at the roundtable and follow-up comments in
writing from the Government of Lao PDR were presented on March 16, 2021 and responded to
and included in this Final Report. The ET also responded to comments in writing.
Final Evaluation Report xiv
Findings Conclusions Recommendations
Relevance
1. The large majority of stakeholders (over 1. The UNPF is relevant and aligned to the 1. To further integrate the UNSDCF within the
75%) in the UN, Government of Lao PDR and political and economic context in which it is Lao PDR context, the UNCT needs to build on
other agencies consulted all agree that the implemented. The actual process of positive movement towards overcoming
UN Partnership Framework (UNPF) is well developing the document is itself also challenges linked to differing administrative
aligned with national plans and priorities relevant and brings stakeholders together to modalities among UN agencies, development
identified in the Lao PDR 8th NSEDP. Specific discuss their vision on how the UN, as a partners and the Lao PDR government. It also
results are primarily delivered through system and a neutral partner, can align its needs to identify ways to widen the
individual UN Agency efforts working with work with the priorities and needs of Lao partnership to include INGOs/NPAs, the
partners. PDR. private sector and new development
2. The UNPF thematic areas are aligned with partners. At the strategic level, the Joint
the national priorities of the 8th NSEDP of Steering Committee should agree on
Lao PDR and have contributed to progress directional issues while at the operational
towards most targets but the level a joint Theory of Change, monitoring
implementation results are mixed. framework and indicators should be
3. The UN is seen as a neutral partner with developed together.
strong technical expertise supporting the
Government to achieve the 8th NSEDP and Recommendation for: the UNCT and
SDG targets. headquarters of UN organizations and the
4. Overall the UNRC and UNCT is leading Joint Steering Committee.
movement towards improved interagency
cooperation and collaboration among UN When: during the preparation and
agencies and also with the Government of implementation of the upcoming UNSDCF.
Lao PDR and other agencies but issues
related to differing administrative modalities
among UN agencies, other agencies and the
Lao PDR Government make it difficult to
optimize results and avoid duplication.
5. Outreach to the private sector, the
INGOs/NPAs and to new development
partners is has not been significant and is
essential to expanding the UNPF partnership
Final Evaluation Report xv
Findings Conclusions Recommendations
between the UN and the Government of Lao
PDR. But at present this situation is improving
with several UN agencies increasing their
linkages with INGOs/NPAs and expanding
partnerships with multiple stakeholders such
as e.g. UNFPA.
6. The UN Agencies have responded well to
the COVID crises which has enhanced the
relevance of the UN working together as a
whole.
Effectiveness
7. The UNCT is well respected as a UN 2. The UNCT and its member agencies, partly 2. To ensure more effective implementation
coordinating body with improved positioning through the use of the UNPF, have achieved of the upcoming UNSDCF, the Lao PDR
credibility, reliability and communication good results, all the more through its support government needs to more actively
thanks to strong leadership from the UNRC to national institutions and ministries. These participate in programmes designed and
which can potentially help bring about counterparts respect and have confidence in implemented by and with UN Agencies. The
culture change within the Lao PDR UNCT. the UN system and its technical as well as UNCT also needs to continue to fully consult
8. The UNPF clarifies Agency Financial thematic expertise. the government throughout development of
Priorities effectively. the UNSDCF and also in development of
9. Non-resident UN Agencies report they are 3. The Sector Working Groups set up by the major coordinated programmes to ensure full
well integrated into the UNCT. Government and the Results Groups commitment and ownership.
10. UNPF reporting has good coverage but coordinated by the UN are not well aligned. Recommendation for: the UNCT and the
reports are challenged in measuring progress While the Sector WGs are at the output Government.
on indicators due to weak baselines and sectoral level, the Results Groups are at the When: during the preparation and
wide-ranging indicators. outcome level. This has contributed to the implementation of the upcoming UNSDCF.
11. Increased capacity is needed in M&E as two groups not coordinating as well as they
well as in statistical and data management in could in their work together. 3. The Sector Working Groups and Results
UN Agencies and the Government of Lao Working Groups should be aligned at the
PDR. 4. In the Government’s view, the UNPF and outcome level to the 9th NSEDP and the
12. Many stakeholders view the work of the UNCT need to empower Government UNSDCF in order to promote and track
UN Results Groups as an internal UN stakeholders more in terms of decision- changes at the transformational outcome
mechanism while the 10 Sector Working making, and involvement during programme level.
Final Evaluation Report xvi
Findings Conclusions Recommendations
Groups are a broader Government and planning and implementation of UN Recommendation for: the UNCT and Joint
Development Partner mechanism working programmes. Steering Committee.
under the Round Table process. When: during the preparation and
13. The Results Groups are uneven in level of implementation of the upcoming UNSDCF.
ownership by specific agencies and in their
levels of involvement in planning and 4. Clarification of AFPs and reporting have
implementing programmes. been valuable, but further improvements are
14. UN programme teams need to empower needed to strengthen M&E and statistical
Government stakeholders more in terms of management as well as overall joint
decision-making during programme planning reporting.
and implementation of UN programmes. Recommendation for: the UNCT.
When: immediately.
Efficiency
15. Each UN Agency has its own 5. Although UN agencies, in part thanks to 5. The UNRC, through the UNPF and the up
administrative modalities which makes it the UNPF, have shown in many instances that coming UNSDCF, needs to continue to
challenging for Ministries in Lao PDR to work they can coordinate their work through joint support the culture change that encourages
with UN Agencies since they implement programming, many challenges remain to more joint programme design and
similar programmes using different methods overcome silos within a number of agencies implementation which better reflects the
which often increases transaction costs and which are focused on their own specific “One UN”. Individual and team leadership is
creates duplication. mandates. the key to fostering this cultural change.
16. UN Agencies tend to work in siloes Some UN agencies could benefit from
focussed on achieving their own mandates 6. In order to increase coordination among financial incentives or support for
which limits their efficiency linking with UN Agencies in the field, and avoid coordination which would encourage them to
others to achieve UNPF’s umbrella mandate. duplication, it is important to involve the take part in more joint initiatives.
17. There are many examples of headquarters of these UN Agencies since this Recommendation for: the UNCT and UNRC.
coordination on initiatives (e.g. Joint is where policy decisions are made. When: during the preparation and
Programme on Social Protection). implementation of the upcoming UNSDCF
and beyond.
6. Ways need to be found to overcome the
effects of differing administrative modalities
used by: UN agencies in the field and at UN
Final Evaluation Report xvii
Findings Conclusions Recommendations
headquarters which can be identified through
discussions among the agencies.
Recommendation for: UNCT and
Headquarters of UN agencies
When: Streamlined overtime starting
immediately.
Sustainability
18. Several stakeholders pointed to strong 7. Although the COVID-19 pandemic has 7. The UNCT needs to bring the sustainability
UN AFP partnerships in many provinces and actually strengthened the UN’s capacity to of initiatives, including for disasters of all
districts in Lao PDR but several other work together, overall, the crisis has also set types, to the center of the UNSDCF and guide
stakeholders indicated that most UN support the country back on many fronts. Some of coordinated efforts that can have longer
is at the national policy dialogue level with the progress Lao PDR was making towards lasting results. UN agencies should make
less at the provincial and district levels where graduation from LDC status has slowed down every effort to support policy changes being
actual implementation of policies and making rapid graduation more difficult. implemented at all “levels” (i.e. national,
strategies takes place. regional, district and local).
19. There does not appear to be sufficient 8. The present UNPF framework still has Recommendation for: the UNCT.
emphasis on sustaining results in some of the some gaps in terms of setting a context in When: during the preparation and
projects. which information, knowledge and know- implementation of the upcoming UNSDCF
20. There is a lack of knowledge transfer, how can be shared beyond participants who and beyond.
coaching and mentoring to build capacity and are directly involved in UN agencies’ capacity
contribute to sustainability. building and technical assistance. 8. In engaging and supporting the
21. A longer transition period is needed for Government, the UN system’s support at the
Lao PDR’s graduation from LCD status given national and local level should be balanced to
the effects of COVID-19 and need for UN and help promote the government’s Sam Sang
donor initiatives to build sustainability decentralization policy which assigns broad
through improved use of national systems. roles to provinces as strategic units, districts
22. Sustainability needs to be supported as as comprehensive planning units and villages
an integrated whole including focusing on as development units.
resiliency, building on institution Recommendation for: the UNCT.
strengthening of the governance institutions, When: during the preparation and
building and sustaining human capital within implementation of the upcoming UNSDCF.
the government and widening the
Final Evaluation Report xviii
Findings Conclusions Recommendations
partnerships to include the private sector,
INGOs/NPAs and new development partners.
Cross Cutting Issues
Gender Equality (GE) 9. Gender mainstreaming is well supported in 9. Gender Mainstreaming is essentially well
23. Lao PDR had good gender mainstreaming Lao PDR and promoted by UN agencies and integrated in how the UNCT operates in Lao
but more effort needs to be placed on the UNPF. The UN is already seen as a leader PDR; however, the UNCT can and should
women’s empowerment and women’s rights in GE which has helped introduce sensitive extend this gender mainstreaming effort to
to achieve SDG 5. topics such as GBV prevalence in Lao PDR some of the so-called technical programmes
24. The UN has provided good entry points to which in turn provides a dialogue platform to to ensure that women and girls are also
discuss sensitive topics but needs to better strengthen discussions on women’s rights sharing equally in the fruits of development.
coordinate with other development partners and empowerment. The UNCT should put particular emphasis on
as well as the government to continue to gender equality and making sure it is
advance the GE agenda in Lao PDR. Working 10. Gender Equality in Lao PDR is well done mainstreamed in everything it does, including
with other stakeholders will help identify overall with many promising areas which are the planning and implementation of the
gaps in policy and capacity. positioned to be entry points and platforms upcoming UNSDCF.
25. The Government would like the UN to for the expansion of the rights of women and Recommendation for: the UNCT.
take the lead on GE and the UNCT to identify girls such as reproductive rights, promotion When: during the preparation and
a lead agency since UN Women is not in of the rights of the girl child and work on implementation of the upcoming UNSDCF
country at present. GBV. and beyond.
10. Commencing with the solid platform of
GE mainstreaming and good work done on
GBV, the Joint Steering Committee, together
should address more directly women’s and
girls’ rights and women’s empowerment
bringing issues related to the public and
private sphere together. All rights are
indivisible and need to be seen as working
together.
Recommendation for: the Joint Steering
Committee.
Final Evaluation Report xix
Findings Conclusions Recommendations
When: during the preparation and
implementation of the upcoming UNSDCF
and beyond.
Human Rights Based Approaches (HRBA) 11. In terms of the human rights-based 11. As with gender equality and gender
26. Promotion and strengthening of HRs has approach, the 10 principles of the UN Global mainstreaming efforts, it is important for all
a transformative effect but is still weak in Compact including human rights and stakeholders to utilize entry points towards a
some policy areas in Lao PDR. environment and the 3 pillars of the Ruggie wider discussion on human rights, beginning
27. HR provides a platform for more inclusive Principles (protect, respect and remedy) are with children’s rights, educational rights, and
growth and the ability to advocate for its recognized to be well supported by the UN addressing poverty alleviation, health and
inclusion but it is still a sensitive subject in Agencies but there are still issues with HRs social justice concerns to help move the
the country; human security issues are better within the country. The government has needle towards a more just and equal
accepted with a focus on poverty reduction, signed several International Human Rights society.
labour and social welfare and education. Conventions such as CEDAW and included Recommendation for: all stakeholders
gender equity and human rights in the involved in the UNSDCF.
national constitution, but there are areas in When: during the preparation and
which the UNPF could make efforts to further implementation of the upcoming UNSDCF
bring forward human rights. and beyond.
12. The UN has advocated for HRBA as 12. ESCR and CPR are not mutually exclusive
transformative and works to strengthen its categories but interrelated. Therefore, when
inclusion in the development process, while discussing the rights of women and girls, non
the Lao PDR government argue for a step- Lao-Tai ethnic group rights, migrant workers
wise approach in which primarily human rights, etc., it is vital to demonstrate a link
security concerns, related to poverty between the need for agency and decision
alleviation and social welfare, are making as well as the right to education, land
emphasized in the early stages over other rights and decent work.
rights. In short, Lao PDR is more comfortable Recommendation for: all stakeholders
promoting Economic, Social and Cultural involved in the UNSDCF.
Rights (ESCR) over those of Civil and Political When: during the preparation and
Rights (CPR). implementation of the upcoming UNSDCF
and beyond.
Final Evaluation Report xx
Findings Conclusions Recommendations
Environmental Sustainability 13. The environment is of central concern to 13. One of the best entry points to move
28. As with GE, Environmental Sustainability development partners in Lao PDR and a focus from the dialogue on Environmental
is well supported. Cross-currents however, of many projects with the Government, both Sustainability to concrete action plans is
such as poverty alleviation, the abundance of with the UN and Other Development through disaster risk/ disaster management
mineral deposits in Lao PDR and the regional Partners. However, there are other which naturally leads to the climate issue and
appetite to acquire them, lead to Lao PDR’s (economic) forces that put pressure on the ecosystem degradation. This issue has the
extractive economy. In turn, this economy environment. Environmental factors include added benefit of highlighting gender equality
exacerbates the increase in climate disasters human rights concerns since many small and non Lao-Tai ethnic group issues since
such as flooding and storms. farmers for example, are among the hardest these overlapping vulnerabilities make
29. Disaster management has worked as a hit by the effects of environmental natural disasters even more destructive for
critical entry-point for combatting challenges unsustainable actions. These negative certain populations. It is hence
related to ES since it has a high degree of environmental outcomes affect more recommended that the UNCT, through the
acceptance. importantly a sub-set of the rural poor, upcoming UNSDCF, concentrates significant
30. The failure to deal with ES has a women and girls from non Lao-Tai ethnic environmental sustainability efforts on
disproportionate effect on women and girls, groups who engage in subsistence farming. disaster risk/ disaster management.
particularly in rural areas were women and Lao PDR, like other countries in the region, Recommendation for: the UNCT.
girls are over-represented in small e.g., Vietnam, is experiencing the effects of When: during the preparation and
subsistence farming. climate change through increased storms and implementation of the upcoming UNSDCF
flooding which often destroy the livelihoods
of the country’s most vulnerable women and
children involved in subsistence farming.
Results Based Management (RBM) 14. The UNPF does not include substantial 14. The UNRC, the UNCT, the Government of
31. A clearly articulated Theory of Change RBM content or detailed guiding principles Lao PDR and other stakeholders, as is
(ToC) which spells out key assumptions and that promote a fully coordinated approach to possible, should be jointly involved in the
outcomes would help to provide an reporting by the UN as a system but rather development of the Theory of Change. It is
overarching strategy on the programme and than as individual agencies with good imperative that the UNCT bases the new
RBM. content. The RBM system does not yet UNSDCF on increased and enhanced levels of
32. The uniqueness of UN Agencies and the reduce pressure on signatory agencies by baseline data and data coordination. The
overwhelming number of indicators makes it emphasizing the need to focus on higher design of indicators and targets should be a
challenging to collect data and for there to be level outcomes that demonstrate changes joint exercise carried out in consultation with
ownership by the Lao PDR government. More that are contributing to higher level results the Lao PDR government which will increase
support for government is needed by the UN and changes by building the capacity of
Final Evaluation Report xxi
Findings Conclusions Recommendations
Agencies to help Lao PDR overcome data national stakeholders to themselves generate joint buy-in and lead to improved
related and statistical capacity concerns. long lasting changes within their society. measurement of progress.
33. The UNPF can provide an overall umbrella Recommendation for: all stakeholders
mandate but there needs more emphasis on involved in the UNSDCF.
contribution rather on attribution of results When: during the preparation and
to make this workable for all development implementation of the upcoming UNSDCF.
partners.
Capacity Building 15. Although UN programmes and the UNPF 15. The UNCT, in close coordination with the
34. The Lao PDR government would like to integrate technical assistance as an important Lao PDR government, needs to develop and
see more technical assistance and capacity approach to support Lao PDR nationals to jointly implement an integrated capacity
building rather than having international increase their capacity to achieve results development plan which responds to the
experts managing programmes since they see themselves, more focus is needed on learning needs of the Government of Lao PDR. This
this as more sustainable in the long run. The by doing and generating local ownership plan needs to include a specific section on
UN agrees that capacity building in a number rather than having international experts building monitoring and evaluation capacity
of key areas is critical for achieving and leading programmes. This is especially to help develop baselines and measure
sustaining the development agenda in Lao important as Lao PDR moves towards progress. Human capital investment is
PDR and includes CB in every programme. graduation from LDC status. There should be important (including investments in TVET
35. The government appreciates support to a balance between investments in human however it is also important to invest in
staff for capacity building but would also like capacity and institutional systems building to institutional strengthening within the
more capacity building or institution building ensure succession planning. There is a Government Public Service to become
at the systemic levels of government, e.g., consensus around the fact that capacity sustainable).
provision of improved systems and building is a key area for sustainability and is Recommendation for: Joint Steering
technology etc. since high staff turn-over and an important area for the future UNSDCF and Committee.
insufficient succession planning makes it a core for future programming. When: during the preparation and
difficult to sustain gains made by staff who implementation of the upcoming UNSDCF.
have benefitted from capacity building alone.
There needs to be a balance between
investments in human capital and
institutional systems building to maximize the
effectiveness of capacity building.
Final Evaluation Report xxii
Findings Conclusions Recommendations
Forward Looking Perspectives 16. The key messages for the next UNSDCF 16. Moving forward it is important to look
36. It appeared to several representatives in are: back at relevance to ensure sustainability.
all areas that some agencies and Ministries Align with the 9th NSEDP with jointly agreed The UNSCDF, as a universal mandate or
have not allocated sufficient resources for indicators identified, monitored and blueprint, should be addressed at two levels:
M&E so they propose that additional reviewed by the JSC and coordinated by the the strategic and operational. The Plan of
resources be committed by agencies linked to UNRC; Action process to concretize this could be:
the UNRC which could provide coordination Allocate more resources for M&E across the
purposes. A joint monitoring approach will board and use a joint monitoring approach Step 1: Consultation Process – Bring together
benefit both large and small UN Agencies and and joint analysis of programme proposals the Government of Lao PDR, UN Agencies,
the Government since cross over issues will etc.; and, Development Partners, private sector and
become more apparent and help agencies, Focus on supporting capacity building and INGOs/NPAs in a series of consultations led
the Government and the UNSDCF to plan. institutional strengthening nationally and by the UNRC and UNCT who are well trusted
37. Multiple stakeholders support the need increasingly at the provincial and district neutral parties.
for the UN and multilateral and bilateral levels. To make this possible will require
development partners to work together on a increased collaboration and commitment Step 2: Development of a Joint Theory of
range of activities including joint initial among development partners, the UN Change which could provide an overarching
analysis of programme proposals, agencies in country and their headquarters vision for change.
coordinating and having good exchanges and with the Government of Lao PDR at
across sectors and in specific sectors and also multiple levels. Step 3: Development of joint-indicators
joint monitoring and evaluation missions and
linkages that increase data sharing among all Step 4: More regular, at least annual
stakeholders. meetings, of the Joint Steering Committee
38. Clearly there is a need for finding ways to are required.
cut transaction costs in procurement and
programme implementation and overcome
the fallout from stakeholders needing to
comply with multiple rules and regulations.
39. Most of the groups of representatives
suggest that the focus of the next UNSDCF
needs to be on increasing the capacity of
government staff to develop, manage,
implement and monitor programmes with
Final Evaluation Report xxiii
Findings Conclusions Recommendations
decentralised decision-making and approval
capability which is likely to increase
government ownership.
40. There is agreement among most
stakeholders that there has not been
sufficient focus in most programmes building
local capacity at the provincial and district
levels which needs to be improved in the
next UNSDCF by integrating these levels in
plans and programmes.
The recommendations are directed to the key stakeholders together (rather than to the UNCT) since to implement them, the UNCT
needs to work with the Government of Lao PDR with input from other stakeholders (e.g., Mass Organizations, INGO/NPAs, Private
Sector and UN Agencies headquarters). Therefore, implementation of the UN Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework
(UNSDCF) should include:
• A jointly agreed Theory of Change by the Joint Steering Committee meeting regularly,
• A coordinated strategy linking the Sector Working Groups with the UN Results Groups,
• An agreed approach to capacity building in support of the Government of Lao PDR, and
• A jointly agreed M, E & L approach with jointly agreed indicators and baselines.
This approach is consistent with the findings and conclusions of this UNPF evaluation and also to findings and conclusions of 3 country
evaluations for UNFPA, WFP and UNDP in late 2020-early 2021.
As indicated, in a comparative table at the end of the report, all the evaluation reports suggest the way forward is to focus on partnership
and to working together to develop an integrated, transformative and strategic approach to finalizing the UNSDCF to support the 9th
NESDP and the SDGs in Lao PDR.
Final Evaluation Report 1
1. INTRODUCTION
This draft evaluation report has been carried out in stages which included an initial consultation
with the UNCT, development of an inception report in October, 2020 which included a document
review (in the Annex of this report), data gathering in November and December, 2020 which
included input from 104 stakeholders in the Government of Lao PDR, the UN agencies and other
partner agencies, and data analysis and triangulation in January and February 2021. The report
includes findings, conclusions, lessons learned, and recommendations based on the data
gathered by this evaluation team.
The primary data for the report was gathered from the interviews, focus groups and the survey
responses as follows:
Government of Lao UN Agencies Other Agencies Total
PDR
Key Informant 52 28 17 104
Interviews (97)
Focus Group (7) 7
Online Survey 22 13 2 37
Total 74 48 19 141
As noted in Annex 6, these participants represented 19 Lao PDR government departments, 18
UN agencies, 14 development partners and 3 INGOs for a total of 48 organizations.
The final draft of the report also compares the results of this evaluation with 3 other evaluations
that have been carried out simultaneously with this evaluation in Lao PDR. What they illustrate
is that there is a significant degree of coherence among key results. This should assist the UN in
preparing its the new UNSDCF which will be linked to Lao PDR’s 9th Five-Year National Socio-
Economic Development Plan (2021-2025).
1.1. Purpose, Scope and Evaluation Objectives
1.1.1. Purpose
As described in the Terms of Reference (TOR), the overall purpose of the UNPF evaluation was
to assess the extent to which the UNPF outcomes (2017-2021) are aligned and contributed to the
Final Evaluation Report 2
national development priorities set forth in the 8th NSEDP and to determine the extent to which
UNPF outcomes have been achieved. In addition, the evaluation examined the relevance,
efficiency, and effectiveness of UNPF results as well as the sustainability of the UNCT’s support
to national development priorities. The evaluation will feed into design of the forthcoming Lao
PDR - UN Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework (UNSDCF) 2022-2026.
1.1.2. Scope
The evaluation worked with UN agencies in country and those which have programmes in Lao
PDR but do not have local offices. The evaluation reviewed the time frame up to the end of 2020
and covered UN supported programmes being delivered throughout the country.
The external evaluation of the UNPF 2017-2021 is intended to contribute to:
Supporting the UN system’s Delivering as One principle to ensure the UNCT worked efficiently
and effectively to implement the UNPF 2017-2021. By objectively verifying results achieved within
the UNPF and assessing the sustainability of strategies and interventions used, the evaluation:
• Evaluated how the UNPF’s strategic intent and principles have been taken forward by UN
Agencies, Funds and Programmes (AFPs) and identified factors that have affected UN
AFPs working together.
• Evaluated the UNCT’s contribution to national development results through an
assessment drawing on evaluation criteria grounded in evidence.
• Identified factors that may have affected the UNCT's support and contributions through
the UNPF, highlighting good practices and bottlenecks.
• Assessed the performance, progress, and gaps of the UNPF’s support to national goals
and priorities; and,
• Generated a set of clear, forward-looking, and actionable recommendations logically
linked to the findings and conclusions, to inform the strategies, implementation
mechanism, and management of the forthcoming Lao PDR UNSDCF 2022-2026.
The evaluation also identified lessons learned from implementation of the UNPF 2017-2021
anchored around “what works, what doesn’t and why?” This included highlighting lessons learned
on what the added value of the UNCT has been and could be in the future, considering the
changing development landscape, emerging actors and how the UN System is adapting to the
changing aid environment. It also takes into consideration not only what is covered in the UNPF,
but also examines and highlights aspects not currently covered but which are nevertheless
relevant to Lao PDR’s current and future context.
1.1.3. Objectives
As per the TOR, the overall objectives of the UNPF evaluation were to:
Final Evaluation Report 3
• Assess UNPF’s overall effectiveness in advancing Lao PDR’s national development
agenda (8th NSEDP);
• Review results achieved during the UNPF 2017-2021 cycle.
• Review UNPF’s relevance, efficiency, effectiveness, and sustainability against Lao PDR’s
national development agenda (8th NSEDP);
• Examine how the five UN programming principles have been mainstreamed in the results-
based management cycle (design, implementation, and M&E) of the UNPF; and
• Provide clear, actionable strategic and programmatic recommendations for improving the
UNCT’s contribution to Lao PDR’s development priorities, taking into consideration the
Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs).
1.1.4. Principles and Pillars
As noted in the TORs, the UNPF is underpinned by the five programming principles of: gender
equality, human rights-based approach, environmental sustainability, results-based management
and capacity development. It also considered the specific context of Lao PDR focusing on its
cultural and national heritage, its very diverse number and variety of ethnic groups, its phased
reform process and agricultural economy with a pronounced rural-urban divide. The UNPF is
supported by three key pillars: 1. Inclusive Growth, Livelihoods and Resilience; 2. Human
Development; and 3. Governance, Rule of Law and Participation in National Decision making
under which the key outcomes are framed.
1.2. Evaluability Assessment and Approach
1.2.1. Evaluability Assessment
As part of the initial development of any evaluation methodology, an evaluability assessment was
carried out to ensure that the evaluation is doable and that the needed data was available. Most
agencies working in international development agree that the definition of ‘evaluability’, presented
by the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development-Development Assistance
Committee (OECD-DAC), is appropriate as: “The extent to which an activity or project can be
evaluated in a reliable and credible fashion” (OECD-DAC 2010; p.21).
At the level of a UN country programme, this is usually not a problem but earlier evaluations in
Lao PDR by this team had found this to be a problem. Also, given that only two members of the
team were able to be in Lao PDR due to COVID 19, it was important to ensure that the required
data was available for remote access. Therefore, a rapid scan of the documents provided by the
UN Team, plus others in the public domain, were reviewed.
For this evaluation, lack of background data was not a major issue since there is substantive data
to cover all the key areas within the UN system and in the dropbox. The Evaluability Assessment
was done as part of the document review (see Annex). Overall, the Evaluation Team concluded
Final Evaluation Report 4
that a sufficiently critical mass of documents was available as well as some data on results, logic
models and performance measurement data although more on baselines would have helped.
Another part of the evaluability assessment was planned to be a review of the Theory of Change
(ToC), logic model, quantitative and qualitative indicators in the PMF and the programme
frameworks of UN Agencies to see how best to identify an agreed ToC for the programme going
forward. Since a ToC doesn’t exist, the ET had suggested a line of evidence take the form of
working with key UNCT stakeholders and the Government of Lao PDR to jointly create and agree
on components of a Theory of Change. It was agreed with the UNRC and the UNCT that this
exercise could not be done as part of this evaluation.
1.2.2. Approach
The evaluation was guided by the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development –
Development Assistance Committee (OECD-DAC) Evaluation Quality Standards for
Development Evaluation, the United Nations Evaluation Group (UNEG) Norms and Standards for
Evaluation in the UN System, and the UNEG Ethical Guidelines and Code of Conduct for
Evaluation in the UN System. In practical terms, the overall approach to the evaluation was
results based using a participatory and mixed-method approach with the goal of providing learning
and recommendations to the key stakeholders that will be of value to their ongoing strategic
decision-making process.
1.2.2.1. Results based and Utilization-Focused Approach
Given that there is a formative function for this evaluation, and a forward-looking and decision-
making aspect to the evaluation, the team adopted a Utilization-Focused Evaluation (UFE)
framework, which is a widely known approach developed by Dr. Michael Quinn Patton (2008).
This evaluation is intended to be used by its intended users to inform their decisions. Dr. Michael
Quinn Patton was meta evaluator for the 22-country OECD study which members of this team
carried out in Cambodia for UNDP and OECD in 2010 and was featured in the final presentation
to OECD of this 22 country evaluation study in Bali). The title of the 22 country study was The
Evaluation of the Paris Declaration: Phase 2 Final Report. OECD, 2011. This is a well-tested and
widely used evaluation approach intended to increase the likely uptake of recommendations by
key stakeholders since it clarifies expectations and objectives in terms of use of the evaluation.
This approach does not decrease evaluation impartiality and independence since the evaluation
team remains responsible for the content of the evaluation report.
1.2.2.2. Participatory and Inclusive Approach
The evaluation approach was participatory and inclusive. The evaluation team used this approach
to ensure that, as external evaluators, we did not impose external perspectives on stakeholders
who know the challenges of their UN country programme and country better. This approach
Final Evaluation Report 5
helped to foster buy-in of different types of stakeholders in the UNCT, Government and other
Agencies to ensure that findings, conclusions, lessons learned and recommendations are useful
to review what took place and to guide future planning.
As part of the evaluation, which included input from 141 stakeholders (see Annex), the evaluation
included consultation meetings with the UNRC and the UNCT on 3 occasions, a consultation with
the other 3 evaluation teams and the Joint Steering Committee consultation with the UNCT and
the Government of Lao PDR.
1.2.2.3. Mixed-Method Approach
The purpose of a mixed-methods non-experimental approach was to triangulate sources of
information and perspectives drawing on quantitative and qualitative techniques to ensure a
comprehensive, robust and evidence-based understanding of the programme being evaluated.
To this end, the ET carried out content analysis of data gathered using qualitative and quantitative
data collection tools to assess each criterion and the 20 questions (including probes for
interviews). Data from primary and secondary sources were triangulated during the analysis. This
allowed for the development of insightful findings, reliable conclusions, and relevant lessons
learned and recommendations.
1.2.2.4. Gender and Human Rights Based Lens
This evaluation used a human rights-based lens in conjunction with the above-mentioned
participatory approach. More specifically, it ensured that key gender equality (GE) and human
rights (HR) principles (identified by the UNEG) were taken into account throughout the evaluation
process:
• Non-discrimination and equality: All individuals are equal as human beings by virtue of the
inherent dignity of each person. As such, all participants in the evaluation will be treated
without discrimination as outlined in multiple human rights treaties;
• Participation and inclusion: Every person and all peoples are entitled to active, free and
meaningful participation in, contribution to, and enjoyment of, civil, economic, social,
cultural and political development in which human rights and fundamental freedoms can
be realized;
• Accountability and the rule of law: Duty bearers (primary and secondary) are answerable
for the observance of human rights while rights holders (including children supported by
advocates) are entitled to claim and/or institute proceedings for appropriate redress before
a competent court;
Final Evaluation Report 6
• Gender mainstreaming: Used more specifically, as “a ‘twin track strategy’, which involves:
1) Integrating women and men’s needs and interests into all development policies and
programmes, and 2) Developing interventions oriented at empowering women.”
The Baastel team has a strong track record implementing evaluations using GE and HR based
lens. For this evaluation, these principles were operationalized by:
a) Ensuring there were opportunities for interested stakeholders to participate in the
evaluation process while ensuring both duty bearers and rights holders are consulted;
b) Recognizing and mitigating power dynamics by ensuring men and women and some
beneficiaries of UN programming can participate; and,
c) Proposing a gender-balanced and culturally sensitive team of evaluators who all have
experience working with international UN culture and most who also have experience
working with the local culture in Lao PDR, the culture of the Mekong sub-region, and of
the ASEAN region.
Gender Equality and Human Rights questions and, where appropriate, probes to other questions,
are included in the Evaluation Matrix. This allowed both the lens of the rights-based framework
and the GEEW perspectives to be taken into account. The participant responses to the KIIs and
FGDs were also sex disaggregated.
Specifically, the ET looked at Gender Equality and Women’s Empowerment for a number of key
elements as follows:
1) Gender division of labor/responsibility – Gender differentiated impact of gender inequality,
e.g., inequality in the workplace, the public sphere or in the private sphere.
2) Access to resources – Gender differentiated access to services within Lao PDR that had
differing impacts on women versus men with respect to economic policy and advancement
3) Overall position women versus men in society – Gender differentiated motivations and
ability to make changes that affect women in the private and public spheres.
4) Finally, this is an intersectional analysis since not all women and men are equally
empowered, e.g., some women are poor, from non Lao-Tai ethnic groups, and/or are more
vulnerable or marginalized.
In summary, there are 4 separate areas of analysis: a) vulnerability analysis, b) access to service
and opportunities, c) the ability to make change and finally, d) looking at these through an
intersectional lens.
In terms of a human rights analysis, the ET proceeded as follows:
The ET used a human rights-based approach which empowers people to both know and claim
their rights, thus such an approach seeks a balance between economic, social and cultural rights
Final Evaluation Report 7
with civil and political rights. People are at the center which increases their ability to influence
organizations, public bodies and even businesses to fulfil their human rights obligations. Finally,
we used an acronym called PANEL (which stands for participation, accountability, non-
discrimination and empowerment and legality).
1.2.3. Key Evaluation Questions
The following are the specific evaluation questions to be addressed through the lens of evaluation
criteria and cross-cutting issues:
Relevance
1. Has the UN System supported achievement of national development goals and targets in
alignment to relevant national plans and frameworks for Lao PDR’s 8th NSEDP?
2. To what extent did the UNPF foster synergies among agencies and involve concerted
efforts to optimize results and avoid duplication?
3. Has the UN system remained responsive to emerging and unforeseen needs of Lao PDR
and its people?
4. To what extent has interagency cooperation and collaboration with other entities facilitated
or hampered the achievement of results?
Effectiveness
5. To what extent has the UN system promoted or supported policies consistent with each
other and across sectors, given the multi-sectorial nature of economic development?
6. Has the cooperation framework strengthened the position, credibility and reliability of the
UN system as a partner for government and other relevant actors?
7. To what extent has interagency cooperation and collaboration with other entities facilitated
or hampered the achievement of results?
Efficiency
8. Has the Cooperation Framework reduced transaction costs for partners?
9. Was the Cooperation Framework supported by integrated funding framework and by
adequate funding instruments?
Sustainability
10. Has the UN system support been extended in such a way to build national and local
capacities to ensure long term, sustainable gains?
11. To what extent has the UN programming assisted Lao’s government to scaled-up to
achieve its goal of becoming a middle-income country?
12. To what extent has the UN system helped to support Lao PDR’s journey towards
becoming a sustainable middle-income country?
Cross cutting Principles
Final Evaluation Report 8
13. Has the UN system’s support been extended in a way that promotes gender equity in Lao
PDR?
14. Has the UN system supported followed the principles of a HRs based approach?
15. Has the UN system support been designed and delivered following the programming
principles of environmental sustainability?
16. Have the programming principles of RBM been used to monitor and track results?
17. Has the overall UN program been designed with programming principle of capacity
development at its core?
Forward looking
18. What are the lessons learned that could be identified for informing the planning and
decision-making of the UNSDCF 2022-2026?
19. Has the current UNPF 2017-2021 contributed to preparedness for emergency situations?
20. If you were involved in joint initiatives, what was their value-added and/or good practices?
1.2.4. Stakeholders mapping and analysis
The UNPF stakeholder analysis was guided by Lao PDR - United Nations Partnership Framework
2017-2021, the Monitoring and Evaluation Strategy of UNFP 2017 – 2020, materials from the
Annual Review of the Lao PDR – UN Partnership Framework (UNPF) 2 February 2018, UN project
mapping, draft UN stakeholder mapping (see Annex 4), and evaluation design reports of UNDP
and UNFPA (and later received from the WFP).
UNPF institutional set up
The Monitoring and Evaluation Strategy of UNPF 2017-2021 (May 2017) outlined the UNPF
institutional set up, which consists of Joint National/UN Steering Committee (JSC), UNCT and
Non-Resident UN agencies, M&E Group, Result Groups, UN Communication Group and
Operations Management Team. Figure 1 summarizes the arrangement.
Figure 1: UNPF 2017-2021 Institutional Set-up
Final Evaluation Report 9
The Joint National/UN Steering Committee (JSC) was established to provide strategic
oversight of the development and implementation of the Lao PDR – UN Partnership Framework
2017-2021 and future successive Frameworks. It was intended to ensure national ownership and
alignment with national priorities throughout the duration of the Framework1. The Monitoring and
Evaluation Strategy included the ToR of the JSC and its proposed membership. The JSC is co-
chaired by the Minister of Foreign Affairs and the UN Resident Coordinator. The JSC TOR was
revised (Draft as of July 2020), but does not yet include a membership list. Therefore Annex 3 of
the Monitoring and Evaluation Strategy was used as a reference for this stakeholder analysis.
The UNPF Results Groups is a mechanism for implementation of the UNPF Results Groups
(RGs) which enhance coordination and synergies among UN Agencies working under each UNPF
Outcome 2. Summary of RG facilitators and its government partners are shown in Table 1.
Table 1: Summary of RG facilitators and its government partners
Pillar Results Group Result Group Government Partners 3
Facilitators
1. Inclusive Results Group on Decent UNDP Planning and International
Growth, Livelihoods and Social Cooperation, Ministry of
Protection (Outcomes 1&2) Labour and Social Welfare
1 Terms of Reference of the Government of Lao PDR – United Nations Joint Steering Committee (Draft as
of July 2020).
2 Monitoring and Evaluation Strategy – UNPF 2017-2021.
3 Line ministries which made presentation of each UNPF outcome progress. The formation is from Tentative
Agenda: Annual Review of the Lao PDR – UN Partnership Framework (UNPF) 2 February 2018.
Final Evaluation Report 10
Livelihoods and
Resilience Results Group on Climate FAO Department of Climate
Change, Disaster Change, Ministry of
Management and Natural Resource and
Environment (Outcome 3) Environment.
2. Human Results Group on Basic UNICEF Department of Planning,
Development Education (Outcome 4) Ministry of Education and
Sports.
Results Group on Health, UNFPA Department of Planning
Water and Sanitation and Cooperation, Ministry
(Outcome 5) of Health.
Results Group on Food WFP Department of Planning
Security and Nutrition and Cooperation, Ministry
(Outcome 6) of Agriculture and Forestry
3. Governance Results Group on Institution UNDP Department of Planning
Building and Access to and Cooperation, Ministry
Justice (Outcomes 7&8) of Home Affairs.
UN Country Team Facilitators for the UNPF: The UN Country Team assigned Facilitators to
support all UNPF Results Groups in ensuring interlinkages and coordination among each other4.
M&E Group: The inter-agency M&E Group took responsibility for assuring the quality of
monitoring and evaluation of the UNPF through development and implementation of UNPF
Outcome Indicator Methodological Notes, cooperating with the UNPF Results Groups in planning,
monitoring and reporting activities as well as through supporting the UNPF final evaluation5.
UN Communications Group: The UN Communications Group through its Communications
Strategy (2017–2021) increases awareness and advocates for key issues under the UNPF Pillars
and Outcomes. The Group includes UN Agency Communications Specialists and focal points.6
Operations Management Team: The Inter-Agency Operations Management Team supports
UNPF implementation through a results-oriented Business Operations Strategy (2017–2021),
which is the backbone of the ‘Operating as One’ pillar of the UN Development Group Standard
Operating Procedures for Delivering as One7.
UNPF stakeholders
Based on the ET analysis, UNPF stakeholders can be placed into three groups: 1. UN group; 2.
Government group and 3. Other partners group. The mapping of their involvement in UNPF is
included in the annex in Table 11: UN Mapping and number of supported projects, Table 2:
4 Monitoring and Evaluation Strategy – UNPF 2017-2021.
5 Monitoring and Evaluation Strategy – UNPF 2017-2021
6 Ibid
7 Ibid
Final Evaluation Report 11
Government Mapping and Table 3: Other Partners Mapping. In total, there are 24 UN (resident
and non-resident) entities, 26 government ministries/entities, and 16 other partners who are
associated with UNPF 2017-2021. The ET acknowledges the important contributions of all UNPF
stakeholders and ensured that the evaluation process was inclusive and participatory. All the
UNPF stakeholders were requested to take part in the evaluation.
With regard to Key Informant Interviews (KII) and focus groups, it would have been very
challenging for the ET to conduct multiple focus groups so two were held with 7 respondents, but
the majority of the data collection was through 97 key informant interviews and the 37 respondents
to the online survey. The list of interviewees and those who took part in the focus groups is
included as Table 4 (move into Annex 4). The 48 UN stakeholders represented most UN
Agencies, and the 74 Government of Lao PDR representatives were primarily in different
Departments of line ministries plus senior representatives of MOFA and MPI, and one provincial
office, as well as one Mass Organisations (Lao Women’s Union), while most Other Agencies
included primarily development partners, INGOs/NPAs and no Private sector organizations.
2. EVALUATION METHODOLOGY
During the virtual start-up meeting on Tuesday, September 15th, 2020, the evaluation team (ET)
was presented to representatives from a variety of UN teams. Discussions on the motivations
behind undertaking the UNPF evaluation, beyond the obligation to do so, and various conclusions
of the UN Country Team (UNCT) as a whole were shared with the evaluation team. Reference
was also made to the material to be reviewed in the document review shared on Google Drive.
A second meeting took place on Tuesday, September 22nd, 2020 during which the UNPF
evaluation team met virtually with members of the other three evaluation teams who were
conducting parallel assignments for UNDP, WFP, and UNFPA. The objective was for all the teams
to get a better sense of how the different assignments were to take place. Each team made a
short ppt presentation reviewing their plans and timelines. It was agreed that as the evaluations
continue, there would be an opportunity for the evaluation teams or ETLs, to meet virtually and
share their perspectives and learning on similar questions. This was the case for evaluators from
the WFP, UNDP and UNPF evaluation teams between November, 2020 and January, 2021.
2.1. Data collection strategy
Line of Evidence 1 - Desk and Document Review
The Google Drive folders contained a variety of documents provided by different agencies on past
and ongoing programmes and initiatives’ results as well as on overall socio-economic, health,
Final Evaluation Report 12
education and disaster risk reduction contexts in the country. Specifically, these included UNPF
progress reports, AFP reports and evaluations, government related information, as well as
thematic documents on agriculture, civil society, human rights, and nutrition among many others.
Information on SDG progress was also available in the folder. The document review allowed the
team to familiarize themselves with the full UNPF context and understand key issues in sectors
and thematic areas. Past evaluations, the most important having been the 2012 – 2016 UN
Development Assistance Framework (UNDAF) Lao PDR evaluation, and other relevant research
and reference materials, were also accessed. A brief review was carried out of Country
Programme documents (CPDs) of central agencies (e.g. UNDP, UNICEF, UNFPA, WFP, WHO,
FAO, UNODC, ILO, UN Women, UNESCO and others).
As the review took place, specifics on different sectors and outcomes became clearer and
informed the development of this inception report. Indeed, in addition to an improved
understanding of the national and sub-national context, the review helped scope the evaluation
process, finalize the key evaluation questions to be answered by the team through the lines of
evidence. Data was systematically classified in a data collection matrix by relevant indicators (see
evaluation matrix in Section 5) and, as noted under the data analysis sub-section below, coded
using content analysis methods to ensure that bias is avoided, and trends are clearly identified.
The inclusion of two national evaluators as part of the evaluation team (Ms. Latsany Phakdisoth
and Ms. Dalaphone Sihanath) allowed the ET to review documents in both the English and Lao
PDR languages.
Secondary data from a variety of sources gathered through literature searches was also used that
was sex, urban-rural, and ethnicity-disaggregated data collected from all available sources. These
literature searches provided background material on issues such as relevant national
development contexts and key issues and challenges for each outcome. The Evaluation Team
also reviewed regional and other publications and internet resources. The in-depth
desk/document review allowed data to be collected prior to the 97 interviews which were
conducted by Zoom and face to face in November and December, 2020 mostly prior to the launch
of the online survey (OLS). Using these separate strategies allowed the results of the interviews
and 2 focus groups to be compared with the results of the survey in developing the findings during
the data triangulation process. Thus, the document review provided sufficient background to the
context and themes to the evaluation team prior to beginning data collection in Nov. 2020.
Draft Inception Report
Upon completion of the document review, the draft inception report (IR) was presented to the
UNCT and RCO in October 2020. The IR included the intended methodology and evaluation tools
which included: the evaluation matrix and data gathering tools developed (see Annexes): i)
document review data collection matrix (internal document used by the ET); ii) customized
interview protocols, iii) focus group discussion guides that were used with respondents, and iv)
survey questionnaires. All tools focused on the main evaluation issues and allowed respondents
to define, inform, and/or validate them.
Final Evaluation Report 13
The tools were also used to standardize the data collection processes. However, the content of
the protocols and guides were only indicative, since depending on the respondents, ad-hoc
questions and downstream discussions arose during interviews and focus group discussions. The
interview protocol and focus group discussion guides were adapted on a case-by-case basis to
each person or group.
Once agreed, the adjusted work plan guided the evaluation. As stated in the Interim Cooperation
Framework Evaluation guideline (UN July, 2019), the IR: assesses the evaluability of the
Cooperation Framework, presents evaluation questions and sub-questions, contains sources and
methods of data collection and a concrete plan of evaluation activities. The UNCT’s comments
on the draft inception report were addressed in the second IR which allowed the ET to fine-tune
and finalize the evaluation work plan.
2.2. Primary Data Sources, Analysis and Triangulation
Line of Evidence 2 – Theory of Change (not included as agreed with UNRC)
As stated in the Interim Cooperation Framework evaluation guideline,
“The theory of change is the key reference framework for evaluators. For Cooperation Framework
evaluations, the theory should cascade from the SDGs to Cooperation Framework outcomes and
outputs to agency outcomes and outputs” (UNEG, July 2019).
The guideline goes on say that the Theory of Change (ToC) should have been developed when
the Cooperation Framework was developed, but since this wasn’t the case, a Theory of Change
workshop was suggested to take place early in this evaluation process. The objective of the
workshop would have been to ensure that the UNCT members and the Evaluation Team had a
common understanding of the goals, activities and the changes being sought. In discussion with
the UNCT and UNRC, it was agreed that there was insufficient data and time to do this as part of
this UNPF evaluation.
Line of Evidence 3 – Key Informant Interviews
The ET conducted interviews primarily virtually but face to face when possible especially for most
interviews with Government of Lao PDR stakeholders. Virtual interviews were conducted with
most key representatives of the UNCT including both agencies in Lao PDR as well as with non
resident agencies, and other agencies particularly development partners and a few Mass
Organisations, INGOs/NPAs. Interviews with Lao PDR government officials were mostly done by
the Lao PDR speaking members of the Evaluation Team which avoided people having to speak
in a second language and also avoided translation and interpretation challenges which otherwise
would be a limitation as it was for other evaluations.
The sample was purposive with all UN agencies working in Lao PDR or remotely with Lao PDR
and with all relevant Lao PDR government ministries. The ET used Zoom for virtual interviews
which worked well technically for the most part. Semi-structured interviews used key evaluation
Final Evaluation Report 14
questions and sub-questions (probes) based on the four identified OECD-DAC evaluation criteria
(relevance, efficiency, effectiveness, and sustainability) plus the cross-cutting issues on human
rights and gender equality.
The draft interview protocols were prepared (see Annex 2) and adapted and refined during the
interviews to tailor questions to different stakeholders, but the consistent key questions were
included across all interviews to provide a basis for data triangulation. To ensure data collected
in all sessions was comparable, and that there is no bias, tools used were the same for all
members of the ET. The list of stakeholders proposed initially was adapted based on UN feedback
and the resulting sample covered the key groups in terms of stakeholders from several levels,
and themes. The ET was pleased to rely on support from the UNRC office and the local ET
national consultants to identify and reach out to all selected potential respondents. The list of
organizations consulted is in Annex 7 and the list of 104 people consulted, exclude 37 survey
respondents, is included in Annex 6.
These interviews facilitated collection of qualitative data on a range of topics (e.g., different
projects and initiatives’ relevance at the national level and implementation processes, progress
towards reaching SDGs, and sustainability of the results’ achieved in different contexts), which
were used to answer the evaluation questions and triangulate with data collected using other lines
of evidence.
Line of Evidence 4 – Focus Group Discussions
Focus groups were requested to stakeholders but unlike the response to requests for interviews
did not receive high response rates. Two were held with UN stakeholders which provided
additional input to the interviews and included responses to the same questions. The focus groups
did not have wide cross sections as had been anticipated but did provide useful information from
the small number of participants (7 in all with 4 in one group and 3 in the other FGD). Two team
members took part in each of these focus groups to ensure that one facilitated and the other took
notes. In terms of sampling for the two focus groups, the UN participants were those who
responded to the general call letter. During the proposal development process, the ET had
planned to have an additional line of evidence which would be a provincial consultation site visit.
In the light of the enduring Covid-19 pandemic, this was considered not to be possible so it was
cancelled. A requested telephone interview with one provincial office (Attapeu province) was
changed since they preferred to provide written comments which they did. To somewhat mitigate
this, several of the interviews with Lao PDR government officials had experience working
throughout the country. In addition, some local evidence that was gathered by other evaluation
teams for the concurrent UN Agency evaluations, was reviewed.
Line of Evidence 5 – Survey
The idea of an Online Survey (OLS) was to reach stakeholders with whom the ET would not be
able to talk to through other lines of evidence, with the goal of obtaining wider input. The ET
considered the OLS as the most effective way to: 1) reach as many potential respondents as
possible, 2) generate a large body of quantitative data that could be used to triangulate with
Final Evaluation Report 15
qualitative information collected through other lines of evidence (document review, interviews and
focus group discussions), and 3) create a context in which potential respondents were ensured
confidentiality (since the raw data was not going to be shared with the UNCT).
The ET developed survey questionnaires in English which were approved during the Inception
Phase along with other instruments. The draft questionnaire in English was developed (see Annex
2) with mainly closed questions and a few open-ended questions to allow respondents to provide
details. The Lao PDR version of the questionnaires was translated after the English version was
accepted by the UNCT and UNRC.
An OLS was distributed to all UNPF stakeholders (census sample of all stakeholders for which
the ET had email addresses). It included Ministries and central and provincial government agency
representatives, UN Agency representatives and other partners representatives such as
international and national organizations (see sub-section on stakeholder mapping). The ET
anticipated that completion of an OLS would require a maximum of 15 minutes. Baastel uses
Qualtrics for several reasons including because it has high standards in terms of data privacy
protection.
The survey(s) was undertaken in phases:
1. Sampling Frame and Sample: The ET identified an appropriate stratified sampling frame
and drew a sample.
2. Instrument: The survey instrument and materials (questions, covering letter, etc.) and
contact lists were developed in consultation with the UNCT and then translated into the
Lao PDR language.
3. Pre-test: Initial contact with potential survey participants involved sending the survey
questions to a small sample of people from across targeted categories of stakeholders. In
addition, pre tests were conducted with ET colleagues to ensure that the content was clear
and simple and that the functionalities of the survey process were effective. Thereafter the
survey instrument and procedures were revised.
4. Introduction: An introductory email was sent to the contact list to announce the upcoming
survey. The ET has learned that a letter/email from the client (UNCT) is very important to
ensure a high representative response rate. Therefore, the UNCT was asked to send
official emails of invitation, written in partnership with the ET, to all potential respondents.
These emails were drafted and sent and explained the evaluation process and e-survey
context. They indicated completion would be quick and noted that they would be sent an
invitation with the OLS link.
5. Distribution: Once the pre-test phase was completed, and the UNCT sent the introductory
letters and emails were sent to the contact list with the link to the questionnaire (on-line
platform).
6. Follow-up: After 3 weeks, the ET followed up by email, text or phone. A UNCT follow-up
was also requested for groups with low return rates. Considering that potential
respondents were quite busy during the end of the year phase of government
management reporting cycles, as well as with other ongoing evaluative processes, the ET
envisaged that some hands-on follow-up would likely be needed. This was done and the
Final Evaluation Report 16
ET was able to get a suitable response rate allowing for the survey data to be used for
triangulation and analysis.
Three online surveys were carried out as part of the evaluation of UNPF in Lao PDR conducted
by Le Groupe-conseil Baastel Itée. The online survey aimed to gather the views of a wide range
of stakeholders that were involved in the UNPF, in order to obtain insights and lessons that can
feed into the next UNPF. Each survey was adapted and sent to government representatives (an
audience of 85 persons), UN agencies representatives (an audience of 23 persons) and
development partners (an audience of 14 persons). The response rate was 26% for the
government representatives survey, 57% for the UN agencies survey, and 14% for the
development partners survey. Concerning the government response rate, after consultations with
government staff, it was noted that from past experience, surveys circulated by electronic means
and/or by email do not usually elicit a high response rate from Lao PDR government
representatives so the number in this case was good. Current practices as per official policy of
the Government do not recognize email as formal communication. In addition, in many cases,
government officials still use their private email addresses for what is considered “less official”
communications including surveys.
Results of the development partners have not been analysed since only one (1) questionnaire
out of two was fully completed.
Government UN Agencies Survey Development
representatives partners
survey survey
Population 85 23 14
Emails sent 85 23 14
Questionnaire 8 8 2
filled through
email
Questionnaire 14 5 0
filled through the
anonymous link
Total of 22 13 2
responses
Response rate 26 % 57% 14%
Final Evaluation Report 17
2.2.1. Data Analysis
To assist with the lines of evidence, the ET drafted and utilized several tools including those which
overviewed both the outcome and output-level results in the reports and identified the challenges
faced. The ET also reviewed the indicators that were tracked and summarized them. The team’s
gender expert also applied the most updated GEEW (Gender Equality and. the Empowerment of
Women) tools to ascertain how proactive (rather than reactive) the conceptual model operating in
UN agencies in Lao PDR was and the level of GEEW mainstreaming and what gaps remain.
Once all necessary data was collected through document review, key informant interviews, focus
group discussions, and e-surveys, content analysis of data from multiple sources to the same
evaluation questions was done permitting triangulation and informing the drafting of evidence-
based findings, conclusions, lessons learned, and recommendations. Triangulation was used to
validate and enrich findings with details or additional perspectives from other sources, countering
any potential bias, and gaining greater understanding of identified facts. Evidence supplied by the
different lines of enquiry were placed in an evidence matrix in which facts and opinions from
various sources were identified and triangulated for evaluation questions.
This analytic grid (the evidence matrix), based on the evaluation design matrix, was used to
capture information, data, and the source for each evaluation question and performance indicator
or measure. The table below is an illustration of how the data was processed during the
triangulation process:
Table 1 – Triangulation Matrix
Data and Findings from Different Lines of Evidence Findings
Criteria,
Questions/Sub- Document Direct
questions and Review Interviews FGDs observation OLS
Indicators
1. Relevance
Question 1-“n”
Indicator 1-“n”
Relevance Conclusions
2. Sustainability
Question 1-“n”
…
Qualitative data analysis was supported using standardized data collection recording templates.
Capturing data in a standardized way helped ensure that anomalies, non-representative, or
inaccurate data were spotted quickly and managed so as to allow the ET to validate evidence
against relevant data. The ET used content analysis methods to help triangulate data and
standardize results across evaluators and lines of evidence. The content analysis surfaced
multiple similar responses from a variety of data sources which facilitated generating evidence-
based findings, conclusions, lessons learned and recommendations.
Final Evaluation Report 18
Validation (Line of Evidence 6)
Upon completion of the first draft of the evaluation report, the ET had a consultation with the
UNCT followed by a consultation with the Joint Steering Committee composed of UNCT and
Government of Lao PDR representatives. These two virtual consultations by zoom provided
additional data for the evaluators on key issues to be addressed and items that needed more
detail. After these consultations, comments in writing were received which have been addressed
in this second draft of the report.
2.3. Data Protection Protocol and Evaluation Ethics
The evaluation approach that was used conforms to the ethical principles described in the UNEG
Ethical Guidelines for Evaluation (2008). The inception report and its data collection tools were
reviewed and approved by the dual tiered evaluation management structure which verified the
use of the Ethical Protocol and Informed Consent Forms.
The evaluation approach was grounded in ethical principles defined in the UNEG Guidelines that
fall under three broad categories: obligations of evaluators, safeguards for participants, and the
evaluation process and product. The evaluation team complied with all the stated obligations.
First, the obligations of the evaluation team included independence, impartiality, credibility,
honesty and integrity, conflicts of interest and accountability. These were all be met by the team
throughout the evaluation without bias or conflict of interest.
Secondly, the principles of safeguards for participants of confidentiality, do no harm, respect for
dignity and diversity and rights, were also met through using approved instruments, ethics
protocols and consent forms as required. Participants were informed that the final report will be a
public document to which they will have access.
Finally, the evaluation team also complied with the third area of Evaluation Process and Products,
which cover transparency, accuracy, reporting, omissions and wrongdoing.
In terms of data security, the team is security cleared for multiple clients and complied with all
ethical standards in terms of questions and anonymity of specific respondents in the reporting.
The main method of protecting confidentiality was to use the following method: No individual
respondents will be named to protect anonymity but some agencies where appropriate. The
format will essentially be: All respondents said…; (100%) The majority of respondents said… (~
more than 75%); Many respondents said… (~ more than 50%), Some respondents said…
(~between 25 and 50%), A few said… (~ less than 25%); and One respondent said… (This was
not used because if only one person mentioned the information, it is identifiable and is too
minimal).
Final Evaluation Report 19
2.4. Quality Assurance
The Quality Assurance (QA) approach includes the ET having a Quality Control expert as part of
the team to ensure that the evaluation and methodologies used comply with the OECD DAC
Quality Standards, the OECD DAC criteria and United Nations Evaluation Group standards and
details as presented in the UNEG Handbook. In addition, the products of the evaluation were
reviewed by the Evaluation Team Leader using evaluation grids which he has used as a reviewer
for UN agencies including UNICEF for which he evaluates research and evaluation reports in
Asia. Finally, the UNCT has shared comments on the methodology to which the team has
responded in this report.
2.5. Limitations
First limitation was timing and the challenge for the UN dealing with 4 evaluations taking place
during the same time frame when there were also challenges for the Lao PDR Government
dealing with multiple high level internal political activities happening at the same time. This was
mitigated by extending the time line for the consultation with the Joint Steering Committee in late
February, 2021 followed by the ET integrating their feedback into this second draft of the report.
It may be useful for the UNCT to consider whether the UN carrying out several evaluations at the
same time is the best approach.
A second related limitation was low response rates to interviews and the survey which the national
Lao PDR ET members worked to mitigate by reaching out in-person as needed to ensure as much
data as possible could be collected.
A third limitation was lack of access to local communities, the private sector and multiple mass
organisations beyond the Lao Women’s Union which was interviewed. More was not possible in
the evaluation time frame.
A fourth limitation was the team not being able to use an agreed upon Theory of Change at the
start of the evaluation since no ToC existed and the UNCT was planning to develop a ToC as part
of preparing the new UNSDCF. The UNRC also shared ToCs from agencies that have them
including the UNDP ToC which had parallel outcome areas as those of the UNPF.
A final limitation was that due to the effects of the COVID 19 pandemic, none of the international
team members were able to be in Lao PDR to conduct interviews and focus groups. This was
mitigated to as large an extent as possible by having two local team members based in Vientiane.
Any possible bias was mitigated by having two evaluators taking part in most interviews and
having the whole team review all notes prior to the content analysis to identify any bias.
Final Evaluation Report 20
3. FINDINGS OF THE EVALUATION
3.1. Relevance
3.1.1 Question - Has the UN System supported achievement of National Development
Goals and Targets in alignment to relevant national plans and frameworks for Lao PDR’s
8th NSEDP?
Findings:
1. The large majority of stakeholders (over 75%) in the UN, Government of Lao PDR and other
agencies consulted all agree that the UN Partnership Framework (UNPF) is well aligned with
national plans and priorities identified in the Lao PDR 8th NSEDP. Specific results are primarily
delivered through individual UN Agency efforts working with partners.
2. The UNPF thematic areas are aligned with the national priorities of the 8th NSEDP of Lao PDR
and have contributed to progress towards most targets but the implementation results are mixed.
3. The UN is seen as a neutral partner with strong technical expertise supporting the Government
to achieve the 8th NSEDP and SDG targets.
Overall, the key informant interviews, focus groups and the survey results all indicated that the
UN, the Government of Lao PDR and other agencies view the present UNPF as well aligned to
the Lao PDR 8th NSEDP. (Please see Figure 2 below).
Government Representatives
Overall. the survey indicated that Government representatives were very positive regarding the
alignment of UN’s actions and support with government entities and their plans and frameworks
for the Lao PDR’s 8th NSEDP. Government representatives think that UN’s actions and support
are very aligned (25%) or aligned (75%) with their institutional plans and frameworks for Lao
PDR’s 8th NSEDP. Specifically, in terms of their specific agency, 17% of government
representatives state that the UN is very aligned with the approach of their institution while a total
of 83% state that it is aligned.
Final Evaluation Report 21
Government representatives view
To what extent has the UN’s actions and support been
aligned with your institutional plans and frameworks for Lao 25% 75%
PDR’s 8th NSEDP?
To what extent is the UN approach aligned with the
17% 83%
approach of your institution?
Very aligned Aligned Misaligned Very misaligned Do not know
This finding was verified by the interviews in which 75% of Government stakeholders interviewed
indicated that UN support to government stakeholders to achieve their development priorities and
goals has assisted them to achieve their organizational priorities and goals and contributed to the
8th NSEDP. For example, the Lao PDR Social Indicator Survey 2017 on which the Lao Statistics
Bureau (LSB) worked closely with UNICEF and UNFPA and other DPs, has generated evidence-
based data to monitor NSEDP progress and design evidence-based interventions. A few
stakeholders also shared their concerns on UN support that did not meet their needs and suit the
local situation such as for example the rural solar power project with Institute of Renewable
Energy Promotion, and Pelletization Technology project with the Department of Industry and
Handicraft.
UN Agencies
When it comes to alignment of UN actions and support with the Government’s institutional plans
and frameworks for Lao PDR’s 8th NSEDP, 50% of UN Agencies representatives responding to
the survey state that they see themselves as very aligned, 33% think they are aligned for a total
of 83% whereas none see themselves as misaligned or very misaligned and 17% do not know.
With respect to alignment of the UN approach with national institutions, 58% of UN agency
representatives think they are very aligned, 25% perceive they are aligned for a total of 83% while
none see themselves as misaligned or very misaligned and 17% do not know.
Concerning the alignment of the UN Approach with that of regional institutions, 17% UN agencies
representatives state that they are very aligned and 58% see themselves as aligned whereas 8%
think that they are misaligned and 17% do not know. On other issues related to alignment of the
UN approach with the approach of INGOs/NPAs, it is instructive to note that 67% of UN agencies
representatives do not know about relationships with the INGOs/NPAs while only 33% think that
they are aligned.
Final Evaluation Report 22
This was similar to the interview and focus groups findings which indicated that over 75% of UN
agencies see themselves as well aligned with the 8th NSEDP of Lao PDR and 50% aligned with
regional agencies such as ASEAN but few (only 25% of UN agencies see themselves as aligned
with INGOs/NPAs and almost none mention alignment or relationships with private sector
organizations. This was the case both for UN Agencies represented in Lao PDR and for non-
resident agencies who report being more included in the UNCT over the past few years and
learning more about activities of other UN Agencies.
Although UN Agencies see the relevance of the UNPF and increased work on coordination
supported by the UNRC, they also indicate that more coordination could be done to overcome
siloes. One of the areas is to link the Sector Working Groups and the appropriate Results Groups
more. The emphasis of the UN Agencies, as part of the UNPF, is to work as closely as possible
with the key Lao PDR Ministries which most agree is happening and the increased interaction
enhances the relevance of working together to achieve shared goals. There was an emphasis on
the importance of the UN and its bilateral partners working together with each other and country
officials since most key issues are interconnected and Lao PDR does not have excess resources
and is not a major target country receiving very significant international assistance.
Other Agencies
Development partner respondents, who were aware of both the UNPF and the 8th NSEDP,
mentioned that there is alignment but it is difficult to see since both documents are quite broad.
In addition, the UN system supports the development of the NSEDP which makes it easier for the
UNPF to be aligned with those goals and targets. For some development partners, the UNPF is
not a central element in their decision-making process. They have their own agendas and priority
sectors/pillars in which they invest. Some respondents (25%) did not know much about the
framework at all. Still, many respondents believed that the process of developing the UNPF was
important and they wanted to be part of it including in the development of the upcoming UNSDCF.
Some development partner representatives mentioned that they considered the UN system to be
complementary to what they do through other means which makes its work relevant e.g., UN
Final Evaluation Report 23
agencies’ work is more at the strategic policy dialogue level that allows development partners to
work at a “practical” level. A few respondents mentioned that the Lao PDR government wants to
make “intense support” investments whereas the UN offers “soft support”. This can be seen as a
mismatch to some extent. Much of the data collected through interviews with the donor
representatives point to the fact that they more easily find affinities with specific agencies
(thematic alignments) than with the whole UN system. It is easier to align work of individual
agencies with their narrower priorities than working through the full UN system. Many
development partners have two or three programmes with two or three agencies but the rest of
their portfolio is with other implementing agencies.
3.1.2 Questions - To what extent has interagency cooperation and collaboration with other
entities facilitated or hampered the achievement of results? (This also addresses
synergies among agencies, responsiveness to emerging needs and inclusiveness)
Findings:
4. Overall the UNRC and UNCT is leading movement towards improved interagency cooperation
and collaboration among UN agencies and also with the Government of Lao PDR and other
agencies but issues related to differing administrative modalities among UN agencies, other
agencies and the Lao PDR Government make it difficult to optimize results and avoid duplication.
5. Outreach to the private sector, INGOs/NPAs and to new development partners is has not been
significant and is essential to expanding the UNPF partnership between the UN and the
Government of Lao PDR. But at present this situation is improving with several UN agencies
increasing their linkages with INGOs/NPAs and expanding partnerships with multiple
stakeholders such as e.g. UNFPA.
6. The UN Agencies have responded well to the COVID crises which has enhanced the relevance
of the UN working together as a whole.
The UNPF 2017-2021 reflects the plan of the UNCT to support national development priorities
and the government’s aspirations for Lao PDR to develop into a modern upper middle-income
country. The UNPF is aligned closely to the 8th NSEDP 2016-2020, and each of the three pillars
of UNPF are connected to 8th NSEDP outputs, as indicated in the 17 indicators being among the
8th NSEDP indicators as described in Figure 2 below.
The 8th NSEDP in turn has a strong link to the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). Lao PDR
was among the earliest countries to localize the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) and
integrate them into its national planning. Nearly 60 % of the SDG indicators for Lao PDR were
fully aligned with the 8th NSEDP with the target for the 9th NEDP being to increase this to 80%.
Final Evaluation Report 24
Figure 2: Linkage of the Partnership Framework to the 8th NSEDP
source: 2018 Annual Review of the Lao PDR – UN Partnership Framework (2017 – 2021) Power Point Presentation
Government Representatives
Interviews with government stakeholders who were aware of UNPF indicated that UNPF has
taken 8th NSEDP targets and objectives into account but even those 58% were very satisfied,
another 33% were only somewhat satisfied. On a positive note, most government representatives
indicated that they perceive UN agencies as representing them and voicing concerns on their
behalf in many international events. Most Government respondents in interviews indicated that
there is good collaboration and cooperation with the UN agencies and other development partners
and these do follow the 8th NSEDP. UN programmes are viewed as contributing to the
achievement of the 8th NSEDP.
But at the same time, there were areas of the Government which was not aware of the UNFP
such as Technical Departments. Some Government staff find it difficult to follow UN policies on
COVID 19, such as a collaboration, coordination, working and training through online video
conferences even though UN agencies have been flexible on work and budget planning during
COVID 19 and changed some activities to match current local needs. Also, some national
stakeholders perceived that the UN focussed more on regional, cross border or national issues
rather than local issues whereas others perceived that that there was sufficient local involvement.
A recurring theme from the Government was that differing administrative requirements made very
relevant programmes difficult to carry out easily in practice.
Final Evaluation Report 25
UN Agencies
As noted in the previous chapter and illustrated in Table 1, the UNPF Results Groups is a
mechanism intended to enhance coordination and synergies among UN Agencies. In terms of
UN Agencies working with others, most UN Agencies, both resident and non-resident, include
consultations with government as part of their planning processes. As the survey results below
indicate, 58% of UN Agencies (50% to a large extent) indicate that they believe that they are
including national institutions in their process of identifying and planning UN agency activities.
Although many UN Agencies mentioned in interviews that they took working with regional
institutions such as ASEAN into consideration, the interviews also surfaced that others did not.
This was similar to the survey results which indicated a range of response with 34% noting to a
small extent or not at all. But very noticeable in both the interviews and the survey was the small
linkage between UN Agencies and INGOs/NPAs. For example, 42% of UN survey respondents
indicated not knowing and 17% indicated knowing to a small extent about the process followed
for the identification and planning of the UN agency activities included INGOs/NPAs or regional
institutions. There was limited reference to NPAs or INGOs from UN Agencies in their interview
responses about partners with whom they coordinated.
Final Evaluation Report 26
Other Agencies
Overall, most development partners indicated that the UNPF is consistent with the 8th NSEDP
with which their efforts are also aligned. Some respondents from other agencies mentioned in
interviews that as part of working with the UNPF, building on responding to the SDGs for their
own planning has been useful. However, many also mention that multi-agency programmes are
not really examples of clear co-implementation, but rather parallel programmes implemented at
the same time. Some donor representatives focused on the importance of regional linkages (i.e.
the ASEAN Regional Integration Support-Lao PDR Trade Related Assistance - Arise Plus), while
others focused less on regional or sub-regional considerations. But many do consider the Chinese
presence (existent or non-existent) as being an important consideration for the UN, the
Government and themselves in future planning. Many donor representatives (as well as other
types of respondents) mentioned the COVID crisis enhanced the relevance of having the UN
working as a whole to respond to emerging needs. The UNCT prepared the UN Socio-Economic
Response Plan (SERP) using its extensive experience of diverse development challenges
globally and of the country context, as well as its strong partnership with government,
development partners, civil society, and the private sector. It establishes an essential package of
support offered by the UN Development System (UNDS) in Lao PDR over the 18 months from
September 2020 to support Lao PDR’s recovery effort and to protect the needs and rights of
people living under the duress of the pandemic, with a particular focus on the most vulnerable
people and groups, who are at risk of being left behind. 8
8 Draft UN Lao PDR Socio-Economic Response Plan to COVID-19
https://laopdr.un.org/sites/default/files/2020-12/UN%20Lao%20PDR_Socio-
Economic%20Response%20to%20COVID-19_Draft%20as%20of%2029%20September.pdf
Final Evaluation Report 27
3.2. Effectiveness
Questions: To what extent has the UN system promoted or supported policies consistent with
each other and across sectors, given the multi-sectoral nature of economic development? Has
the cooperation framework strengthened the position, credibility and reliability of the UN system
as a partner for government and other relevant actors? To what extent has interagency
cooperation and collaboration with other entities facilitated or hampered the achievement of
results.
Findings:
7. The UNCT is well respected as a UN coordinating body with improved positioning credibility,
reliability and communication thanks to strong leadership from the UNRC which can potentially
help bring about culture change within the Lao PDR UNCT.
8. The UNPF clarifies Agency Financial Priorities effectively.
9. Non-resident UN Agencies report they are well integrated into the UNCT.
10. UNPF reporting has good coverage but reports are challenged in measuring progress on
indicators due to weak baselines and wide-ranging indicators.
11. Increased capacity is needed in M&E as well as in statistical and data management in UN
Agencies and the Government of Lao PDR.
12. Many stakeholders view the work of the UN Results Groups as an internal UN mechanism
while the 10 Sector Working Groups are a broader Government and Development Partner
mechanism working under the annual Round Table process.
13. The Results Groups are uneven in level of ownership by specific agencies and in their levels
of involvement in planning and implementing programmes.
14. UN programme teams need to empower Government stakeholders more in terms of decision-
making during programme planning and implementation of UN programmes.
Government Representatives
Many government stakeholders see the UN as a neutral and trusted partner, with strong technical
expertise. Many of them state that working with the UN has strengthened their organizations
internal capacity and helped them to achieve their organizations’ goal. The UN system has also
promoted or supported policies consistent with each other and across sectors. Most Government
representatives state that the UN agencies support and promote interagency cooperation and
collaboration which has helped the government achieve its mandates with support from multiple
agencies. The technical department indicated it can achieve its mandates partly because of the
support it receives from UN agencies which are trusted. While acknowledging the strong technical
expertise of UN APF, several government stakeholders suggested that there could be more of a
Final Evaluation Report 28
balance between international practices and local needs particularly related to working in a Less
Developed Country. They also think that UN agencies need more resources to implement the
UNPF.
Government partners who have received support from a variety of UN agencies suggested that
there is no overlapping support among UN agencies as each agency has its own focus. This
situation demonstrates that there is significant work being done in siloes and a lack of synergy in
UN support overall. This feedback is consistent with that of interviewed INGOs/NPAs’ feedback,
discussed below.
Many government representatives do not feel that they have been consulted sufficiently in the
decision-making process during design and implementation of UN programmes in which they are
involved and in which they are fully involved and participating. At the project implementation level,
several government partners feel that they do not have real decision-making power on projects
including preparation, planning, project implementation and recruitment of project staff. They
would like UN partners to decentralise decision making to them to draft workplans and budget
plans and manage implementation. There is also minimal evaluation on the effectiveness of the
UN projects/programmes and many small projects (i.e. on regulations, training, policy papers etc.)
which were implemented in short timelines without the use of M&E indicators and reporting. Some
programmes duplicate other efforts, are not linked to larger initiatives and often have no outreach
activities. Respondents indicated that they had insufficient tools and capacity in M&E and
reporting which needs to be strengthened.
At the provincial level, local authorities indicated that the UN AFP have also provided significant
contributions to their socio-economic development. However, provincial planning and investment
departments face some challenges in tracking and consolidating data on UN support to their
province. UN support is often channeled to relevant sectors directly without informing provincial
planning and investment departments which are responsible for development coordination. UN
agencies mobilise funds and assistance for development of the country which are agreed at the
central and local levels but the level of coordination and consultation with line Ministries and the
provincial and local levels of government needs to be improved. Given the UN works with the
Ministry of Planning and Investment (MPI) through the Round Table mechanism, the Government
representatives think that the UN should consider addressing this with the government which
would improve coordination at the provincial level and widen the impact of UN assistance across
the country.
The UNPF annual progress report is prepared regularly to document results and progress
achieved. It demonstrates that joint UN efforts are part of the UN’s annual achievements and
challenges. The evaluation team observed that the report would be more substantive if it reported
against the annual UNPF joint workplan and targets.
An idea that was suggested by multiple Government stakeholders was that big programmes with
5-year plans are more likely to see tangible results and impacts that can be demonstrated in M&E
reports. The programme timeline could be aligned with the next national five-year plan (NSEDP)
cycle and would demonstrate results that clearly contribute to the development of the country.
Final Evaluation Report 29
As noted in the interview results, the responses of the Government to questions on UN agencies
coordination efforts indicates that most think there is a lot of coordination (50%) and others
indicate that there is some coordination (40%).
Government representatives view
To what extent do you consider the UN agencies you
50% 40% 10%
have worked with have coordinated their efforts?
A lot of coordination Some coordination Minimal Coordination No Coordination
In terms of the UN’s enhanced reliability and credibility the ratings noted by the Government
representative respondents noted that it had increased to a large extent - 60% reliability and 50%
credibility.
Government representatives view
To what extent do you consider that since 2017, the UN
60% 30% 10%
has enhanced its reliability for your institution?
To what extent do you consider that since 2017, the UN
50% 40% 10%
has enhanced its credibility for your institution?
To a large extent To some extent To a small extent Not at all
With respect to partnership, in the Government representatives view, it is very low for the private
sector with 30% noting to a small extent and low for INGOs/NPAs with 20% noting to a small
extent. The Government representatives think that partnerships at the regional level exist more
and see partnerships between the UN and themselves in the government as better with 40%
rating it as a large extent and 50% as to some extent.
Final Evaluation Report 30
Government representatives view
To what extent has the UN advanced the establishment of
10% 50% 30% 10%
partnerships between Private sector?
To what extent has the UN advanced the establishment of
20% 50% 20% 10%
partnerships between NGO?
To what extent has the UN advanced the establishment of
30% 60% 10%
partnerships between Regional institution ?
To what extent has the UN advanced the establishment of
40% 50% 10%
partnerships between National institutions?
To a large extent To some extent To a small extent Not at all Do not Know
Finally, the Government representative’s opinion about the extent that interagency cooperation
and collaboration with other entities enhanced the possibility of achieving joint results with their
institution was encouraging with 30% noting to a large extent for cooperation and 50% noting to
a large extent for coordination.
To what extent has interagency cooperation and collaboration with other
entities enhanced the possibility of achieving joint results with your
institution?
Government representatives opinion
Cooperation 30% 70%
Coordination 50% 50%
To a large extent To some extent To a small extent Not at all
UN Agencies
Most UN Agencies indicated in interviews that being part of the UNCT and the UNPF provided
them with a clearer picture of what are the key priorities of other UN agencies and what their
specific areas of focus in Lao PDR are. This allowed the agencies to see where there are
possibilities for working in partnership with other agencies. They also report that this helps them
to see where there can be scale up and where they can provide more assistance in terms of
capacity building that they had not yet identified. Many agencies see the need to work together
with a variety of other agencies and the importance of culture change from working in siloes which
is less effective to developing and working in partnerships with other UN agencies, development
Final Evaluation Report 31
partners and a variety of Ministries in the Government of Lao PDR. However, as discussed in the
”relevance” section above, although coordination between the UN agencies and government
institutions does take place, many respondents agree that efforts are still needed to ensure
existing implementing bodies on both sides are better aligned. The most discussed example
during the data collection process is linked to insufficient coordination between the 10
governmental Sector Working Groups and the eight UN Results Groups.
In terms of effectiveness, work on COVID has been very collaborative and coordinated among
UN agencies and with the Government. The response has demonstrated preparedness in DRM
with good investments in the public health information system. The principle of build back better
evolved from building responses to disasters which is building that capacity. Several interviewees
mentioned that the simple act of working together is building trust. Several agencies indicated
that to continue to be effective, the UNPF needs to increase its focus on all types of DRM including
preparation for future pandemics. Many interviewees also mentioned that there are results in
terms of building capacities in multiple sectors i.e. in health for example several agencies mention
there have been significant gains but there still are inequities and significant gaps at the rural
level. Most agency representatives made similar comments. Some agencies mentioned working
with 4 agencies successfully on issues related to UN reform. The key point is to find shared
interest in a programme or issue and to take the initiative to build on the opportunity provided by
the UNRC and the UNCT and links with the relevant Government Ministries.
The UNPF is relevant but given its high level it is overarching and can support multiple activities
and results. The positioning of the UN is important and has allowed UN Agencies to work more
closely with Government partners to assist them to leverage up their plans that will help Lao PDR
to graduate. The UNPF was developed at a different time and context and must be flexible as
the situation changes. What the UNPF does well is open doors. This can pave the way for
increased future partnerships. The coordinating mechanism has created better credibility and
reliability which has led more agencies in the same sectors to work with each other with their
specific partner Ministry i.e. Agriculture, Health etc. What is needed to be more effective is a
UNPF framework linked to significant money. The new UNSDCF needs to emphasize more
coordination in the face of funding shortfalls.
For non-resident agencies, the support of the UNRC’s office has been of particular value since it
helps them to be kept updated on what is happening on the ground in Lao PDR and then to be
part of the UNCT and have both input and information sharing through being on distribution lists.
Some non-resident agencies focussed on the importance of the UNPF building regional linkages
in a variety of sectors. UN Agencies working on business areas think that to be as effective as
possible the UNPF needs to support these agencies linking more with each other, the appropriate
ministries and also the private sector. Most interviewees point out that to gain influence at the
policy level, it is valuable to draw in a wide variety of stakeholders.
The survey results for UN Agencies shows that the respondents are mixed in their views of how
much coordination there is with 20% saying a lot, 50% saying some and 20% indicating minimal
coordination. This corresponds with the various responses of the interviewees.
Final Evaluation Report 32
UN Agencies representatives view
To what extent do you consider the UN agencies have
coordinated their efforts to support the country towards 30% 50% 20%
achieving SDGs?
A lot of coordination Some ccordination Minimal Coordination No Coordination
Most UN Agencies representatives see the UN overall as having enhanced the reliability,
credibility and position of their institution to some extent since 2017 and another 30% to a large
extent.
UN Agencies representatives view
To what extent do you consider that since 2017, the UN has
30% 60% 10%
enhanced its reliability for your institution ?
To what extent do you consider that since 2017, the UN has
40% 50% 10%
enhanced its credibility for your institution?
To what extent do you consider that since 2017, the UN has
30% 70%
enhanced its position for your institution ?
To a large extent To some extent To a small extent Not at all I Do not Know
With respect to UN Agencies representatives view of establishing partnerships, the result is very
clear in that 50% do not think that the UN has advanced the establishment of partnerships with
the private sector and 30% are not sure if the UN has advanced the establishment of partnerships
with the NGO sector. The establishments of partnerships with regional organizations are more of
an emphasis (70% to some extent) and advancing the establishment of partnerships with national
Final Evaluation Report 33
institutions in particular are much stronger at 50% noting to a large extent and 40% to some
extent.
UN Agencies representatives view
To what extent has the UN advanced the establishment of
10% 40% 50%
partnerships between private sector?
To what extent has the UN advanced the establishment of
60% 10% 30%
partnerships between NGO?
To what extent has the UN advanced the establishment of
10% 70% 10% 10%
partnerships between regional institutions?
To what extent has the UN advanced the establishment of
50% 40% 10%
partnerships between national institutions?
To a large extent To some extent To a small extent Not at all I Do not Know
Finally, with respect to UN Agencies representatives’ views on the extent which the UNPF has
contributed to increasing coordination with these stakeholders, the findings are similar. NGO
linkages are again very low with 30% to a small extent and 20% not knowing. Regional institutions
again indicate to some extent (70%) whereas coordination at the national level is 90% either to a
large extent or to some extent which is similar to the extent of UN interagency cooperation and
collaboration with other entities to enhance the possibility of reaching SDG targets. Clearly there
is a need for more reaching out to the private sector and the NGO sector.
Final Evaluation Report 34
UN Agencies representative view
To what extent has the UN contributed to increasing
50% 30% 20%
coordination among NGOs ?
10%
To what extent has the UN contributed to increasing
10% 70% 10%
coordination among regional institutions ? -
To what extent has the UN contributed to increasing
30% 60% 10%
coordination among national institutions ? -
To what extent has UN interagency cooperation and
collaboration with other entities enhanced the possibility 40% 50% 10%
of reaching SDGs targets?
To a large extent To some extent To a small extent Not at all I Do not Know
Other Agencies Representatives
Many development partners participate in UN system and joint events and chair or take part in
meetings and groups and are pleased to be asked for their input. The interviewees indicate that
UN agencies have been in the country for a long time and are a valuable source of knowledge
about Lao PDR. Working with the SDGs in a wholistic manner brings a well coordinated targeted
approach to structure the support provided by the UN as a system. For many representatives,
the UNPF is quite broad but they find it appropriate for Lao PDR. The UNRC is good at
strategically cultivating partnerships with the government and its departments and needs to
leverage up this good positioning. Interviewees indicated that this coordination is essential since
some agencies and programmes have shifting mandates which need to be coordinated to
leverage up inputs and avoid duplication.
All respondents were of the opinion that the UN, as a system, is well positioned with the
government. Almost all donor representatives mentioned that the leadership within the
UNRC/UNCT is the most important success factor in positioning the UN system with all actors.
The UN working with many departments makes it easier for development partners to work with
them as well. Notwithstanding this positive view, some respondents mentioned that it is important
that the UNCT does not become complacent and repeat supporting the same programmes and
types of programmes through continuous phases. The direction for future programmes should be
on longer (5 year programmes) working on comprehensive issues, such as skills building and
connectivity for example, which can best be done with multiple partners supporting relevant UN
agencies, the government and others.
From their viewpoint, these representatives did not see the UN as working much with NPAs, or
INGOs and not having developed relationships with the private sector which all should be
expanded by drawing in these additional partners when it is possible at the policy dialogue level.
Final Evaluation Report 35
If the private sector is invited, they may well get involved and take part in partnership initiatives in
their areas of expertise. In some cases, particularly with some INGOs/NPAs, this will be
challenging but it would be worth the effort if wider more inclusive partnerships could be developed
in the future including a variety of partners. Similarly, a few respondents mentioned that the UN
has had difficulty in developing working relations with “emerging donors” (China and South Korea
for example). There appeared to be a lack of communication and few attempts to involve them in
UN work. Building these linkages may also enhance access to additional resources.
Interviewed INGOs/NPAs suggest that although the UN has done a great deal of good work in
Lao PDR, they tend to work in siloes and need to work more in partnerships with other
stakeholders. The prevailing view is that working together with INGOs/NPAs with expertise in
specific areas in both planning and implementing activities will increase the effectiveness of
projects and programmes, as they are on the ground and would be able to support UN AFP, who
very much focus their work on the policy level, in translating polices into implementation at the
local level. Interviewed INGOs highlighted that the UNFPA Nang Noi Framework has been a
platform for collaborative efforts to advocate for greater investments on adolescent girls with an
aim to supports the girls to make healthy choices in their lives and learn about the consequences
of early marriage and pregnancy.
3.3 Efficiency
Questions Has the Cooperation Framework reduced transaction costs for partners? And Was the
Cooperation Framework supported by integrated funding frameworks and by adequate funding
instruments?
Findings:
15. Each UN Agency has its own administrative modalities which makes it challenging for
Ministries in Lao PDR to work with UN Agencies since they implement similar programmes using
different methods which often increases transaction costs and creates duplication.
16. UN Agencies tend to work in siloes focussed on achieving their own mandates which limits
their efficiency linking with others to achieve UNPF’s umbrella mandate.
17. There are many examples of coordination on initiatives (e.g. Joint Programme on Social
Protection).
Government Representatives
In key stakeholder interviews, most government stakeholders indicated that each UN Agency has
its own operational approach and appears to be working somewhat in silos which made it difficult
for government departments to work most efficiently with several UN Agencies at the same time.
Final Evaluation Report 36
Many Government stakeholders report that given that each UN Agency has different financial
reporting requirements, often it take a lot of time to fulfil each of their requirements which is not
an efficient use of time. The UNPF is one framework, but each of the UN agencies has different
policies and principles. It is difficult for government departments to join activities and funds
involving several agencies in the UN, especially after a programme is already approved or in a
stage of implementation. Some indicated that joining activities and funds might be possible during
an initial stage such as proposal development.
Some government partners report having been empowered and taking the lead in implementing
UN supported activities, but other government partners expressed their frustration in working with
their UN partners due to an environment lacking trust in which they did not feel a sense of
ownership and transparency especially on financial reporting. While government partners were
very much appreciative of technical and financial support from UN partners, they observe that
there are many shortfalls in the UNFP budget as well as for some individual programmes. At the
programme level, this creates challenges for the government to plan its activities since the
government is asked to develop plans before they know the actual allocations and then have to
adjust their plans after the budget allocation is confirmed. In connection to the funding shortage,
government partners suggested that the UN may help the government to identify potential
external funding sources and build government capacity on how to access those funds, and the
best ways in which to engage more with the private sector.
Cost sharing for implementing activities is impossible if the costs are not aligned with programme
objectives for programmes that are managed by one UN agency working with one Department.
Many interviewees think that UN agencies should be more flexible in working together with the
government to achieve maximum results. The cost of international experts is high and often over
budgets allocated for implementing programme activities. Many partners noted that the most
important function for international experts is training, coaching, M&E and providing specific
technical expertise that is needed rather than programme management. Many also note that UN
agencies often have to take time to compete with each other to get funds from development
partners and to build their credibility.
Staff from Government implementing agencies are occasionally not well trained on UN
procurement rules and procedures of UN agencies with which they work but some training on
finance that was received in programmes was well delivered and useful. The problem is that
many rules of UN Agencies are not aligned with government rules set by the Ministry of Finance.
This does not facilitate an ease of working collaboratively especially at local levels. Many
interviewees suggested that all UN programmes should follow national procurement and finance
regulations and the rules of the Ministry of Finance. For example, no full DSA on travelling days
and no fee for opening remarks at workshops and meetings. Similarly, procurement of vehicles
and IT managed by the UN is often not cost effective. Several examples related to vehicles and
specifications for IT equipment prevented less expensive services to be used etc. Many partner
agencies thought that procurement should be in the country and flexible in selecting available
goods/services to their specifications. Government representatives indicate that some UN
Agencies do use country financial and procurement systems and rules and regulations which
Final Evaluation Report 37
increases ownership. A letter of agreement by FAO is an example of a good practice to clarify
exactly what is intended to take place and by whom.
Survey responses from Government representatives to specific questions demonstrated that the
Government Representatives were satisfied most with knowledge resources being made
available to the Government and access to human resources and timely support. They were
somewhat less satisfied with the level of material and financial resources made available from the
UN to achieve joint results. In fact, that particular point was made by most Government Agencies
which is significant in the near future as Lao PDR needs increased financial resources to move
towards graduation.
Government representatives view
How satisfied are you with the timeliness with which UN
30% 70%
activities were delivered?
How satisfied are you with material resources made
30% 50% 20%
available by the UN to achieve the joint results? -
How satisfied are you with the knowledge resources made
50% 50%
available by the UN to achieve the joint results? -
How satisfied are you with the human resources made
40% 60%
available by the UN to achieve the joint results? -
Very satisfied Somewhat satisfied Somewhat unsatisfied Very unsatisfied
UN Agencies
As noted below, representatives of UN Agencies responding to the survey also noted the least
positive responses are to being satisfied with the financial resources made available by the UN
with 38% being somewhat unsatisfied with the level of material resources and 63% being
somewhat unsatisfied or very unsatisfied with the level of financial resources made available to
the UN to reach SDG resources.
Final Evaluation Report 38
UN Agencies representatives view
How satisfied are you with the material resources made
50% 38% 13%
available by the UN to reach SDG targets?
How satisfied are you with the knowledge resources made
75% 25%
available by the UN to reach SDG targets?
13%
How satisfied are you with the financial resources made
38% 50%
available by the UN to reach SDG targets?
How satisfied are you with the human resources made
63% 38%
available by the UN to reach SDG targets?
How satisfied are you with the timeliness with which UN
63% 25% 13%
activities were delivered?
Very satisfied Satisfied Dissatisfied Very dissatisfied I Do not Know
In terms of efficiency, in addition to agreeing with the inadequacy of resources, another recurring
theme pointed out by many UN Agencies was that many UN Agencies work in silos which is not
efficient and contributes to duplication of efforts since agencies are unaware of what other similar
activities are being supported by other UN Agencies. Also, the issue of some agencies seeking
to lead programmes outside their main area of expertise also does not contribute to efficiency.
To improve efficiency, several UN Agencies said that more focus needs to be placed on capacity
building to develop skills needed both in programme content areas and in monitoring and
evaluation including report writing. Similarly, more support for developing research and policy
expertise was also noted.
Several smaller UN Agencies noted that, working together with other UN Agencies, and the
Government in joint programmes can cut transaction costs for them and lead to increased
synergies but this also makes attribution and even contribution more difficult to track.
Notwithstanding this perspective and the fact that joint monitoring especially working in districts
where costs are high was viewed as very useful, few UN agencies could identify ways in which
transaction costs were decreasing overall as a result of working together.
Other Partners
Some development partners mentioned that there is sometimes a lack of communication among
UN agencies which leads them to duplicate work being done by other UN Agencies which points,
in the views of these respondents, to a lack of coordination among agencies. Some respondents
mentioned that the UN did not have the necessary human resources to reach the “lower” levels
of implementation on the ground that is needed to achieve meaningful results. UN agencies are
also financially resource constrained. A few development partner respondents mentioned that the
differing amounts for travel and per diems among UN agencies is confusing and unclear for some
Final Evaluation Report 39
partners. Some communication issues in terms of roles and responsibilities were also mentioned.
For example, sometimes UN agencies are seen as sources of money in the same way as
development partners but that is not what the UN is. Development partners are keen on visibility
and want to ensure that they receive credit and can demonstrate contribution if not attribution
resulting from their support.
3.4 Sustainability
Questions: Has the UN system support been extended in such away to build national and local
capacities to ensure long term, sustainable gains? To what extent has the UN programming
assisted Lao’s government to scale up to achieve its goal of becoming a middle-income country?
And, To what extent has the UN system helped to support Lao PDR’s journey towards becoming
a sustainable middle-income country?
Findings:
18. Several stakeholders pointed to strong UN AFP partnerships in many provinces and districts
in Lao PDR but several other stakeholders indicated that most UN support is at the national policy
dialogue level with less at the provincial and district levels where actual implementation of
policies and strategies takes place.
19. There does not appear to be sufficient emphasis on sustaining results in some of the projects.
20. There is a lack of knowledge transfer, coaching and mentoring to build capacity and
contribute to sustainability.
21. A longer transition period is needed for Lao PDR’s graduation from LDC status given the
effects of COVID-19 and need for UN and development partner initiatives to build sustainability
through improved use of national systems.
22. Sustainability needs to be supported as an integrated whole including focusing on resiliency,
building on institution strengthening of the governance institutions, building and sustaining
human capital within the government and widening the partnerships to include the private sector,
INGOs/NPAs and new development partners.
Government Representatives
In term of sustainability, most government stakeholders pointed out that they benefited from
participating in the implementation of UN supported programmes through learning by doing and
being engaged in the implementation process. They indicated that this was a good way for
capacity transfer of skills. Government partners also suggested that to ensure sustainability of UN
intervention results, the projects should involve more people, offices and authorities at the sub-
Final Evaluation Report 40
national level and work towards strengthening their capacity as well. Cooperation and
participation at the local level is important to national sustainability.
Regarding UN support to Lao PDR becoming an upper middle-income country by 2030,
government stakeholders noted that UN agencies have provided support through contributions to
issues in the 8th NSEDP. To become an upper middle-income country, Lao PDR GNI per capital
has to reach more than 6,000 USD, which is a challenge. In this regard, Lao PDR would need
more support on income generation activities at local and community levels, more support on
production of local products, more building of local capacity, and more opportunities to work
closely with the private sector as well as NGOs.
UN agencies have strengthened the national capacity. Many capacity development initiatives
include intensive training and awareness building workshops. Due to staff turnover and internal
movement, Technical Departments still need capacity development on specific expertise required
for sectoral management, monitoring, and planning. This could be in the form of on-job training,
long-term coaching, short-term training including recognized institutes and certificates, or mid and
long-term capacity development through Masters/PhD scholarship study in country or overseas.
A baseline should be agreed and a level of capacity development targeted and agreed by the
UNCT and the Government.
When programmes end, most of their activities also end. The Government has limited budget and
often these activities are not categorized in sectoral budget priorities so do not receive ongoing
support. Also, often, external experts and consultants have not transferred sufficient knowledge
to the appropriate local staff so they are unable to use the knowledge and know how and ensure
long term benefit. The UNFPA evaluation points to this situation in “Finding 2: The UNFPA country
office has put a comparatively strong emphasis on adolescents and particularly adolescent girls
in data gathering and research, but key knowledge products are not widely known […] the CPE
team noted that these useful knowledge products were not widely known among consulted
government and development partners9.”
In summary, the responses to the survey reflect the perspective that the majority of the
Government respondents were somewhat satisfied (67%) with the involvement of their institution
in UN’s planning and implementation process, but others (33%) were very satisfied.
9 UNFPA, January 2021. UNFPA Country Programme Evaluation Lao PDR. P. 39
Final Evaluation Report 41
How satisfied are you with the involvement of your
institution in UN’s planning and implementation 33% 67%
process?
Very satisfied Somewhat satisfied Somewhat unsatisfied Very unsatisfied
Similarly, 67% of government representatives also perceived that UN programming assisted to
some extent the Lao’s government scale-up to achieve its goal of becoming an upper middle-
income country and 33% scored it to a large extent.
To what extent has the UN programming assisted
Lao’s government to scaled-up to achieve its goal of 33% 67%
becoming a upper middle-income country?
To a large extent To some extent To a small extent Not at all Do not Know
UN Agencies
Most UN Agency respondents indicated that the plans of the Government in the 8th NSEDP Plan
were perhaps overly ambitious but definitely going in the right direction to support sustainability.
But In future they need to work more intersectorally, prioritizing working together and building
interlinkages across sectors. Some Agencies are not reaching out sufficiently but can be brought
along by the UNRC.
Final Evaluation Report 42
The issue of supporting human capital development was mentioned by most UN Agencies as
critical with a particular emphasis on Train the Trainer capacity development approaches
augmented by coaching and mentoring and building local human capacity over time.
Many UN Agencies indicated that achieving sustainability in Lao PDR still has a strong need to
use the technical expertise housed in their UN agency and in many others. They also indicated
that they have solutions for problems that have not been identified by most stakeholders. For
example, a rural country such as Lao PDR has one of the highest urbanization rates in the world
and needs to confront the issue of planning urbanization in towns and villages in a sustainable
manner to address issues related to the growing urban poor. Or in terms of dealing with
agriculture, it is important to address root causes and introduce mechanized approaches which
are sustainable and linked to the realities on the ground.
Many agencies point out that the key to overall sustainability is an integrated approach with
progress on multiple goals at the same time. Several UN Agencies indicated that Sustainability is
enhanced by programmes like the UN Joint Programme which is a cooperation platform among
UN Agencies working on social protection and poverty10 and also can include UXO. But other UN
Agencies indicate that it is difficult to get many UN Agencies all on the same page and move
forward together.
Overall, many UN Agencies note that for potential graduation from LDC status11, work needs to
be done on preparing for the new modalities that will be needed. Several UN Agencies indicated
that UXO needs to have its support increased to build capacity on UXO-Lao and the NRA which
will strengthen the two national institutions and reduce the high costs of external support. Support
for education and youth job training also needs to be strengthened. Also mentioned by several
respondents was the need to increase linkages regionally to address challenges that are beyond
one country. For example, migration needs to be dealt with by linking with other countries and
with regional organizations such as ASEAN with which initiatives can be coordinated.
The UN Agency representatives’ responses to the survey questions on participation showed that
most are satisfied with their participation with national institutions at 87% either very satisfied at
25% or satisfied at 63%. These scores are lower at the regional level 65% very satisfied or
satisfied and very low at only 25% satisfied with their involvement with NGOs in their planning
and implementation processes. Although not asked, there was mention in the interviews of the
lack of involvement with the private sector. On the question of to what extent UN programming
is assisting the Lao PDR Government to scale up to achieve its goal of becoming a middle-income
10 During the current UNPF cycle the number of UN joint programme has increased from one to five.
11 In Feb 2021, Lao PDR has been recommended, by UN CDP, for graduation with an extended 5-year
preparatory period effectively setting the graduation to 2026 assuming a positive and continued trajectory
throughout the time period leading up to graduation. http://www.mofa.gov.la/index.php/activities/state-
leaders/3999-lao-pdr-is-recommended-to-graduate-in-2026-from-the-least-developed-country-category-
with-an-extended-preparatory-period
Final Evaluation Report 43
country, the findings were mixed with 50% saying to some extent and 25% saying to a large extent
but with 13% saying to a small extent and 13% saying they did not know.
UN Agencies representatives view
How satisfied are you with the participation of NGO in
25% 50% 13% 13%
UN’s planning and implementation process?
How satisfied are you with the participation of regional
13% 50% 25% 13%
institutions in UN’s planning and implementation process?
How satisfied are you with the participation of national
25% 63% 13%
institutions in UN’s planning and implementation process?
Very satisfied Satisfied Dissatisfied Very dissatisfied I Do not Know
UN Agencies representatives view
To what extent has the UN programming assisted Lao’s
government to scaled-up to achieve its goal of 25% 50% 13% 13%
becoming a middle-income country?
To a large extent To some extent To a small extent Not at all I Do not Know
Other Partners
Some development partner representatives mentioned that COVID affected the sustainability of
results achieved by the UN and refocusing on urgent COVID matters diminished the attention
brought to other issues. To ensure the sustainability of all the policy work conducted by the UN,
the UNCT needs to review programmes and initiatives to ensure that there are clear sustainability
goals in mind since it is the experience of several development partners that this is not clear in
some UN supported programmes. Several other partners also noted the importance of exploring
new funding sources and encouraging private sector investment.
Final Evaluation Report 44
3.5 Cross-cutting issues
This section reports on a number of cross-cutting issues in the Lao PDR context as follows:
gender equality, environment, human rights and results-based management, and capacity
building issues. All these areas are critical to international development assistance and to the
SDGs 2030 Agenda. The evaluation team sought to gauge what progress had been made in
these areas using a variety of measures, including a review of documents, key Informant
interviews, focus groups and an online survey. An evaluation matrix provided the conceptual
framework for all of the lines of evidence. Respondents included Government representatives,
UN agencies, and other development partners including development partners and INGOs/NPAs.
Questions on Gender– Has the UN system’s support been extended in a way that promotes
gender equality in Lao PDR? And, to what extent did UNPF make use and promote gender
equality standards and principles (e.g., participation, non-discrimination, accountability,
etc.) to achieve its goals?
Finding on Gender Equality (GE)
23. Lao PDR had good gender mainstreaming but more effort needs to be placed on women’s
empowerment and women’s rights to achieve SDG 5.
24. The UN has provided good entry points to discuss sensitive topics but needs to better
coordinate with other development partners as well as the government to continue to advance
the GE agenda in Lao PDR. Working with other stakeholders will help identify gaps in policy and
capacity.
25. The Government would like the UN to take the lead on GE and the UNCT to identify a lead
agency since UN Women is not in country at present.
Government Representatives – Gender Equality (GE), SDG 5
Government stakeholders noted that UN agencies and the UNPF have helped to promote goal 5
on gender equity in Lao PDR. GE accomplishments in Lao PDR were proudly reported by some
representatives who pointed out that the country has the highest female representation in
parliament among all ASEAN countries; it has adopted gender related laws and legislation; the
government has worked closely with the UN to enhance gender equality as well as with the
national machinery such as, the Lao PDR Women’s Union and National Commission for
Advancement of Women - Mother and Children (NCAW_MC); and worked to integrate gender
into the 8th National Plan. Several government representatives also expressed their appreciation
for the UN’s support regarding the promotion of gender equity in the country, especially UNFPA
and UNICEF which they see as currently leading the effort from the UN side.
Final Evaluation Report 45
Some government representatives however, felt that at times it was important to adapt the
principles of GE, as conceived by the UN system, into existing social norms to ensure internal
support and long-term sustainability within the country context. In other words, to soften the tone
to ensure GE, particularly with reference to women rights and empowerment, was well
implemented.
With respect to the on-line survey, government representatives responded as follows in terms of
the advancement of gender equality in Lao PDR: 67% answered that GE has been extended to
a large extent; 22% % think it has been extended to some extent; 11% state it has been extended
to a small extent.
UN Agencies – Gender Equality
Overall, the sense is that gender equality is on track in Lao PDR and is well linked to the UNPF
but there are many important caveats, including issues related to Gender Based Violence (GBV).
The UN was able to bring the needed national government attention to important and sensitive
topics on GE, such as GBV, but it still has high prevalence within the society. This evidence is
aligned to that collected through the UNFPA CPE evaluation: “CP6 is a good reflection of
UNFPA’s family planning and maternal health transformative result areas. Gender-based violence
is becoming more prominent. There is scope for more and more concerted support for ending
early marriages12.”
Many UN agencies said that gender equality is mainstreamed well and that UN agencies
cooperate well with the Lao PDR Women’s Union as well as with several government
departments. Due its overall acceptance, some agencies have used gender to address overall
issues related to human rights, particularly as it relates to issues concerned with UXOs in Lao
PDR. However, more efforts need to be made beyond gender mainstreaming on women’s rights
and women’s empowerment to overcome structural and institutional barriers.
In general, UN representatives felt that UN agencies, in partnership with the government, were
largely contributing to gender equality in Lao PDR. Examples of best practices mentioned are:
UNICEF’s support for the CEDAW implementation, a gender plan of action (first implemented in
Vientiane and then at the local levels) and an annual report to the HQ in New York regarding
progress towards gender equality in Lao PDR. UNFPA has supported the government in the
formulation of a Gender Equality Law and has mobilized funds to support its implementation and
advocacy. UNFPA in Lao PDR initiated targeted GE/GBV activities under PD activities and
UNFPA’s 2019 and 2020 annual work plans included interventions to assist the Government of
Lao PDR through LWU to establish multi-sectoral referral system based on the 2014 Law on
Preventing and Combating Violence Against Women and Girls.
12 UNFPA, December 2020. UNFPA Country Programme Evaluation. P. 60
Final Evaluation Report 46
With respect to the on-line survey, UN representatives responded on GE as follows: 50% of UN
agency representatives answered that it has been extended to a large extent; 25% think it has
been extended to some extent; 13% say to a small extent; and surprisingly, 13% responded, that
they do not know which is concerning since GE should be mainstreamed through UN
programmes.
Other Development Partners – Gender Equality
Overall, the UN is seen by the development partners as a champion of the cross-cutting principles
discussed in this section and particularly on GE. With respect to the government, GE
mainstreaming into government was considered good and some indicated that GE was well linked
in the UNPF, although few could provide details.
The majority of development partners who responded pointed to the fact that the UN continues to
bring attention on important and sensitive topics related to GE e.g., Gender Based Violence (GBV)
which can then lead to other considerations. Specifically, the UN engagement of government
(and other partners) on such a sensitive issue (by commissioning a GBV study in 2014) helped
to raise awareness and sparked an ongoing dialogue. This dialogue not only yielded the first time
the government acknowledged the prevalence of GBV in Lao PDR but has helped to provide a
platform to discuss the need to strengthen women’s empowerment and women’s rights to fight
against GBV.
Also, development partners said there should be more openings with respect to coordination with
Lao PDR INGOs/NPAs and that they should be brought into the process from the beginning.
Selected CSO for example, were invited to participate in a number of important consultations with
government and the UN with respect to e.g., the preparation of the CEDAW progress report and
the UPR as well the SDG reporting. Some INGOs/NPAs were also invited by MOFA to provide
comments and inputs to CEDAW and UPR preparation process. The problem however was that
even though invited to these events, they were sometimes brought in mid-stream and thus were
less able to influence the course of action and provide the needed grass-roots voice.
Although most development partner respondents agreed that GE should be led by the UN, they
were concerned that, since the departure of UN Women from Lao PDR, it was difficult to discern
which of the UN Agencies should take the lead. This is a concern that was also expressed by
some government representatives.
Questions on Human Rights Based Approach- Has the UN system supported/ followed the
principles on HRs based approach? To what extent did UNPF make use of and promote
human rights standards and principles to achieve its goals?
Finding on HR Based Approach (HRBA)
26. Promotion and strengthening of HRs has a transformative effect but is still weak in some
policy areas in Lao PDR.
Final Evaluation Report 47
27. HR provides a platform for more inclusive growth and the ability to advocate for its inclusion
but it is still a sensitive subject in the country; human security issues are better accepted with a
focus on poverty reduction, labour and social welfare and education.
Government Representatives – Human Right Based Approach (HRBA)
This topic was met with mixed reviews from government representatives. Virtually all respondents
said that they felt that human rights are important and that, as LDC, the government of Lao PDR
needs to make the discussion of basic human rights a priority. At the center of the mixed reactions
however, is the interpretation of what a human rights-based approach entails within the Lao PDR
context.
Overall, the representatives emphasized two main factors when discussing the HRBA: 1) the
importance of prioritizing poverty alleviation, health and well-being as well as children’s education;
and, 2) the government’s ratification of several HRs conventions e.g., the Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women (CEDAW) as well the preparation of
relevant reports associated with HRs conventions as proof that they were working hard on the
rights agenda. However, implementation was more difficult. The promotion of human rights in
partnership with UN agencies was said to be under domestic law and regulation and needed to
be interpreted accordingly.
Several representatives also felt that some international experts/CTA have not been credible or
reliable since they were inflexible with respect to how HRs be implemented. According to some
respondents, it is necessary to fit HRs into the broader Lao PDR context and culture, including
the collectivist approach of their governance system. Thus, they argued, HRs remains a very
sensitive subject, particularly in areas related to information dissemination and disclosure.
Finally, he online survey of government representatives yielded the following responses on
human rights progress: 67% of government representatives answered that it has been extended
to a large extent; 22% think it has been extended to some extent; and 11% answered that they
do not know.
UN Representatives – Human Right Based Approach (HRBA)
With respect to Lao PDR’ achievements in human rights, UN Agency representatives
acknowledged that progress has been made, particularly in the areas of social welfare, disaster
management, climate change, child rights, education rights and to some extent women’s rights.
However, they also felt that HRBA was not well mainstreamed into technical programmes such
as taxation and agriculture. The UN technical programmes focus on training and workshops.
Principles of human rights are generally not applied in the technical content of the
training/workshop/seminar/study tours. The UNPF addresses the principles of using HRBA but
implementation is still a work in progress. Particularly, as it concerns civil and political rights in
Final Evaluation Report 48
Lao PDR and the rights of ethnic minorities and migrant worker, this is still a difficult discussion.
Thus, progress on the HRBA has mixed reviews.
Finally, responses to the online survey by UN representatives yielded the following in terms of
human rights progress in Lao PDR: 50% of UN agencies representatives answered that it has
been extended to a large extent; 38% % think it has been extended to some extent; and, 13%
answered that they do not know.
Other Partners – Human Right Based Approach (HRBA)
Privately various development partners continue to raise issues related to HRBA in Lao PDR.
Examples are related to undocumented migrant workers, particularly from Vietnam and Burma,
since they are vulnerable to exploitation given their status. There are also issues related to
discrimination and exploitation with respect to migrant labourers working on plantations and in the
informal sector related to low wages as well as occupational health and safety concerns. Again,
civil and political rights continue to be of concern, e.g., forced disappearances, fair trials, as well
as continued discrimination against non Lao-Tai ethnic groups persist, despite laws and policies
providing for equal rights for members of all national, racial and ethnic groups. Thus, changes in
HRBA acceptance needs to go beyond changes in law and regulation, including the signing of
HR conventions. These concepts need to be enforced and accepted within the Lao PDR country
context.
Questions on Environmental Sustainability - Has the UN system support been designed
and delivered following the programming principles of environmental sustainability? And,
To what extent did UNPF effectively use the principles of environmental sustainability to
strengthen its contribution to national development results?
Finding on Environmental Sustainability (ES)
28. As with GE, Environmental Sustainability is well supported. Cross-currents however, such as
poverty alleviation, the abundance of mineral deposits in Lao PDR and the regional appetite to
acquire them, lead to Lao PDR’s extractive economy. In turn, this economy exacerbates the
increase in climate disasters such as flooding and storms.
29. Disaster management has worked as a critical entry-point for combatting challenges related
to ES since it has a high degree of acceptance.
30. The failure to deal with ES has a disproportionate effect on women and girls, particularly in
rural areas were women and girls are over-represented in small subsistence farming.
Government Representatives – Environmental Sustainability (ES)
When asked about addressing environmental sustainability, most government representatives
interviewed responded that ES is a core principle related to the country’s on-going well-being and
sustainable growth, particularly given rise to issues related to flooding, storms and disaster/risk.
Government representatives suggested that the Technical Departments on environment and
natural resources were strictly implementing the principles of environmental sustainability as part
Final Evaluation Report 49
of their mandate, as well as promoting gender equity and women in decision making, since many
women and girls are often disproportionately affected by these issues. Also, UN Agencies working
in this area should coordinate better and move forward in the same direction. They saw this
coordination as resulting in more influence at a policy level and implementation of programming,
as well as providing more clarity for Lao PDR’s government on a way forward.
Echoing the sentiments above, in on-line survey with respect to ES, government representatives
responded as follows: 56% of government representatives answered that it has been extended
to a large extent; 33% think it has been extended to some extent; and 11% say they do not know.
UN Agencies Representatives – Environmental Sustainability (ES)
UN Agency respondents said that environmental sustainability is central because there has been
a real degradation of the Laotian forests and many challenges with programming in this area. Due
to the extent of the challenges, UN Agencies and their Government counterparts, have worked
hard to address environmental sustainability in policies and practices, including in the UNPF and
the National Plan. Also, although UN DESA is a non-resident agency in New York, it supports the
transformative 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and works to help countries like Lao
PDR translate global commitments into national action in the economic, social and environmental
spheres – including environmental sustainability.
Yet, there are many inter-related reasons why tackling ES is challenging in the country. For
example, Lao PDR is a very resource-rich country with well over 500 mineral deposited identified,
including gold and zinc. In short, Lao PDR benefits economically from an extractive economy
which continues to contribute to mounting ES issues.
The underlying challenge is that poverty levels are high in Lao PDR and natural resources are
plentiful and in demand in the region, which is a mixed blessing. Thus, although some progress
has been made in terms of disaster management and ES in general, it continues to be a balancing
act.
With respect to ES, the importance of building capacity in disaster risk reduction cannot be
overstated and needs to become an overarching area of importance for the UNCT and next
UNPF. In fact, there are many UN programmes related to environment and particularly to the
green climate/economy, but often these could be better coordinated among the UN’s four
Biodiversity Agencies e.g., UNESCO, FAO, UNEP, and UNDP. Environmental sustainability is
also supported in the Arise programme of ITC with its overall focus on building capacity. Other
agencies such as UN-Habitat, working with the Ministry of Natural Resources and Environment,
also support the management of resources including for disaster risk reduction and natural
protection from climate change.
In terms of the survey, UN Agencies responded in the following manner with respect to ES: 25%
of UN agencies representatives answered that it has been extended to a large extent; 25% think
Final Evaluation Report 50
it has been extended to some extent; 25% state it has been extended to a small extent; 13% state
it has not been extended at all; and 13% said they do not know at all.
Other Partners – Environmental Sustainability (ES)
There is a lot of work on ES in Lao PDR and it would benefit from more work at the local levels
by the UN. Most UN agencies support the national level through policy dialogue and include
limited support to provincial and district levels where actual implementation of policies and
strategies takes place. This risks a disconnect between policy and implementation and, for
example, results in many rural women and girls being victims of challenges related to ES due to
increased climate disasters. They would benefit from more support at the local levels.
Questions on Results Based Management (RBM) – Have the programming principles of
RBM been used to monitor and track results? And, to what extent did UNPF make use of
the programming principles of RBM to monitor and track it results?
Finding on Results Based Management (RBM)
31. A clearly articulated Theory of Change (ToC) which spells out key assumptions and outcomes
would help to provide an overarching strategy on the programme and RBM.
32. The uniqueness of UN Agencies and the overwhelming number of indicators makes it
challenging to collect data and for there to be ownership by the Lao PDR government. More
support for government is needed by the UN Agencies to help Lao PDR overcome data related
and statistical capacity concerns.
33. The UNPF can provide an overall umbrella mandate but there needs more emphasis on
contribution rather on attribution of results to make this workable for all development partners.
Government Representatives – Results Based Management (RBM)
According to many government representatives it appears that RBM is used more for larger
programmes but less for smaller projects valued from 50K – 200K. Also, with respect to
Monitoring and Evaluation and Results Based Management and the development and ownership
of indicators, representatives stressed the importance of not having overly ambitious indicators.
Moreover, the importance of developing a culture that supports placing significant effort and
resources on M&E & RBM needs to begin by fostering a sense of ownership and mutual
accountability. With respect to the UNPF and UN supported programmes, Government agencies
would like to be consulted and be part of the overall process more than they are currently when it
comes to RBM which deals with which indicators are tracked and why. This would increase the
likelihood that indicators are utilized and data tracked and of use to the government.
DOP/MPI took the lead in preparing the 9th NSEDP and its M&E framework, and currently have
300+ indicators in the 9th Plan. There was optimism expressed by some Government
representatives who mentioned that UNRC and UNDP has pushed for high quality indicators in
the 9th NSEDP. As a result, the 9th Plan is an improvement on the present 8th Plan. The 9th
Plan is said to have a clearer structure and focused areas of interest. Previously, the 8th Plan
Final Evaluation Report 51
was very focused on the economy and to some extent on social and environmental issues. The
9th Plan however, contains six inter-related areas namely, economic, HRD, livelihood,
environment, partnership development, and governance. The government partners interviewed
said they were more confident that the 9th Plan will be a “real” Results-Based Plan with which the
UN will be well aligned.
Some government departments expressed challenges in reporting on some SDG indicators. The
challenges that they are facing include unclear indicator definitions and knowledge about how to
use those indicators effectively. These issues were reported with the goal of receiving further
support and working to ensure that Government of Lao PDR and the UN indicators are
complementary.
Largely in keeping with findings from other lines of evidence, the government representatives
surveyed online felt that RBM was as follows: 44% of government representatives answered that
it has been extended to a large extent; 44% % think it has been extended to some extent; and
11% said they do not know.
UN Agencies Representatives – Results Based Management (RBM)
RBM is not yet being well done and needs increased capacity and training to develop better
measures, including how to use the indicators and other techniques to augment RBM such as
Most Significant Change (MSC) to help track progress towards results. Moreover, there is a need
for developing better and indictors that can be measured and setting of targets is also something
that needs to be improved as does work on baselines. This is particularly crucial as Lao PDR
moves towards graduation from LDC status to help track progress and follow results from
interventions. In general, there is a need to increase the capacity for RBM at both the national
and local levels of government working with UN Agencies at multiple levels.
Within the UNPF there were some indicators that did not have baselines, targets and also some
indicators that were too ambitious to track properly. There was an overall sense that the UNPF
should be supportive of the NSEDP. It was pointed out that NSEDP indicators were contributed
to by government and other Development Partners, not just UN Agencies and that this should be
borne in mind when thinking about the UNPF and NSEDP indicators.
There are 10 Sector WGs and 8 UN Results Groups which need to be better coordinated, not just
in terms of their agendas but also in terms of their results framework as many have overlapping
influences. Moreover, the UN Results Groups tend to be uneven in the level of ownership by
specific agencies and their involvement in planning and implementing programmes. . Working
with government from the beginning of the process will go a long way to helping alleviate these
issues, particularly those related to ownership of indicators, targets and the inclusion of baselines.
With respect to what extent the UN system’s support has been extended to promote gender
equity, human rights, environmental sustainability, and RBM use in Lao PDR, 50% indicated that
it had been extended to some extent but 25% thought it was only extended to a small or no extent
while another 25% thought it had been extended to a large extent. This was inconclusive.
Final Evaluation Report 52
Other Partners – Results Based Management (RBM)
Many development partners agree that there is work to be done with respect to RBM and the
alignment of indicators, targets and baselines in all development areas. With respect to cross
cutting issues such as gender equality, the human rights-based approach, environmental
sustainability and capacity building within government, this continues to be a challenge even in
areas where the government is improving RBM reporting. When it comes to M&E support,
development partners and the government tend to look to the leadership of the UNCT and the UN
in general so they are well positioned to provide coordination opportunities to improve RBM. This
also requires cooperation from other parties and will also require some changes on the part on
individual development partners themselves, who are sometimes too concerned with capturing
their own contributions to results rather than working collaboratively to show overall progress.
Question on Capacity Building (CB)
Has the overall UN program been designed with programming principles of capacity development
at its core? And, to what extent has UNPF been designed with programming principles of capacity
building at its core?
Finding on Capacity Building (CB)
34. The Lao PDR government would like to see more technical assistance and capacity building
rather than having international experts managing programmes since they see this as more
sustainable in the long run. The UN agrees that capacity building in a number of key areas is
critical for achieving and sustaining the development agenda in Lao PDR and includes CB in
every programme.
35. The government appreciates support to staff for capacity building but would also like more
capacity building or institution building at the systemic levels of government, e.g., provision of
improved systems and technology etc. since high staff turn-over and insufficient succession
planning makes it difficult to sustain gains made by staff who have benefitted from capacity
building alone. There needs to be a balance between investments in human capital and
institutional systems building to maximize the effectiveness of capacity building.
Government Representatives – Capacity Building
Capacity development is a core principle of the government of Lao PDR as well as UN Agencies
and other Development Partners. The government representatives indicated that there is a need
to work on capacity development on two levels: with respect to government staff and with respect
to government institutions to increase sustainable development.
Within the government structure, the ‘Sam Sang’ policy has mainly focused on human
development from the central to the grass-roots level. Indeed, government implementing agencies
are trying to ensure that all programmes are aligned with capacity development activities. A
Final Evaluation Report 53
primary goal is that, once programmes are completed, government staff will have obtained the
necessary knowledge and know how, in order to function at the level of specialists in their
respective fields.
The UN is seen as having strong technical expertise, which many government representatives
felt fortunate to be able to benefit. In addition, the UN has strengthened the capacity of many line
ministry staff, including soft skills and has also opened up more positions for Lao PDR nationals.
There should be a stronger emphasis on learning by doing and longer programme timeliness
since real capacity building does not just involve funding but time to learn and integrate what
you’ve learned. The Lao PDR government would like to see more involvement of technical
assistance and capacity building in the form of coaching and mentoring and exchange of skills in
the future. In addition, they hope to have more systemic capacity building embedded into
government and succession planning to retain knowledge locally which is especially important
due to high staff turnover. The government hopes to plan and implement joint programmes which
are aligned with national systems. The overall view of most government stakeholders was that
this type of capacity building will be successful for the government.
Some government institutions indicated that the exchange visits through South-South cooperation
were found to be useful. This is consistent with the UNDP CP evaluation. However, the evaluation
also suggests that they are limited by being one-off exchanges which did not result in ongoing
cooperation following the exchanges.
UN Agencies - Capacity Building
UN Agency respondents recognize that capacity building is very important for national
counterparts and the UN and needs to be integrated into programmes. UN capacity building
however, is often too centred at the national level. Indeed, the UNPF and UN agencies do
contribute to capacity building at the national level, but there is agreement that there should be
increased local and also regional support as well, e.g., ASEAN. An example was provided in
terms of dealing with trade disputes, in which case Lao PDR has had to seek external TA.
However, after graduation from LDC status, Lao PDR will need to rely more on its own resources
and thus will need well developed national capacity in this and other important areas.
The UN should support the Lao PDR government staff’s capacity building in areas such as:
resource mobilization, RBM, data and monitoring and evaluation. There needs to be more
coordination among UN Agencies and with the Government on capacity building strategies which
should link with the UN Joint Program in Social protection and value chains and capacity in TVET
and apprenticeships.
There is also a need for increased capacity in areas such as disaster prevention and building
resilience. The UNCT should help UN Agencies develop joint approaches with government and
Final Evaluation Report 54
UN Agencies on these issues. Additionally, the UNCT and UNRC should be able to do oversight
and coordinate capacity development initiatives to strengthen national capacity.
Other Partners – Capacity Building
Capacity development can take many avenues, including not just technical skills development but
critical soft skills that can help move difficult agendas forward. A great example of this are
responses for the EU on their joint efforts with the UNCT working together on cross cutting issues.
The EU team in Lao PDR were exposed to a useful way of working together and thinking about
cross-cutting issues. It was through participating in a pilot course organised by DEVCO’s Unit B1
(Human Rights, Gender, Democratic Governance) and Unit 06 (Quality & Results). It used a
learning workshop on the intercultural methodological approach which responded to the need to
better understand people in the social and cultural context in which they operate. Not having this
intercultural understanding can prevent programmes from achieving their goals. It can help people
reframe their approaches with others and understand factors they had not considered. The EU in
Lao PDR was the first location in which this intercultural approach was piloted and was successful
leading people to see that the cultural lens is key to looking at cross-cutting issues and how
different partners/stakeholders can work together and communicate with each other using
culturally sensitive interventions.
Government Representatives
To what extent has the UN system’s support been
44% 44% 11%
extended in a way that promotes RBM use in Laos?
To what extent has the UN system’s support been
extended in a way that promotes environmental 56% 33% 11%
sustainability in Laos?
To what extent has the UN system’s support been
67% 22% 11%
extended in a way that human rights use in Laos?
To what extent has the UN system’s support been
extended in a way that promotes gender equity in 67% 22% 11%
Laos?
To a large extent To some extent To a small extent Not at all Do not Know
-
Final Evaluation Report 55
UN Agencies Representatives
UN Agencies representatives view
To what extent has the UN system’s support been extended
25% 50% 13% 13%
in a way that promotes RBM use in Laos ?
13%
To what extent has the UN system’s support been extended
in a way that promotes environmental sustainability in Laos 25% 25% 25% 13%
?
To what extent has the UN system’s support been extended
50% 38% 13%
in a way that promotes human rights in Laos ?
To what extent has the UN system’s support been extended
50% 25% 13% 13%
in a way that promotes gender equity in Laos ?
To a large extent To some extent To a small extent Not at all Do not Know
3.6 Forward Looking Perspectives
Questions: In response to questions about what the future focus of the next UNPF 2017-
2021 should be, what lessons have been learned, and how joint ventures have added value
or identified good practices, the interviewees and focus groups from the UN, Government
and others presented several ideas which are presented below.
Findings:
36. It appeared to several representatives in all areas that some agencies and Ministries have not
allocated sufficient resources for M&E so they propose that additional resources be committed
by agencies linked to the UNRC for coordination purposes. It was noted that a joint monitoring
approach would benefit both large and small UN Agencies and the Government since cross over
issues will become more apparent and this would help agencies, the Government and the UNCT
to plan.
37. Multiple stakeholders support the need for the UN and multilateral and bilateral development
partners to work together on a range of activities including joint initial analysis of programme
proposals, coordinating and having good exchanges across sectors and in specific sectors and
also joint monitoring and evaluation missions and linkages that increase data sharing among all
stakeholders.
38. Clearly there is a need for finding ways to cut transaction costs in procurement and
programme implementation and overcome the fallout from stakeholders needing to comply with
multiple rules and regulations.
39. Most of the groups of representatives suggest that the focus of the next UNSDCF needs to be
on increasing the capacity of government staff to develop, manage, implement and monitor
Final Evaluation Report 56
programmes with decentralised decision-making and approval capability which is likely to
increase government ownership.
40. There is agreement among most stakeholders that there has not been sufficient focus in most
programmes building local capacity at the provincial and district levels which needs to be
improved in the next UNSDCF by integrating these levels in plans and programmes.
Government Representatives
Several government representatives indicated that the next UNSDCF (UN Sustainable
Development Cooperation Framework) should be aligned with the 9th NSEDP and several
mentioned that skill development is an important component of the 9th NSEDP. Representatives
of technical departments also indicated that they had not been sufficiently involved in the
development of UNPF indicators and would like to be in the future UNSDCF.
Many Government representatives recommend that there be one standardized set of UN
regulations/rules for programme management, finance, procurement and reporting. Procurement
should be in the country but if local goods and services are not available, procurement could be
from overseas. Some financial and procurement rules are not appropriate in Lao PDR especially
at the local level since they conflict with NIM policies and MoF financial regulations and rules.
Procurement policies and approval needs to be faster, more flexible and applicable to the Lao
PDR context especially at the local level and in remote areas. The conditions for receiving funds
should be less onerous and flexible.
Several representatives noted that many small projects do not achieve their planned results and
are not well monitored. The UN should support larger programmes with spending of USD 5 million
to ensure tangible results that achieve SDGs. Programmes need to be 3-5 years to be able to
demonstrate impact.
Disaster management is already included in the 9th NSEDP particularly focusing on prevention,
response and recovery. Recovery should be prioritized and focused upon since most current
funds are allocated for emergency responses during disasters and less is allocated to livelihood
recovery to build resilience after disasters. Funds for disaster risk response, management and
prevention are channeled to the Ministry of Environment and Natural Resources and the Ministry
of Labor and Social Welfare and are needed to prevent and control disease outbreaks caused by
flood and drought and climate change. The UNSDCF should include priorities of the MAF which
are defined in the 9th NESDP and continue to achieving the Sendai framework.
Overall Government representatives noted that there is too much of a top-down view on
environment when a bottom-up view would work better to bring in the provincial and district levels.
This should be linked to building local capacity including for example capacity in remote sensing,
water accounting, pollution control and use of data and statistics etc. Enhanced capacity is
needed as well as links with international research institutes and universities. Many
representatives suggest that the focus of the next UNSDCF needs to be on increasing the
Final Evaluation Report 57
capacity of government staff to develop, manage, implement and monitor programmes with
decentralised decision-making and approval capability. This will increase government ownership.
UN Agencies
Many interviewees noted that in the future the M&E framework must be upgraded so that the
UNSDCF clearly supports the 9th NSEDP and has a well-developed results framework. It
appeared to several representatives that some agencies and Ministries have not allocated
sufficient resources for M&E. Additional resources could be committed by agencies linked to the
UNRC for coordination purposes. A joint monitoring approach will benefit both large and small
UN Agencies since cross over issues will become more apparent and help agencies and be useful
to include in the UNSDCF. Many also added that indicators should not be too ambitious. It is
important to develop a culture which supports and funds M&E and RBM.
Many stakeholders agree that policy dialogue is important but think that there should be more
focus on providing resources for action at the local level which also needs to be part of the policy
dialogue. The local levels also need to benefit from lessons learned by others such as tools
developed in Cambodia by the UN to generate income which could be replicated and deployed
in Lao PDR where such approaches are needed.
Additional cross cutting issues could be considered including UXO especially given the
importance of Lao PDR’s Special SDG 18 on UXO. Others could include people with disabilities,
and migration which is also a regional concern that needs to be included in the UNSDCF.
Most interviewees agree that the major investment in the future needs to be on human capital
including digital knowledge and capacity in all the key sectors. The UNSDCF could help integrate
the many UN initiatives and pull them together and help link them to MPI plans.
A practice that is not helpful is having trust funds or programmes set up proposals which attract
hundreds of good proposals of which only very few can be funded. This is discouraging for
possible partners and discourages rather than encourages action.
A key lessons-learned mentioned was that the UNRC setting the tone for coordination and
partnership among agencies and partners adds substantial overall value to the programme, and
as coordination becomes a reality, increases the possibility of decreasing transaction costs from
joint activities.
Other Partners
These stakeholders note that the UNRC and UNCT are doing a good job and need to continue it
since there is much to be done. As part of this, several development partners mentioned that the
UN needs to open up to new development partners, the private sector and INGOs/NPAs.
Development partners mentioned that the recommendations from the mid-term review of the 8th
NSEDP focussed on institutional strengthening which is still the key in the near future and to Lao
Final Evaluation Report 58
PDR being ready for graduation. Many also focus on the fact that Lao PDR has financial
challenges and needs to focus on building human capital as its central focus.
Development partners also focussed on the need for the UN and multilateral and bilateral
development partners to work together on a range of activities including joint initial analysis of
project proposals, coordinating and having useful exchanges across sectors and in specific
sectors and also carry out joint monitoring and evaluation missions and linkages that increase
data sharing.
4 LIST OF FINDINGS, CONCLUSIONS AND LESSONS
LEARNED
FINDINGS
Relevance
1. The large majority of stakeholders (over 75%) in the UN, Government of Lao PDR and other
agencies consulted all agree that the UN Partnership Framework (UNPF) is well aligned with
national plans and priorities identified in the Lao PDR 8th NSEDP. Specific results are primarily
delivered through individual UN Agency efforts working with partners.
2. The UNPF thematic areas are aligned with the national priorities of the 8th NSEDP of Lao PDR
and have contributed to progress towards most targets but the implementation results are mixed.
3. The UN is seen as a neutral partner with strong technical expertise supporting the Government
to achieve the 8th NSEDP and SDG targets.
4. Overall the UNRC and UNCT is leading movement towards improved interagency cooperation
and collaboration among UN agencies and also with the Government of Lao PDR and other
agencies but issues related to differing administrative modalities among UN agencies, other
agencies and the Lao PDR Government make it difficult to optimize results and avoid duplication.
5. Outreach to the private sector, INGOs/NPAs and to new development partners is has not been
significant and is essential to expanding the UNPF partnership between the UN and the
Government of Lao PDR. But at present this situation is improving with several UN agencies
increasing their linkages with INGOs/NPAs and expanding partnerships with multiple
stakeholders such as e.g. UNFPA. 6. The UN Agencies have responded well to the COVID crises
which has enhanced the relevance of the UN working together as a whole.
Final Evaluation Report 59
Effectiveness
7. The UNCT is well respected as a UN coordinating body with improved positioning credibility,
reliability and communication thanks to strong leadership from the UNRC which can potentially
help bring about culture change within the Lao PDR UNCT.
8. The UNPF clarifies Agency Financial Priorities effectively.
9. Non-resident UN Agencies report they are well integrated into the UNCT.
10. UNPF reporting has good coverage but reports are challenged in measuring progress on
indicators due to weak baselines and wide-ranging indicators.
11. Increased capacity is needed in M&E as well as in statistical and data management in UN
Agencies and the Government of Lao PDR.
12. Many stakeholders view the work of the UN Results Groups as an internal UN mechanism
with the 10 Sector Working Groups are a broader Government and Development Partner
mechanism working under the annual Round Table process.
13. The Results Groups are uneven in level of ownership by specific agencies and in their levels
of involvement in planning and implementing programmes.
14. UN programme teams need to empower Government stakeholders more in terms of decision-
making during programme planning and implementation of UN programmes.
Efficiency
15. Each UN Agency has its own administrative modalities which makes it challenging for
Ministries in Lao PDR to work with UN Agencies since they implement similar programmes using
different methods which often increases transaction costs and creates duplication.
16. UN Agencies tend to work in siloes focused on achieving their own mandates which limits
their efficiency linking with others to achieve UNPF’s umbrella mandate.
17. There are many examples of coordination on initiatives (e.g. Joint Programme on Social
Protection).
Sustainability
18. Several stakeholders pointed to strong UN AFP partnerships in many provinces and districts
in Lao PDR but several other stakeholders indicated that most UN support is at the national policy
dialogue level with less at the provincial and district levels where actual implementation of policies
and strategies takes place.
19. There does not appear to be sufficient emphasis on sustaining results in some of the projects.
20. There is a lack of knowledge transfer, coaching and mentoring to build capacity and contribute
to sustainability.
Final Evaluation Report 60
21. A longer transition period is needed for Lao PDR’s graduation from LCD status given the
effects of COVID-19 and need for UN and donor initiatives to build sustainability through improved
use of national systems.
22. Sustainability needs to be supported as an integrated whole including focusing on resiliency,
building on institution strengthening of the governance institutions, building and sustaining human
capital within the government and widening the partnerships to include the private sector,
INGOs/NPAs and new development partners.
Cross Cutting Issues
Gender Equality (GE)
23. Lao PDR had good gender mainstreaming but more effort needs to be placed on women’s
empowerment and women’s rights to achieve SDG 5.
24. The UN has provided good entry points to discuss sensitive topics but needs to better
coordinate with other development partners as well as the government to continue to advance
the GE agenda in Lao PDR. Working with other stakeholders will help identify gaps in policy and
capacity.
25. The Government would like the UN to take the lead on GE and the UNCT to identify a lead
agency since UN Women is not in country at present.
Human Rights Based Approaches (HRBA)
26. Promotion and strengthening of HRs has a transformative effect but is still weak in some policy
areas in Lao PDR.
27. HR provides a platform for more inclusive growth and the ability to advocate for its inclusion
but it is still a sensitive subject in the country; human security issues are better accepted with a
focus on poverty reduction, labour and social welfare and education.
Environmental Sustainability
28. As with GE, Environmental Sustainability is well supported. Cross-currents however, such as
poverty alleviation, the abundance of mineral deposits in Lao PDR and the regional appetite to
acquire them, lead to Lao PDR’s extractive economy. In turn, this economy exacerbates the
increase in climate disasters such as flooding and storms.
29. Disaster management has worked as a critical entry-point for combatting challenges related
to ES since it has a high degree of acceptance.
30. The failure to deal with ES has a disproportionate effect on women and girls, particularly in
rural areas were women and girls are over-represented in small subsistence farming.
Final Evaluation Report 61
Results Based Management (RBM)
31. A clearly articulated Theory of Change (ToC) which spells out key assumptions and outcomes
would help to provide an overarching strategy on the programme and RBM.
32. The uniqueness of UN Agencies and the overwhelming number of indicators makes it
challenging to collect data and for there to be ownership by the Lao PDR government. More
support for government is needed by the UN Agencies to help Lao PDR overcome data related
and statistical capacity concerns.
33. The UNPF can provide an overall umbrella mandate but there needs more emphasis on
contribution rather on attribution of results to make this workable for all development partners.
Capacity Building
34. The Lao PDR government would like to see more technical assistance and capacity building
rather than having international experts managing programmes since they see this as more
sustainable in the long run. The UN agrees that capacity building in a number of key areas is
critical for achieving and sustaining the development agenda in Lao PDR and includes CB in
every programme.
35. The government appreciates support to staff for capacity building but would also like more
capacity building or institution building at the systemic levels of government, e.g., provision of
improved systems and technology etc. since high staff turn-over and insufficient succession
planning makes it difficult to sustain gains made by staff who have benefitted from capacity
building alone. There needs to be a balance between investments in human capital and
institutional systems building to maximize the effectiveness of capacity building.
Forward Looking Perspectives
36. It appeared to several representatives in all areas that some agencies and Ministries have
not allocated sufficient resources for M&E so they propose that additional resources be committed
by agencies linked to the UNRC which could provide coordination purposes. A joint monitoring
approach will benefit both large and small UN Agencies and the Government since cross over
issues will become more apparent and help agencies, the Government and the UNSDCF to plan.
37. Multiple stakeholders support the need for the UN and multilateral and bilateral development
partners to work together on a range of activities including joint initial analysis of programme
proposals, coordinating and having good exchanges across sectors and in specific sectors and
also joint monitoring and evaluation missions and linkages that increase data sharing among all
stakeholders.
38. Clearly there is a need for finding ways to cut transaction costs in procurement and
programme implementation and overcome the fallout from stakeholders needing to comply with
multiple rules and regulations.
Final Evaluation Report 62
39. Most of the groups of representatives suggest that the focus of the next UNSDCF needs to
be on increasing the capacity of government staff to develop, manage, implement and monitor
programmes with decentralised decision-making and approval capability which is likely to
increase government ownership.
40. There is agreement among most stakeholders that there has not been sufficient focus in most
programmes building local capacity at the provincial and district levels which needs to be
improved in the next UNSDCF by integrating these levels in plans and programmes.
LESSONS LEARNED
The evaluation identified lessons learned from implementation of the UNPF 2017-2021 anchored
around “what works, what doesn’t and why?” which build on the conclusions and could be
applicable for wider use.
1. A key lesson learned identified by multiple stakeholders in this evaluation was that the
UNRC is Lao PDR is setting the tone for creating a cultural change which highlights the
importance and value of partnership and coordination among agencies and partners which has
added substantial overall value to the UNPF and encouraged partnerships becoming a reality and
increasing the likelihood of more joint activities taking place. The lesson is that leadership is
essential for cultural change related to building partnerships.
2. As noted above, other levels of stakeholders in a country need to integrated but also other
actors need to be drawn in including inactive or new development partners, the private sector
locally and internationally and INGOs/NPAs and international NGOs.
3. Entry points need to identified and used such as on gender through Gender Based
Violence and Environmental Sustainability through Disaster Management to move the needle and
create a platform for open discussion in each area.
4. Actions at multiple levels need to be consistent and moving in the same direction to avoid
issues such as trust funds or calls for proposals being let and attracting hundreds of responses
but only having very few be funded which discourages many interested possible partners and
discourages rather than encourages actions and a widening of the partnership.
5. Levels of governance such as Joint Steering Committees or Technical Working Groups or
Results Groups all need to be inclusive and operating with significant ownership by all
stakeholders.
6. Finally, the central lesson is that to move forward with a national level undertaking, all the
levels need to be working together and be on the same page to address all the SDGs successfully.
CONCLUSIONS
Final Evaluation Report 63
Building on the findings, this section draws together and integrates conclusions based on those
findings.
Relevance
1. The UNPF is relevant and aligned to the political and economic context in which it is
implemented. The actual process of developing the document is itself also relevant and brings
stakeholders together to discuss their vision on how the UN, as a system and a neutral partner,
can align its work with the priorities and needs of Lao PDR.
Effectiveness
2. The UNCT and its member agencies, partly through the use of the UNPF, have achieved good
results, all the more through its support to national institutions and ministries. These counterparts
respect and have confidence in the UN system and its technical as well as thematic expertise.
3. The Sector Working Groups set up by the Government and the Results Groups coordinated by
the UN are not well aligned. While the Sector WGs are at the output sectoral level, the Results
Groups are at the outcome level. This has contributed to the two groups not coordinating as well
as they could in their work together.
4. In the Government’s view, the UNPF and UNCT need to empower Government stakeholders
more in terms of decision-making, and involvement during programme planning and
implementation of UN programmes.
Efficiency
5. Although UN agencies, in part thanks to the UNPF, have shown in many instances that they
can coordinate their work through joint programming, many challenges remain to overcome silos
within a number of agencies which are focused on their own specific mandates.
6. In order to increase coordination among UN Agencies in the field, and avoid duplication, it is
important to involve the headquarters of these UN Agencies since this is where policy decisions
are made.
Sustainability
7. Although the COVID-19 pandemic has actually strengthened the UN’s capacity to work
together, overall, the crisis has also set the country back on many fronts. Some of the progress
Final Evaluation Report 64
Lao PDR was making towards graduation from LDC status has slowed down making rapid
graduation more difficult.
8. The present UNPF framework still has some gaps in terms of setting a context in which
information, knowledge and know-how can be shared beyond participants who are directly
involved in UN agencies’ capacity building and technical assistance.
Cross Cutting – Gender Equality
9. Gender mainstreaming is well supported in Lao PDR and promoted by UN agencies and the
UNPF. The UN is already seen as a leader in GE which has helped introduce sensitive topics
such as GBV prevalence in Lao PDR which in turn provides a dialogue platform to strengthen
discussions on women’s rights and empowerment.
10. Gender Equality in Lao PDR is well done overall with many promising areas which are
positioned to be entry points and platforms for the expansion of the rights of women and girls such
as reproductive rights, promotion of the rights of the girl child and work on GBV.
Human Rights Based Approach
11. In terms of the human rights-based approach, the 10 principles of the UN Global Compact
including human rights and environment and the 3 pillars of the Ruggie Principles (protect, respect
and remedy) are recognized to be well supported by the UN Agencies but there are still issues
with HRs within the country. The government has signed several International Human Rights
Conventions such as CEDAW and included gender equity and human rights in the national
constitution, but there are areas in which the UNPF could make efforts to further bring forward
human rights.
12. The UN has advocated for HRBA as transformative and works to strengthen its inclusion in
the development process, while the Lao PDR government argue for a step-wise approach in
which primarily human security concerns, related to poverty alleviation and social welfare, are
emphasized in the early stages over other rights. In short, Lao PDR is more comfortable promoting
Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (ESCR) over those of Civil and Political Rights (CPR).
Environmental Sustainability
13. The environment is of central concern to development partners in Lao PDR and a focus of
many projects with the Government, both with the UN and Other Development Partners. However,
there are other (economic) forces that put pressure on the environment. Environmental factors
include human rights concerns since many small farmers for example, are among the hardest hit
Final Evaluation Report 65
by the effects of environmental unsustainable actions. These negative environmental outcomes
affect more importantly a sub-set of the rural poor, women and girls from non Lao-Tai ethnic
groups who engage in subsistence farming. Lao PDR, like other countries in the region, e.g.,
Vietnam, is experiencing the effects of climate change through increased storms and flooding
which often destroy the livelihoods of the country’s most vulnerable women and children involved
in subsistence farming.
Results Based Management
14. The UNPF does not include substantial RBM content or detailed guiding principles that
promote a fully coordinated approach to reporting by the UN as a system but rather than as
individual agencies with good content. The RBM system does not yet reduce pressure on
signatory agencies by emphasizing the need to focus on higher level outcomes that demonstrate
changes that are contributing to higher level results and changes by building the capacity of
national stakeholders to themselves generate long lasting changes within their society.
Capacity Building
15. Although UN programmes and the UNPF integrate technical assistance as an important
approach to support Lao PDR nationals to increase their capacity to achieve results themselves,
more focus is needed on learning by doing and generating local ownership rather than having
international experts leading programmes. This is especially important as Lao PDR moves
towards graduation from LDC status. There should be a balance between investments in human
capacity and institutional systems building to ensure succession planning. There is a consensus
around the fact that capacity building is a key area for sustainability and is an important area for
the future UNSDCF and a core for future programming.
Forward looking Perspectives
16. The key messages for the next UNSDCF are:
Align with the 9th NSEDP with jointly agreed indicators identified, monitored and reviewed by the
JSC and coordinated by the UNRC;
Allocate more resources for M&E across the board and use a joint monitoring approach and joint
analysis of programme proposals etc.; and,
Focus on supporting capacity building and institutional strengthening nationally and increasingly
at the provincial and district levels.
Final Evaluation Report 66
To make this possible, will require increased collaboration and commitment among development
partners, the UN agencies in country and their headquarters and with the Government of Lao
PDR at multiple levels.
4. RECOMMENDATIONS
Relevance
1. To further integrate the UNSDCF within the Lao PDR context, the UNCT needs to build on
positive movement towards overcoming challenges linked to differing administrative modalities
among UN agencies, development partners and the Lao PDR government. It also needs to
identify ways to widen the partnership to include INGOs/NPAs, the private sector and new
development partners. At the strategic level, the Joint Steering Committee should agree on
directional issues while at the operational level a joint Theory of Change, monitoring framework
and indicators should be developed together.
Recommendation for: the UNCT and headquarters of UN organizations and the Joint
Steering Committee.
When: during the preparation and implementation of the upcoming UNSDCF.
Effectiveness
2. To ensure more effective implementation of the upcoming UNSDCF, the Lao PDR government
needs to more actively participate in programmes designed and implemented by and with UN
Agencies. The UNCT also needs to continue to fully consult the government throughout
development of the UNSDCF and also in development of major coordinated programmes to
ensure full commitment and ownership.
Recommendation for: the UNCT and the Government.
When: during the preparation and implementation of the upcoming UNSDCF.
3. The Sector Working Groups and Results Working Groups should be aligned at the outcome
level to the 9th NSEDP and the UNSDCF in order to promote and track changes at the
transformational outcome level.
Recommendation for: the UNCT and Joint Steering Committee.
When: during the preparation and implementation of the upcoming UNSDCF.
Final Evaluation Report 67
4. Clarification of AFPs and reporting have been valuable, but further improvements are needed
to strengthen M&E and statistical management as well as overall joint reporting.
Recommendation for: the UNCT.
When: immediately.
Efficiency
5. The UNRC, through the UNPF and the up coming UNSDCF, needs to continue to support the
culture change that encourages more joint programme design and implementation which better
reflects the “One UN”. Individual and team leadership is the key to fostering this cultural change.
Some UN agencies could benefit from financial incentives or support for coordination which would
encourage them to take part in more joint initiatives.
Recommendation for: the UNCT and UNRC.
When: during the preparation and implementation of the upcoming UNSDCF and beyond.
6. Ways need to be found to overcome the effects of differing administrative modalities used by:
UN agencies in the field and at UN headquarters which can be identified through discussions
among the agencies.
Recommendation for: UNCT and Headquarters of UN agencies
When: Streamlined overtime starting immediately.
Sustainability
7. The UNCT needs to bring the sustainability of initiatives, including for disasters of all types, to
the center of the UNSDCF and guide coordinated efforts that can have longer lasting results. UN
agencies should make every effort to support policy changes being implemented at all “levels”
(i.e. national, regional, district and local).
Recommendation for: the UNCT.
When: during the preparation and implementation of the upcoming UNSDCF and beyond.
8. In engaging and supporting the Government, the UN system’s support at the national and local
level should be balanced to help promote the government’s Sam Sang decentralization policy
which assigns broad roles to provinces as strategic units, districts as comprehensive planning
units and villages as development units.
Recommendation for: the UNCT.
When: during the preparation and implementation of the upcoming UNSDCF.
Final Evaluation Report 68
Cross cutting themes - Gender Equality
9. Gender Mainstreaming is essentially well integrated in how the UNCT operates in Lao PDR;
however, the UNCT can and should extend this gender mainstreaming effort to some of the so-
called technical programmes to ensure that women and girls are also sharing equally in the fruits
of development. The UNCT should put particular emphasis on gender equality and making sure
it is mainstreamed in everything it does, including the planning and implementation of the
upcoming UNSDCF.
Recommendation for: the UNCT.
When: during the preparation and implementation of the upcoming UNSDCF and beyond.
10. Commencing with the solid platform of GE mainstreaming and good work done on GBV, the
Joint Steering Committee, together should address more directly women’s and girls’ rights and
women’s empowerment bringing issues related to the public and private sphere together. All rights
are indivisible and need to be seen as working together.
Recommendation for: the Joint Steering Committee.
When: during the preparation and implementation of the upcoming UNSDCF and beyond.
Human Rights Based Approach
11. As with gender equality and gender mainstreaming efforts, it is important for all stakeholders
to utilize entry points towards a wider discussion on human rights, beginning with children’s rights,
educational rights, and addressing poverty alleviation, health and social justice concerns to help
move the needle towards a more just and equal society.
Recommendation for: all stakeholders involved in the UNSDCF.
When: during the preparation and implementation of the upcoming UNSDCF and beyond.
12. ESCR and CPR are not mutually exclusive categories but interrelated. Therefore, when
discussing the rights of women and girls, non Lao-Tai ethnic group rights, migrant workers rights,
etc., it is vital to demonstrate a link between the need for agency and decision making as well as
the right to education, land rights and decent work.
Recommendation for: all stakeholders involved in the UNSDCF.
When: during the preparation and implementation of the upcoming UNSDCF and beyond.
Environmental Sustainability
Final Evaluation Report 69
13. One of the best entry points to move from the dialogue on Environmental Sustainability to
concrete action plans is through disaster risk/ disaster management which naturally leads to the
climate issue and ecosystem degradation. This issue has the added benefit of highlighting gender
equality and non Lao-Tai ethnic group issues since these overlapping vulnerabilities make natural
disasters even more destructive for certain populations. It is hence recommended that the UNCT,
through the upcoming UNSDCF, concentrates significant environmental sustainability efforts on
disaster risk/ disaster management.
Recommendation for: the UNCT.
When: during the preparation and implementation of the upcoming UNSDCF
Results Based Management
14. The UNRC, the UNCT, the Government of Lao PDR and other stakeholders, as is possible,
should be jointly involved in the development of the Theory of Change. It is imperative that the
UNCT bases the new UNSDCF on increased and enhanced levels of baseline data and data
coordination. The design of indicators and targets should be a joint exercise carried out in
consultation with the Lao PDR government which will increase joint buy-in and lead to improved
measurement of progress.
Recommendation for: all stakeholders involved in the UNSDCF.
When: during the preparation and implementation of the upcoming UNSDCF.
Capacity Building
15. The UNCT, in close coordination with the Lao PDR government, needs to develop and jointly
implement an integrated capacity development plan which responds to the needs of the
Government of Lao PDR. This plan needs to include a specific section on building monitoring and
evaluation capacity to help develop baselines and measure progress. Human capital investment
is important (including investments in TVET however it is also important to invest in institutional
strengthening within the Government Public Service to become sustainable).
Recommendation for: Joint Steering Committee.
When: during the preparation and implementation of the upcoming UNSDCF.
Forward Looking Perspectives
Final Evaluation Report 70
16. Moving forward it is important to look back at relevance to ensure sustainability. The UNSCDF,
as a universal mandate or blueprint, should be addressed at two levels: the strategic and
operational. The Plan of Action process to concretize this could be:
Step 1: Consultation Process – Bring together the Government of Lao PDR, UN Agencies,
Development Partners, private sector and INGOs/NPAs in a series of consultations led by the
UNRC and UNCT who are well trusted neutral parties.
Step 2: Development of a Joint Theory of Change which could provide an overarching vision for
change.
Step 3: Development of joint-indicators
Step 4: More regular, at least annual meetings, of the Joint Steering Committee are required
Final Evaluation Report 71
ANNEXES
ANNEX 1: EVALUATION MATRIX
EVALUATION CRITERIA KEY EVALUATION QUESTIONS SUB-QUESTIONS INDICATORS METHODS AND SOURCES
Relevance 1. Has the UN System supported 1.1 Has the UN system paid proper Degree of alignment between different Desk review
achievement of national development attention to regional and cross- agencies’ project results and relevant Progress Reports
goals and targets in alignment to border issues of importance, national plans and frameworks for Lao
relevant national plans and frameworks e.g., ASEAN, Mekong and other PDR’s 8th NSEDP Interviews
for Lao PDR’s 8th NSEDP? cross border issues of Government
importance? Evidence and level of participation of UN UN staff
system in national events related to the
2. To what extent did the UNPF foster
Provincial Government
Partnership Framework interfacing with
synergies among agencies and involve INGOs/NPAs etc.
Government. (# of times participated
concerted efforts to optimize results and 2.1. COVID 19? (Related issues with compared to overall # of events) Focus Group Discussion
avoid duplication? respect to e.g., health, economic Online survey
well-being, human security, etc.)
Role of the UN during relevant national and Coordination with other concurrent
3. Has the UN system remained responsive regionally related events. evaluations
to emerging and unforeseen needs of
Evidence of active participant in and Roundtable discussion
Lao PDR and its people?
contributor to national and regional
partnership framework related networks.
External and internal stakeholders'
perception that UN is leader and convenor
for the partnership framework related
activities and programmes.
Partnerships and networks have been
4.1. Using an assessment of the
4. To what extent has interagency created at all levels (national, and sub-
evaluation criteria, how has the
cooperation and collaboration with national) and across sectors.
Final Evaluation Report 72
EVALUATION CRITERIA KEY EVALUATION QUESTIONS SUB-QUESTIONS INDICATORS METHODS AND SOURCES
other entities facilitated or hampered UNCT contributed to national
the achievement of results? development results in Lao?
Extent of progress toward outcome targets Desk review
Effectiveness
(% of planned outcomes achieved)
5. To what extent has the UN system Progress Reports
promoted or supported policies Interviews
Extent of progress toward SDG targets
consistent with each other and across
5.1 Have UN policies been used Focus Group Discussion
sectors, given the multi-sectorial nature
effectively as partnership tools? Evidence of a UN, Lao PDR government and Online survey
of economic development?
other relevant counterparts and
Government
implementing partners shared
6. Has the cooperation framework understanding of the systemic approach to
UN staff
strengthened the position, credibility partnership framework Provincial Government
and reliability of the UN system as a INGOs/NPAs etc.
partner for government and other
Coordination with other concurrent
relevant actors? Evidence that the partners/stakeholders
evaluations
have a shared vision on longer-term goals,
Roundtable discussion
boundaries, complexities, possible
7. To what extent has interagency
pathways to success, responsibilities and
cooperation and collaboration with
7.2 Using an assessment of the financial commitment involved to maintain
other entities facilitated or hampered
evaluation criteria, how has the a well-functioning partnership framework
the achievement of results?
UNCT contributed to national
development results? Number and quality of partnerships and
networks that have been created at all
levels (national, and sub-national) and
across sectors)
External and internal stakeholders'
perception on the alignment and
Final Evaluation Report 73
EVALUATION CRITERIA KEY EVALUATION QUESTIONS SUB-QUESTIONS INDICATORS METHODS AND SOURCES
coordination between UN programmes and
government systems.
External and internal stakeholders'
perception of the relevance of the
partnership to the context, coherent and
effective long term.
External and internal stakeholders'
perception on achieving jointly reported
results
% of spent funds vs commitments
Evidence that national institutions adopt
measures derived from UN cooperative
leadership.
Level of progress towards impacts along
change paths of the Theory of Change.
Efficiency 8. Has the Cooperation Framework 8.1 What factors have affected % of total budget for project management
reduced transaction costs for partners? UNAFPs working together to services (vs % operational) per agency Desk review
achieve the UNPF strategic
Progress Reports
intent and principles?
External and internal stakeholders'
Interviews
perception on UN's effective leadership role
Focus Group Discussion
8.2 What factors have affected the at the national level.
Online survey
UNCT support and contributions
through the UNPF highlighting Actual vs planned schedule and budget for Government
good practices and bottlenecks? a sample of agencies (both UN and UN staff
Final Evaluation Report 74
EVALUATION CRITERIA KEY EVALUATION QUESTIONS SUB-QUESTIONS INDICATORS METHODS AND SOURCES
Government) and external partnerships Provincial Government
8.3 To what extent has the UNPF with local INGOs/NPAs, business and other INGOs/NPAs etc.
relevant actors.
outcomes related to Human
Development been achieved?
Coordination with other concurrent
evaluations
Contributions towards outcomes specified
8.4 FTo what extent has the UNPF Roundtable discussion
in planning and programming documents or
outcomes related to Inclusive
in reports or evaluations that are traceable
Growth, Livelihoods and
and measurable.
Resilience been achieved?
Actions taken to mitigate time or budget
8.5 To what extent has the UNPF
problems
achieved outcomes related to
Governance, Rule of Law and
Participation in National
Decision-Making been achieved?
9. Was the Cooperation Framework 9.1 What were the performance, UN and governmental stakeholders' Desk review
supported by integrated funding progress or gaps in the UNPF perception concerning on-going Progress Reports
framework and by adequate funding support to national goals and cooperation (e.g., in terms of human
Interviews
instruments? priorities? resources, finances and knowledge
Government
capacity) Toward the goal of being
adequately equipped UN staff
Provincial Government
Focus Group Discussion
Online survey
Coordination with other concurrent
evaluations
Roundtable discussion
Final Evaluation Report 75
EVALUATION CRITERIA KEY EVALUATION QUESTIONS SUB-QUESTIONS INDICATORS METHODS AND SOURCES
Sustainability 10. Has the UN system support been 10.1 What other types of partners Evidence that local and national Desk review
extended in such a way to build national have been approached to ensure the stakeholders and partners are able to Progress Reports
and local capacities to ensure long term, sustainability, e.g., private sector? deliver against global, regional and country
Interviews
level goals and objectives agreed to.
sustainable gains?
Government
11.1 Can the UN continue to be a
Conformity with global and UN institutional UN staff
11. To what extent has the UN programming catalyst?
objectives spelled in the partnership
Provincial Government
assisted Lao’s government to scaled-up
framework is evidenced.
to achieve its goal of becoming a middle- INGOs/NPAs etc.
income country? Focus Group Discussion
Relationship to relevant SDGs and national
Online survey
plans are evident.
12. To what extent has the UN system Coordination with other concurrent
helped to support Lao PDR’s journey evaluations
Evidence of increasing national resources
towards becoming a sustainable middle-
Roundtable discussion
devoted to partnership framework, e.g., in
income country?
national budgets.
Strength of stated and documented
government commitment to resource
partnership framework.
Explicit national budgeting related to the
objectives of the partnership agreement
from a range of government agencies and
other external partnerships with civil
society.
National reports and statistics show improved
services related to the PA.
Evidence that UNCT agencies have developed
and implemented sstrategies and actions to
promote sustainability of benefits and results
Final Evaluation Report 76
EVALUATION CRITERIA KEY EVALUATION QUESTIONS SUB-QUESTIONS INDICATORS METHODS AND SOURCES
Cross-Cutting Principles 13. Has the UN system’s support been 13.1 To what extent did UNPF make Documented evidence of procedures to engage Reporting with disaggregated gender and
extended in a way that promotes gender use and promote gender equality and of actual engagement in the promotion intersectionality
equity in Lao PDR? standards and principles (e.g., of gender equality. Desk review
participation, non-discrimination,
Progress Reports
accountability, etc.) to achieve its Evidence of improved protection
performance achieved through stronger Interviews
goals?
engagement procedures and practice. Government
UN staff
Broad range of approaches based on Provincial Government
improved understanding of women’s
INGOs/NPAs etc.
perspectives and experiences in Lao PDR
Focus Group Discussion
are present in the UNPF and related
national agreements/frameworks. Online survey
Coordination with other concurrent
Type and amount of stakeholders’ financial evaluations
and human resources allocated to GEWE Roundtable discussion
date
14. Has the UN system supported followed 14.1 To what extent did UNPF make Evidence that UN, duty-bearers, Analysis of gender
the principles of a HRs based approach? use of and promote human rights counterparts and other national Intersectionality
standards and principles to implementing partners share a common
Desk review
achieve its goals? understanding of the systems approach to
HRs protection. Progress Reports
Interviews
Evidence that stakeholders have shared Government
vision on longer-term goals, boundaries, UN staff
complexities related to HRs and are moving
Provincial Government
towards alignment on these issues within
INGOs/NPAs etc.
the country.
Focus Group Discussion
Online survey
Final Evaluation Report 77
EVALUATION CRITERIA KEY EVALUATION QUESTIONS SUB-QUESTIONS INDICATORS METHODS AND SOURCES
Coordination with other concurrent
evaluations
Roundtable discussion
15. Has the UN system support been 15.1 To what extent did UNPF Evidence of improved protection Desk review
designed and delivered following the effectively use the principles of performance achieved through stronger
Progress Reports
programming principles of environmental sustainability to engagement procedures and practice with
Interviews
environmental sustainability? strengthen its contribution to respect to environmental sustainability.
national development results?
Government
Extent to which measures address relevant coUN staff
environmental issues and risks in the
Provincial Government
communities
INGOs/NPAs etc.
Focus Group Discussion
Online survey
Coordination with other concurrent
evaluations
Roundtable discussion
16. Have the programming principles of RBM 16.1 To what extent did UNPF make Level of progress towards impacts along Desk review
been used to monitor and track results? use of programming principles of change paths of the implicit Theory of Progress Reports
Change found in the UNPF.
RBM to monitor and track its results?
Interviews
Government
UN staff
Provincial Government
INGOs/NPAs etc.
Focus Group Discussion
Online survey
Final Evaluation Report 78
EVALUATION CRITERIA KEY EVALUATION QUESTIONS SUB-QUESTIONS INDICATORS METHODS AND SOURCES
Coordination with other concurrent
evaluations
Roundtable discussion
17. Has the overall UN program been 17.1 To what extent has UNPF been Evidence that UN program has been Desk review
designed with programming principle of designed with the programming designed with programming principle of Progress Reports
capacity development at its core? principles of capacity building at capacity development at its core
Interviews
its core?
Focus Group Discussion
Online survey
Government
UN staff
Provincial Government
INGOs/NPAs etc.
Coordination with other concurrent
evaluations
Roundtable discussion
Forward looking 18. What are the lessons learned that could 18.1 What specific recommendations Evidence of increased national capacity to Desk review
be identified for informing the planning should be included in the 2022-2026 manage elements of the Partnership Progress Reports
and decision-making of the UNSDCF UNSDCF? Framework with reducing support from UN
Interviews
and others.
2022-2026?
Focus Group Discussion
Online survey
19. Has the current UNPF 2017-2021 Specific plan(s) of the Government to work
contributed to preparedness for with other national stakeholders to Government
emergency situations? mainstream the goals and objectives of the UN staff
UNPF into on-going development of the
Provincial Government
•
country in the future.
INGOs/NPAs etc.
Final Evaluation Report 79
EVALUATION CRITERIA KEY EVALUATION QUESTIONS SUB-QUESTIONS INDICATORS METHODS AND SOURCES
Coordination with other concurrent
evaluations
Roundtable discussion
UN staff
20. If you were involved in joint initiatives, Examples where joint initiatives led to Provincial Government
what was their value-added and/or good results that are traceable and measurable. INGOs/NPAs etc.
practices? Coordination with other concurrent
evaluations
Roundtable discussion
Final Evaluation Report 80
ANNEX 2: LAO PDR UNPF- DOCUMENT REVIEW
This UNPF evaluation takes into consideration the overall United Nations Partnership Framework
(UNPF) 2017-2021, the 8th National Socio-Economic Development Plan (NSEDP) 2016-2020 in
alignment with the 2030 Agenda and its Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) as articulated
in the UN Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework (2019). It also takes into account
other background including the Interim Cooperation Framework evaluation guideline developed
by the UN Evaluation Group (UNEG) in 2019, and the Programming Principles (UNDAF
Companion guidance document (2017) which all provide background to the development of the
upcoming UNSDCF (UN Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework) 2022-2026.
The UNPF 2017-2021 was drafted as a roadmap by the UNCT and the government to ensure
alignment with national development plans and included major milestones. A National UN-
Steering Committee established that the following elements of strategic focus were key to the
development of the UNPF. As noted in the UNPF 2017-2021 (p. 4), these were:
• National ownership and alignment with national development priorities, strategies and
systems;
• Inclusiveness of UN system with full involvement of specialized and non-resident
agencies;
• Integration of the five programming principles of: human rights based, gender equality,
environmental sustainability and other international commitments, and theory of change
/ results based management and capacity development, tailored to the Lao PDR context;
• and, Mutual accountability for development results.
As part of the initial information from the UNCT, we were provided with the approach being used
by the UNCT to work with the three key pillars and related outcomes:
Pillar 1 of Inclusive Growth, Livelihoods and Resilience includes Results Groups (RG) 1
and 2 on Livelihood and Social Protection and RG 3 on Climate Change, Disaster
Management and Environment.
Pillar 2 on Human Development includes Results Groups 4 on Basic Education, RG 5 on
Health, Water and Sanitation and RG 6 on Food Security and Nutrition.
Pillar 3 on Governance, Rule of law and Particpation in National Decision Making includes
RG 7 and 8 on Institution building and Access to Justice.
Team members reviewed materials in the documents provided and drafted the initial comments
in this section. Sections 1 and 2 are integrated into 1 results group as are sections 7 and 8.
The evaluation team’s objective is to have focus group meetings with the 6 results groups
described below. To begin this process, we want to work with the responsible UN agency person
who is the lead for a specific group or groups. These may change during the evaluaition.
Final Evaluation Report 81
o Inclusive Growth, Livelihoods and Resilience
Results Groups 1 & 2: Livelihood and Social Protection
After more than a decade of high growth with low inflation, Lao PDR is solidifying its progress
toward graduating from the Least Developed Country (LDC) status. In 2011, The World Bank has
raised Lao PDR’s income categorization from a low-income economy to a lower-middle income
economy13. However, more than one fifth of the population remains poor, regional disparities are
persistent, and recurring natural disasters pose risks for poverty reduction14. The Lao PDR
economy is characterized by a large current account deficit, low level of reserves, a high level of
debt, managed exchange rate, and a dollarized banking system which amplify macro-
vulnerabilities. In Lao PDR, it was estimated that economic growth slightly increased to 6.4 per
cent in 2019 from 6.3 per cent in 2018 after a decrease from 6.8 per cent in 201715 as both
agricultural and industrial production declined mainly due to natural disasters Despite disruptions,
inflation remained below 3 percent. Foreign currency reserves are low, estimated to cover under
one month of imports by the end of 2020. Fiscal deficit went down to 4.4 percent of GDP in 2018
from 5.5 percent in 2017 and were expected to decline to 4.3 percent of GDP in 201916. Lao PDR
13https://www.worldbank.org/en/news/press-release/2011/08/17/lao-pdr-now-lower-middle-income-
economy#:~:text=The%20World%20Bank%20has%20raised,estimates%20using%20the%20Atlas%20m
ethod.
14 2019. IMF. Lao People’s Democratic Republic Staff Report for the 2019 Article IV Consultation
15 Idem
16 Idem
Final Evaluation Report 82
faces a challenging external debt profile with around USD1.1 billion a year due over the next four
years, compared to current foreign-exchange reserves of USD1.3 billion.17
The Government committed to a policy of fiscal consolidation, reflecting in part, mounting fiscal
pressure following the 2018 floods. The high level of debt and low level of international reserves
increased the economy’s vulnerability to shocks. Since 2017, the IMF has classified Lao PDR’s
risk of external debt distress as moderate to high. According to a recent report from the World
Bank, the share of debt to GDP increased from 57 per cent in 2018 to nearly 60 per cent in 2019
was forecasted to rise by two to three percentage points per year for the period between 2020 -
2022. Debt sustainability is a major impediment for Lao’s economic development that needs to
be addressed. Since public debt is high and the risk of debt distress remains elevated, one of the
priorities is to put debt on a sustainable path while meeting development needs. Much of the
existing public and publicly guaranteed (PPG) debt stock is external, and close to 65 percent of
the public external debt is on concessional and semi-concessional terms18. Due to the high level
of public debt and weak external position, Lao PDR has no fiscal space. Committed Public
Financial management (PFM) and tax policy reforms are directed towards building necessary
fiscal space and should be implemented at an accelerated pace. Lao PDR authorities reiterated
that a fiscal deficit of about 2 percent of GDP could be achieved by 2025 by tightening public
expenditure and improving revenue administration. However, as a result of the coronavirus shock
and the sovereign's large debt maturities, Fitch rating Ratings has downgraded Lao PDR Long-
Term Foreign-Currency Issuer Default Rating (IDR) from 'B-' to 'CCC'.
Tourism was rapidly growing and continued to be an important sector in Lao PDR, with strong
growth in tourist arrivals and spending over the past decade. In 2019, international tourist arrivals
increased by 14.4%, reaching an all-time peak of 4.79 million. International tourism receipts
totaled $934 million, trailing mineral exports ($1.43 billion) and electricity exports ($1.32 billion).19
According to Government of the Lao PDR, during 2010-2019, international tourist receipts
increased faster than international arrivals, suggesting an increasing value addition from the
sector20. Recent reports21 estimate that tourism directly contributes to 4.6% to GDP and employs
54,000 workers, about 63% of whom are women22. The number of visitors to the country was
expected to reach 2.5 million by 2025, benefiting from the completion of the Lao PDR-China
railway from Vientiane to Kunming, planned for December 2021. With this rapid expansion in
tourism and transportation links, the Government has prioritized efforts to ensure that Lao PDR
citizens, particularly those in rural areas, benefit from the growth in tourism. Since March 2020,
17https://www.fitchratings.com/research/sovereigns/fitch-downgrades-laos-to-ccc-23-
092020#:~:text=Fitch%20Ratings%20%2D%20Hong%20Kong%20%2D%2023,of%20'CCC'%20or%20be
low.
18 2019. IMF. Lao People’s Democratic Republic Staff Report for the 2019 Article IV Consultation. P 6
19 June 2020. ADB Briefs. The impact of Covid-19 on Tourism Enterprises in the Lao People’s democratic
Republic. P.2
20 Idem
21 Reports from World Travel and Tourism 2018 and Ministry of Education and Sports 2018.
22 June 2020. ADB Briefs. The impact of Covid-19 on Tourism Enterprises in the Lao People’s democratic
Republic. P.2
Final Evaluation Report 83
COVID-19 has paralyzed tourism as countries closed their borders, suspended commercial
aviation, restricted domestic travel, and implemented physical distancing measures. These
measures implemented to contain the pandemic are expected to severely affect the tourism
sector. In fact, tourism-related sectors in Lao PDR, including transport, food, and accommodation
services and the retail trade have been hit hard by the COVID-19 crisis, due to fewer tourists from
China and other neighboring countries in the first quarter of 2020. International arrivals to the
country have dropped by 17% in the first quarter of 2020 compared with the same period in
2019.23
Against the backdrop of economic advancement, the development of labour market institutions is
ongoing, but remains fragile. Significant decent work challenges remain, particularly those related
to high levels of vulnerability and informality, as well as the frequently limited transferable skills
linked to an economy that is still dominated by a low-productivity agricultural sector, despite the
recent expansion of the industrial and service sectors. It is worth mentioning that a core issue of
capital-intensive investments underpins the labour issues plus the actual size of the labor force
that cannot drive nor maintain industrialization policy. In addition, the economy suffers from
complex regulatory procedures as reflected in its Doing Business Ranking. Lao PDR’s 2019
ranking on the Ease of Doing Business Index in 2019, has remained unchanged since 2018, at
154 out of 190 after falling from 139 in 2017 , despite key measures undertaken to improve the
business environment and support Small and Medium-sized Enterprises (SME) development, and
notably, the endorsement of the amended Law on Investment Promotion, establishment of the
One-Stop-Service Office, and initiatives to promote access to finance and streamlining of
business start-up procedures. In fact, the Lao PDR Prime Minister Order No 02 effective since
February 2018 aims to mobilize and attract quality investments, bolster the competitive capacity
of domestic businesses, and minimize constraints to make it easy to do business in Lao PDR,
among others. In addition, the focus is on transparency, simplifying procedures, and reducing the
application time for investment license and business registration, to inspire confidence among
both domestic and foreign investors24.
Although Lao PDR has so far avoided a major health crisis related to COVID-19, it has not been
spared by the global economic downturn. The COVID-19-induced economic downturn has
affected Lao PDR through multiple channels including tourism, trade, investment, commodity
prices, exchange rates, and lower remittances. In the more favorable scenario, the Lao PDR’s
economy is expected to grow at 1 percent, while in the downside scenario, the economy could
contract by 1.8 percent in 202025.
As in many countries worldwide, the COVID-19 pandemic has had negative effects such as
employment and welfare impacts affecting mostly labor-intensive sectors and those linked to
global and regional value chains. Supply chain disruptions followed by contracting external
23 Idem
24https://ifcextapps.ifc.org/ifcext/pressroom/IFCPressRoom.nsf/0/6223AF059FBCA40E852582660026E85
B#:~:text=Prime%20Minister%20issued%20the%20Order,190%20nations%20across%2010%20indicato.
25 June 2020. The World Bank Group. Lao PDR Economic Monitor. P 2.
Final Evaluation Report 84
demand have led to a severe decline in production in the export-oriented manufacturing sector.
The COVID-19 mitigation measures in Lao PDR are causing unprecedented disruption to the
labor market. A sharp drop in demand is leading to job losses in tourism-related sectors, which
account for 11 percent of total employment. The unemployment rate rose to 25 percent in May
2020, from 16 percent at the end of 201926. Although the government of Lao PDR is providing
social insurance system to around 96,000 affected workers, this coverage amounts to only 3.1
percent of total employment and 26 percent of total urban wage workers27.
Moreover, the flow of remittances is being impacted by COVID-19 related economic shock since
more than 100 000 migrant workers have returned to Lao PDR. This has resulted in an estimated
reduction of up to US$125 million in remittances in 2020, or 0.7 percent of GDP and could push
as many as 214 000 people into poverty28.
Furthermore, the pandemic has severely affected economic growth, which will decline to an
estimated range of between -0.6 to -2.4 percent in 2020. Structural vulnerabilities have been
exacerbated by COVID-19, leading to a significant deterioration in the macroeconomic situation.
State revenues are declining, and the fiscal deficit is projected to increase to between 7.6 and 8.9
percent, constraining the government’s ability to mitigate the economic impacts of the pandemic.
Public debt is expected to increase to between 69 and 74 percent in 2020, from around 60 percent
in 2019. These factors make it increasingly difficult for Lao PDR to meet its debt service
obligations, which stand at around US$1.1 billion per year for 2020-2329.
Table 2: Status of UNPF Outcome and Output 1 &2 Indicators
Indicator Baseline Target Status 2019
1. Decent Livelihoods and jobs
1.1 Percentage of total Baseline: 23.2% (2012- Target: 16.2% (2020) Data to be updated by
population living below 2013) the Lao PDR
the national poverty line Expenditure and
Consumption Survey
(National SDG Indicator 2017/18 (not yet
1.2.1) published)
26 https://www.worldbank.org/en/country/lao/overview#1
27 June 2020. The World Bank Group. Lao PDR Economic Monitor. P 3
28 June 2020. The World Bank Group. Lao PDR Economic Monitor. P 4
29 https://www.worldbank.org/en/country/lao/overview#1
Final Evaluation Report 85
1.2. Gini coefficient Baseline: 36.2 Target: Gini coefficients Data to be updated by
(2012/13) improved for Lao PDR, the Lao PDR
urban and rural as Expenditure and
compared to Consumption Survey
coefficients estimated in 2017/18 (not yet
2013 published)
(MoV: 8th NSEDP)
(2020)
1.3. Percentage of Baseline: 15.6% Target: 30% (female: 27.1% (2017 Labour
labour force in formal (female: 15%/male: 30%/ male: 70%) (2021) Force Survey)
sector as a share of total 75%) (2010)
employment rate, No data available for
female/male 2019
2. Social Protection
2.1. Number of formally Baseline: 230,000 Target: 300,000 (2021) 299,998 formally
employed workers (2015) employed workers
enrolled in Social enrolled in National
Security Fund Social Security Fund
(excluding army (female – 140,036) in
officials) 2019
8,080 Self-employed
people enrolled in
NSSF (3,714 females)
2.2. Percentage of poor 80% (2015) Target: 95% (2021) 94% of total population
covered by social are covered under the
protection schemes national social health
protection in 2019
(national SDG indicator
1.3.1)
During the past two decades, poverty in Lao PDR was cut in half from 46 to 23 percent. Since
2012/13, the incidence of poverty declined by 6.3 percentage points to 18.3 percent in 2018/1930.
Inequality has risen due to widening consumption gaps within regions. The Gini index, a measure
of inequality, increased from 36 in 2012/13 to 38.8 in 2018/1931. As per Table 2 above, the
percentage of labour force in formal sector as a share of total employment rate has increased
from 15.6 % in 2010 to 27.1% in 2017. In 2019, nearly 300,000 people, of whom, approximately
30 2020. Lao PDR Poverty Assessment 2020: catching up and falling behind. P 2
31 2020. Lao PDR Poverty Assessment 2020: catching up and falling behind. P 3
Final Evaluation Report 86
140,000 were female, found employment in the formal sector32. Nearly 8,000 people from the
informal, self-employed sector, of whom, approximately 3,700 were female, were enrolled in the
NSSF (Please see Table 2). In 2019, 94 % of total population are covered under the national
social health protection which is an increase from the 80 % coverage in 2015.
Decent Livelihoods and Jobs
ILO provided capacity development to the Ministry of Labour and Social Welfare of Lao PDR
(MoLSW) and the Lao Statistics Bureau (LSB) on labour market statistics and analysis. MoLSW
and ILO also finalized the National Rural Employment Strategy (NRES) that aims to increase
decent employment opportunities for women and men in rural areas through public and private
sector interventions.
Following a request from MoIC, a capacity building initiative for SMEs, “Laos in Business”, was
developed, tested, and launched in 2019, with the support of ILO (600 SMEs participated).In
collaboration with the Ministry of Industry and Commerce (MoIC), UNIDO provided technical
support to the review and launch of an Industry Manufacturing Establishment Survey, setting up
a database, and training MoIC staff to carry out their own surveys in the future.
ITC also provided support to SMEs to facilitate their access to global markets through the
participation of Lao PDR companies at the China International Import Expo (CIIE) in 2019.
To further enhance Lao PDR’s ability to reap the benefits of regional integration and international
trade, in 2019, ITC worked with Government to develop a Foreign Trade Negotiation Roadmap
which is focused on the promotion of Lao PDR’s economic interests in the ASEAN economic
integration process.
To provide alternative livelihoods, through its Alternative Development Programme linked to the
MoPS, in 2019, UNODC helped farmers shift from the cultivation of opium to cash crops such as
coffee. Through the UNODC project, 383 families from opium growing areas have established a
jointly owned coffee cooperative and processing facilities. The cooperative has also been linked
with international markets, as well as with continuous capacity building on coffee processing in
order to produce quality coffee.
To boost local business and commerce, UNCDF conducted customer journey mapping research
in Lao PDR in partnership with Columbia University to gain customer insights for digital finance
product development and delivery.
The research yielded insights that have helped identify business cases for mobile wallet and
banking delivery on digital and agent banking services for garment workers and persons with
disabilities.
32 2020. The United Nations in Lao PDR. 2019 Progress report. P 23
Final Evaluation Report 87
Capacity Building and Training
To ensure that Lao PDR benefits from regional integration, trade opportunities in particular to the
EU market, and improved participation in global value chains, the International Trade Centre (ITC)
supported the MoIC and other line Ministries and key counterparts such as MAF and the Lao
National Chamber of Commerce (LNCCI) with a series of workshops and training in 2019 and
2020. These engagements include among others:
• Reviewing Lao PDR’s export potential and existing trade with the EU and the regional
market.
• Jointly developing sectoral export roadmaps: identifying supply-side constraints and
remedial actions for the coffee and wood processing sectors.
• Developing through a consultative approach a Foreign Trade Negotiation Roadmap for
Lao PDR
• Analysing the measures and level of implementation of Lao PDR commitments in the
ASEAN Trade in Goods agreement
• Providing technical assistance and capacity building in the are of quality, e.g. conformity
assessment and quality management
• Reviewing quality and availability of statistical trade data: capacity building to strengthen
data collection and statistical production capacities
ITC, in collaboration with LNCCI, also provided a series of training on Voluntary Sustainability
Standards (VSS):
• to strengthen SMEs’ competitiveness through the implementation of green business
practices, to capacitate Lao PDR’s SMEs on issues related to standards required by
international buyers (e.g. Organic, Fairtrade etc.), and
• to address gaps and obtain relevant certificates of compliance.
When it comes to strengthening data collection, statistical and assessment capacities:
• ITC’s technical team reviewed the availability and quality of statistical trade data in
country, and
• Training was organised in November 2019 with participation from key government
representatives.
Following training from ILO, agricultural extension officials who provide technical advisory
services on coffee promotion at provincial level, were able to introduce coffee farmers to zero-
waste methodologies for producing animal feed and fertilizer. As a result, approximately 100
coffee-producing households in target villages from the poorest areas of Dak Cheung district in
Xekong province, were able to increase their income five-fold. In Savannakhet province, a skills
needs assessment tool was developed in 2019 and piloted in target districts, villages and selected
companies to inform skills development interventions.
Final Evaluation Report 88
Through ILO support, the provincial Department of Labour and Social Welfare together with the
local skills development centres are now able to conduct assessments related to the recruitment
of rural workers and offer improved employment services and skills training.
After participating in a LWU training through the Government’s One-District-One-Product (ODOP)
initiative that benefited from UNDP support, a group of 250 women in seven districts of Salavan,
Houaphanh and Saysomboun provinces were able to strengthen their business management
skills while receiving support to product development and access to markets. New products from
women’s business groups were subsequently developed and are in the process of being certified
under the ODOP initiative.
Livestock and funds for farming were also provided to vulnerable communities in the form of an
initial investment. The communities also benefited from improved knowledge on food preparation,
food hygiene and nutrition.
Labour and Migration
At the national level, a consultation in preparation for the ASEAN Forum on Migrant Labour
(AFML) was organized by the MoLSW with support from ILO, which brought together
representatives from Government, workers and employers, UN agencies, and INGOs/NPAs to
discuss and agree on proposed recommendations that the Lao PDR delegation brought to the
12th annual regional AFML in Thailand.
A technical workshop was organized in June 2019 and shaped the agreed ILO-ASEAN study on
"Decent Work Promotion in Rural Economy through Productivity Growth, Local Employment
Promotion, and Transition from Informal to Formal Employment”.
To strengthen legislation aimed at protecting migrant workers, through IOM and ILO joint support,
the MoLSW, revised and finalized Decree No. 68 on the placement of Lao PDR Labour to Work
Abroad, last reviewed in 2002.
IOM initiated the promotion of ethical recruitment practices in Lao PDR through a standardized
capacity building program, using IOM’s International Recruitment Integrity System (IRIS),
targeting 24 of the 26 licensed recruitment agencies in Lao PDR. As a result of the workshop, two
recruitment agencies formally requested IOM’s support to work towards the IRIS certification.
IOM partnered with UN Women to ensure gender-responsive messaging and training was
provided to the Technical, Vocational and Education Training (TVET) institutions and women
migrant workers. A total of 33 teachers from TVET institutions and Skills Development Centres
from Vientiane, Khammouan, Savannakhet, Salavan, Attapue and Oudomxay provinces were
trained on safe migration in preparation for the rollout of trainings in their institutions.
ILO continued to provide support and capacity building to all Lao PDR Migrant Resource Centres
(MRCs), to raise awareness and provide services to potential migrant workers, through telephone
and through outreach activities in communities.
Final Evaluation Report 89
In Vientiane, the Lao Federation of Trade Unions (LFTU) conducted awareness training on safe
migration and human trafficking risks exercises that benefited more than 2,000 workers (1,784
were females) in 21 garment factories.
IOM working with the Department of Skills Development and Employment Department, MoLSW,
in partnership with the Lao National Institute of Tourism and Hospitality (LANITH), implemented
the first cross-border training and employment placement models between skills providers and
employers in Thailand of which, 23 migrants completed a one-month training on Food and
Beverage Service and/or Housekeeping. Out of the 23 selected, 18 participants successfully
conducted interviews with employers in Thailand and were accepted to undertake internships in
various hotels in Thailand, resulting in five participants being offered fulltime employment at the
end of their internship.
IOM developed a Psychosocial Awareness Training Curriculum to increase the knowledge among
first responder participants on the mental and physical impacts of trafficking, and how to provide
appropriate support to both staff and victims of human trafficking (VOT) for psychosocial
reintegration. A total of 356 provincial and district level line ministries and civil society
organizations (INGOs/NPAs), working in service provision to VOTs received the training in
Vientiane Capital, Luang Namtha, Savannakhet, Champasak, Luang Prabang and Xieng
Khouang provinces. The post-test evaluation results indicated that overall, there was an increase
in knowledge of approximately 90 per cent across all six rollout trainings.
Social Protection
The MoLSW, with technical assistance from ILO and development partners in 2019, finalised the
National Social Protection Strategy (NSPS), which included an implementation plan. The UN Joint
Programme (UNJP) “Leaving No One Behind: Establishing the basis for social protection floors
in Lao PDR” was approved by the Joint SDG Fund. The primary objective of the UNJP is to
support Government with implementation of the new National Social Protection Strategy (NSPS),
through an approach focused on systems development with implementation through the Mother
and Early Childhood Grant (MECG). Implementation of the UNJP will be led by the MoLSW in
partnerships with relevant ministries, the provincial authority of Savannakhet as the targeted pilot
province, and the UN system (led by ILO, UNCDF, and UNICEF) from January 2020 until
December 202133.
In 2019, through support from the ILO regional social protection facility involving Lao PDR,
Vietnam and Myanmar, technical assistance was provided to MoH and MoLSW on merging
statutory health insurance schemes under the National Social Security Fund (NSSF) and National
Health Insurance (NHI). The continued expansion of the NHI Fund now covers all 17 provinces
of Lao PCR and has brought the overall health coverage total for all schemes, including NSSF,
NHI, the military and a variety of police schemes to a total of 94 per cent nationwide.
33 2020. The United Nations in Lao PDR. 2019 Progress report. P 23
Final Evaluation Report 90
WHO has provided technical support for NHI implementation to improve financial protection
associated with use of healthcare services and assessment of it with focus on protection of
vulnerable population (poor group, pregnant women and children under 5).
Results Group 3: Climate Change, Disaster Management & Environment
Outcome 3: Forests and other ecosystems are protected and enhanced, and people are less
vulnerable to climate-related events and disasters. This is aligned with Outcome 3 on Improved
Environmental Protection of the Eighth NSEDP, the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
on reduction of risks posed by climate change induced disasters.
Situation
Lao PDR will not achieve its target of 70 per cent forest cover by 2020. The forest cover was
maintained at 58% between 201534 to 201935. Approximately 100,000 ha out of 2,954,443ha have
been restored from regenerating vegetable (RV) to forest over in the period of 2005 to 2015. Also,
50 out of 51 Production Forest Areas have developed detailed management plans. The average
annual historical emission from deforestation and forest degradation was +34,106,431 tCO2/year
and the total removals from reforestation and restoration was -7,530,536 tCO2/year. Through
deducting the GHG mitigation measures implemented across all sectors since 2000, the National
GHG emissions in 2020 have been estimated around 53,000 ktCO2e36.
Two thirds of the country population face an average of 1.5 serious floods or droughts every year,
which is accounting for annual economic losses equivalent to 0.7 % of GDP and 4.6% of GDP as
consequences of natural hazards once every 20 years37. Floods have been occurring more
frequently. In 2018, there were over 600,000 people affected from the floods caused by the two
tropical storms, Sontinh and Bebinca, and the collapse of Xe Pian-Xe Namnoy hydropower dam
in Attapeu Province. The total effects of the floods to the economy were estimated at 3,166 billion
Lao kip, or approximately US$371 million or 2 % of GDP of the year. Damage and losses of floods
to agriculture sector were at 1,227 billion Lao38. WHO has provided technical support for NHI
implementation to improve financial protection associated with use of healthcare services and
assessment of it with focus on protection of vulnerable population (poor group, pregnant women
and children under 5).
34 MAF-DOF (2018). The Lao PDR’s Forest Reference Emission Level and Forest Reference Level for
REDD+ Results Payment under the UNFCCC
35 UN (2020). Draft 2019 Progress Report: Lao PDR-United Nations Partnership Framework 2017-2021
36 MONRE (2020). Draft Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC)
37 World Bank (2012). ASEAN Advancing Disaster Risk Financing and Insurance in ASEAN Member States:
Framework and Options for Implementation
38 Government of Lao PDR (2018). The Post-Disaster Needs Assessment 2018 Floods, Lao PDR
Final Evaluation Report 91
In 2019, 764,937 people (of which 51, 970 women) in Khammouan, Savannakhet, Champasak,
Salavan, Xekong and Attapeu provinces were affected by floods caused by a Low Pressure Area
(LPA) and tropical cyclones PODUL and KAJIKI. The total damage was estimated at US$ 164
million. Farmlands of over 123,000 hectares39 were destroyed. The estimated average annual
fiscal cost of floods is 2.7 percent of government expenditures. Overall, the most affected sectors
were infrastructure and agriculture followed by health, education, mining, and labour. Resilience
at the community level is low due to the prevalence of monoculture, lack of diversity in livelihoods,
and limited infrastructure. The poor and vulnerable will be most affected since they have the
fewest options to mitigate risks. In 2020, as impacts of COVID-19, revenue loss will be about 3-4
% of GDP and the fiscal deficit is estimated to increase about 7.5-8.8 % of GDP from 5.2 % in
201940. UNDP has worked with the Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry on through a six-year
project called “Sustainable Forest and Land Management in the Dry Dipterocarp Forest
Ecosystem of Southern Lao PDR” from 2016 to demonstrate sustainable land and forest
management in the forested landscape of Savannakhet province to secure the critical wildlife
habitats, conserve biodiversity and maintain a continuous flow of multiple services including
quality water provision and flood prevention.
Prolonged drought conditions in the north from May to December and severe floods in the south
and parts of the centre from August to September, severely affected the 2019 main cropping
season. Nearly nine in ten households, which reported planting later than normal in 2019, said
that their harvest was lower when compared with 201841. The Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry
and FAO has developed a new Resilient Agriculture Systems and Livelihoods (RASaL)
Programme 2020-2030 to enhance climate and disaster resilience of the agriculture system and
development livelihoods. The RASaL is centred on empowering and strengthening the capacity
of smallholder farmers to adopt climate resilient agro-ecological technologies and participate in
innovative value chains42.
MoNRE, a focal point to the Montreal Protocol of Lao PDR, successfully controlled consumption
of hydrochlorofluorocarbon through the country licensing system. The consumption of
hydrochlorofluorocarbon in 2019 was 1.29 Ozone Depleting Potential Tonnes, well below the
country’s 2019 obligation of 2.07 Ozone Depleting Potential Tonnes. MoNRE has set up the
maximum import quota of hydrochlorofluorocarbon not to be more than 1.5 Ozone Depleting
Potential Tonnes in 2020 in line with the target.
Table 3: UNPF results framework 2017-2021
39 AHA Centre (2019). Situation update tropical storm PODUL and tropical depression KAJIKI Lao PDR.
40 World Bank (2020). Lao PDR Economic monitor: Lao PDR in the time of COVID-19
41 FAO (2020). Special Report - 2019 FAO/WFP Crop and Food Security Assessment Mission to the Lao
People’s Democratic Republic. Rome
42 MAF&FAO (2020).Resilient Agriculture Systems and Livelihoods (RASaL) Programme in Lao PDR
(2020-2030)
Final Evaluation Report 92
Indicators UNPF 2017-2021 Draft 2019 UNPF
Progress Report,
2020
Baselines Targets 2021 Means of Status 2019
verification
3.1. Proportion 46% 70% 3.1. Forest 58%
of land area (2015) (2020) Cover
covered by Assessment
forest Report
(2016,2021)
3.2. Number of Not available Not available 3.2. Annual UNDRR provided
persons per (Being established by (Being established by Ministry of training to the GoL
100,000 directly MONRE) MONRE) Natural and partners in 2019
affected by Resources and to report number of
natural disasters Environment persons per 100,000
Reports directly affected by
disasters into the
online Sendai
Framework Monitor.
3.3. Agricultural Not available Not available Agricultural value lost
value affected by (Being established by (Being established by estimated to be Lao
natural disasters MAF) MAF) kip 1,227.3 billion
and climate (USD 136 millions) by
change flood. (2018).
3.4. (a) level of (a) (a) 3.4. (a) National The consumption of
hydrochlorofluor hydrochlorofluorocarb hydrochlorofluorocarb Ozone Officer hydrochlorofluorocarb
ocarbon on consumption of 2.3 on consumption of 1.5 (annual); (b) on in 2019 was 1.29
consumption Ozone Depleting Ozone Depleting Montreal Ozone Depleting
and (b) signature Potential Tonnes Potential Tonnes Protocol Potential Tonnes
and ratification (2010); (b) Minamata (2020); (b) Minamata Secretariat
of the Minamata Convention on Convention on (annual)
Convention on Mercury not signed Mercury signed and
Mercury (2010) ratified (2021)
Intervention
The UN has worked on reducing persistent organic pollution, healthy living work environments
free from hazardous chemicals, climate change and health adaptation, disaster adaptation and
resilience, disaster management, disaster risk reduction, capacities in disaster preparedness,
response and recovery strengthened, data collection and information management for farmers
resiliencies, protection and development of forest and ecosystems strengthened. These will
significantly contribute to the International Convention and Agreement, as detailed below:
- Climate change: The UN Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC), the
Paris Agreement on Climate Change, and the Montreal Protocol on Substances that
Deplete the Ozone Layer -UNEP, REDD+,
- Environmental Protection: The International Convention on the International Trade in
Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora (CITES),
- Forest Resources and biodiversity: The UN Convention for Biological Diversity,
- Persistent Organic Pollution: the Stockholm Convention for reducing POPs UNIDO-
Final Evaluation Report 93
Persistent Organic Pollution (POPs),
- Health Living and Work Environments free from Hazardous chemicals: Polychlorinated
Biphenyls (PCBs) management, the Minamata Convention on Mercury, and
- Disaster management: the Paris Agreement and Sendai Framework for DRR.
Lessons learned for 2019
- Progress during the Eighth NSEDP period has been affected by natural disasters and
human-driven shocks, and the impact of these have been worsened by poorly functioning
early-warning systems and response mechanisms43.
- The lack of understanding among officials, lack of risk information relevant to sector, and
the need to clarify roles and responsibilities (as defined by the new DRM Law) are key
challenges in implementation of the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction.
- In the context of recovery efforts underway in the southern provinces, lack of coordination
and delays in response have increased the vulnerability of affected communities.
Coordination efforts should be improved to enhance efficiency and improved preparation
and response to future disaster, especially for planning, risk identification and sequencing
of interrelated support activities such as ensuring water, sanitation, electricity and road
access for housing projects, securing livelihoods and other public services including
schooling and health facilities.
- Coordination beyond the forestry sector, including agriculture, investment, environment
and population in affected areas is also necessary for sustainable progress in forest cover.
- WASH facilities are currently vulnerable to climate change. The climate resilient WASH
facilities that can address the impacts of floods and storms are not available in health
facilities and in vulnerable communities. This is a serious gap holding back progress.
o Human Development
Results Group 4: Basic Education
Outcome 4: Children and youth enjoy better access to inclusive and equitable quality basic
education and vocational skills.
This is aligned with Outcome 2, Output 3: Universal access to quality education achieved of the
NSEDP and SDG 4: Quality Education which aims to ensure inclusive and equitable quality
education and promote lifelong learning opportunities for all.
Situation
43 Ministry of Planning and Investment. 2020. Pre final draft Mid-Term Review of the Eighth National Socio-
Economic Development Plan, 2016-2020. Vientiane
Final Evaluation Report 94
The percentage of Grade 1 enrolment of primary education with pre-school experience has
increased from 51% in 2015 to 64,6% in 201844. Early Childhood Education (ECE) has gradually
improved with an increased number of kindergartens and pre-primary facilities. The enrolment
rate of children aged 3-5 increased from 56, 3% to 59% and the enrolment rate of 5-year-old
children increased from 77,1% to 79,4%45. Also, 82.9% of villages have primary schools in
village46. The primary net enrollment rate achieved 99,1% in 2018-2019. However, the drop-out
rate of grade 1 students has increased from 5,8% to 6,3% and in primary education from 4% to
4,3%. Together 57.3% of children aged 6 year+ completed primary school47. Nationally, the
survival rate in primary education increased to 82% in 2019 from 78% in 2015. Grade 1 repetition
has decreased from 13.5% in 2015 to 8.4 % in 2019 (girls 7.4 %)
By the last-year of severe natural disasters, the people have faced hardship and living conditions,
some school infrastructure have been destroyed and some affected schools were not able to start
their academic year in a timely manner. Some affected families have had to move their farming
areas to other places followed by their children being school drop-outs. Having more children and
youth go to school and ensuring they stay in school is a key challenge. The impact of the 2018
natural disasters and the Government’s fiscal challenges continued through to 2019 which
affected the allocation to the education budget allocation which decreased. Budget for the
education and sports sector is equivalent to 12.15% of government expenditure and 2.45% of
GDP. This figure is positively closed to the OECD bench marks of 4-7% of GDP. Together 80%
of the education budget is comprised of salary allocations which leaves little for investments into
improving the quality of education.
Many teacher graduates in each year could not be recruited. In 2019, a total of 3,124 students
graduated, of which 466 were ECE, 204 primary educations, 1.960 secondary education, 372
physical and arts education and 122 monk teachers. In contrast, in rural areas, many schools
need to provide multi-grade teaching classes, especially at Grade 1 due to lack of teachers. The
outcomes of the 2017-2018 ECE and general education teachers’ survey showed that among
4,995 ECE teachers, 422 (8,45%) of total teaching staff do not teach subjects in their field of
study. Some teachers of primary education teach pre-primary classes without any training on the
use of the pre-primary curriculum and experience of an orientation plan. Over and under-supplied
teachers are a striking issue in ECE. Nationwide, there are around 168 over-supplied teachers
and 4,153 under-supplied teachers. There are also 1.65 volunteer teachers teaching at ECE
schools. Of this number, only 1.560 teachers teach subjects in their fields of study.
Survival rates of grade 5 students have decreased from 82,2% to 82,8%, lower education dropout
44 UN (2020). Draft 2019 Progress Report: Lao PDR-United Nations Partnership Framework 2017-2021
45 Ministry of Education and Sports (2019). Education and Sports Sector Performance Annual Report 2018-
2019
46 Ministry of Planning and Investment/LSB (2020). Highlight result of 6th Lao Consumption and
Expenditure Survey (LECS VI), 2018/2019. Ministry of Planning and Investment/Lao Statistic Bureau,
Vientiane.
47 Idem
Final Evaluation Report 95
rates have increased from 9.2% to 9.5% and upper secondary dropout rates from 7.1% to 8.1%.
High drop-out rates at secondary schools were contributed to by the distance of students’ homes
from their schools or work. In total, 93.8% of villages have road access in dry season which is an
increase from the last survey (76.4%)48. Children in primary schools also leave school to help
parents in the farms during growing seasons which results in their not completing their study
programs and leaving schools. Low salaries and teacher absences have become a critical issue
in Lao PDR (partly the result of Lao Social Index Survey II-2017). In all, 80% of students skip
classes due to the absence of teachers from their teaching assignments which leads to student
dropout and the need for the repetition of classes.
The proportion of youth (female/male) employed as a result of participation in vocational training
programmes has decreased from 30% in 2015 to 17% in 2019. The current skills development
system is inadequate in Lao PDR. Access to TVET, career guidance, reliable labour market
information and employment service is limited especially for people in rural and remote areas.
Youth Not in Employment, Education or Training (NEET) stood at 42.1 % in 2017. Specific
challenges for youth trying to access the labour market include a variety of challenges including:
lack of labour market information and job search experience, skills gap, lack of diversified working
experience, socio-cultural and family pressures and lack of capital.
Table 4: UNPF Results Framework 2017-2021
Indicators UNPF 2017-2021 Draft 2019 UNPF
Progress Report, 2020
Baselines Targets Means of verification Status 2019
2021
4.1. Percentage of 51% 75% Annual data by Ministry of 64,6% (2018)
Grade 1 enrolment of (girls: 52%/ (girls: 75% Education and Sports: (girls: 65.5%
primary education with boys: 50% /boys: 75%) Education Management /boys: 63.7%)
pre-school experience (2015) Information System
(national SDG indicator
4.2.3)
4.2 Survival rate in 78% 93% Annual data by Ministry of 82%
primary education (girls:80%/ (girls:93%/ Education and Sports: (girls: 83.8%
boys: 77%) boys: 93%) Education Management /boys: 80.39%)
(2015) Information System
4.3. Proportion of youth 30% (2015) 70% Annual Reports by the Proxy indicator:
(female/male) (2021) Ministry of Education and Youth employment: 17%
employed as a result of Sport, and Ministry of (2017)
participation in Labour and Social (18.6% women/
vocational training Welfare; Employers’ 15.5% men)
programmes survey (2020/2021)
34% of male youth; and 43%
female youth who report that
their highest education
completed is TVET are in
48 Idem
Final Evaluation Report 96
employment
Intervention
- Enhanced health, water, sanitation, hygiene, and nutrition in formal and non-formal
education,
- Strengthened teacher education and other capacity building,
- Improved school and teacher education curricula,
- Increased access, participation and learning outcomes,
- Strengthening capacity for evidence-based analysis, policy dialogue and advocacy,
- Promoting and supporting teaching and learning, improving some curriculum,
providing textbooks and teaching materials to all primary schools,
- School feeding programmes in eight provinces,
- Early Childhood Education (ECE) and monitoring of teaching classes pedagogical
advisory,
- Focusing supports especially on community children development target group and
multi-grade teaching for 3-5 year-old children and children’s caregivers.
Lessons learned for 2019
- The recurring floods highlight the need to strengthen emergency preparedness and
disaster risk reduction, including climate change resilience in all programmes. This
required a joint and integrated response from government stakeholders, the UN and
key development partners,
- Constrained budget remains the key bottleneck to the system.
- Coordination and collaboration within MoES and across other line ministries and
involvement of provinces and districts in planning stages are likely to positively
impact on the quality, alignment and effective use of limited human and financial
resources in the sector.
-
Results Group 5: Health, Water and Sanitation
Outcome 5: People enjoy improved access to quality health services, and water, sanitation
and hygiene
Overview Health System
2014 Health Care Law outlines the healthcare system in Lao PDR which consists of: Public
healthcare system, Private healthcare system, and Joint public-private healthcare system. Three
administrative levels of the Ministry of Health include: central, provincial, and district. A fourth level
under the districts is responsibility for providing community health services through Health
Centers, village health volunteers, community health committees, and traditional. Health care
which is predominantly delivered by the public system through government-owned and operated
health centers, and district and provincial hospitals. There are an increasing number of private
sector services.
Final Evaluation Report 97
Health sector has suffered from low levels of public investment and correspondingly high reliance
on out-of-pocket (OOP) financing, with gaps filled by external assistance for health. The
government health expenditure, as a percentage of government expenditure, has increased from
3.7 percent (2010-11) to 5.9 percent in 2015/16, but still has not reached the committed amount.
The country spent US$71 per capita, or about 2.8 percent of GDP, in 2018. While the government
budgetary spending on health has increased, Lao PDR is greatly dependent on the Global Fund
and the GAVI - the Vaccine Alliance - for supporting its immunization, malaria, tuberculosis (TB),
and HIV/AIDS program. External support is expected to phase out in the coming years, Lao PDR
will have to transition to domestic financing. The COVID-19 response measures are largely
financed by external sources at present. Overall government revenues and revenues from
employment-based health insurance schemes will drop. It is likely that the country will run much
larger fiscal deficits than usual during the crisis, building up debt and restricting fiscal space for
health in the future49.
Significant improvements were achieved in improved health outcomes, including life expectancy
and, key indicators such as under five and maternal mortality which remain high. These
challenging outcomes can, in large part, be attributed to health systems challenges on both supply
and demand sides. Some key challenges include: limited government funding; weak financial
management, with fragmented and inaccurate expenditure monitoring; lack of ethnic language
skills among healthcare providers serving culturally and ethnically diverse areas; shortage of
health professionals, doctors and nurses - with close to 1.88 physicians, nurses and midwives per
1000 population, which is well below the WHO recommended aggregate density of 4.45
physicians, nurses and midwives per 1000 population50. Poor data quality has resulted in, limited
use of data for evidence-based planning and decision making and use by donors.
In response to the sectoral challenges, the government developed a Health Sector Reform
Strategy (HSRS) 2013 – 2025. The HSRS focuses on five priority areas:
• Human resources development
• Health financing
• Governance, organization, and management
• Equitable access to quality health services
• Health information systems and monitoring and evaluation
From 2013 to 2020, the implementation of the HSRS focuses on delivering essential and quality
health services to the population. From 2021–2025, implementation will focus on achieving
Universal Health Coverage (UHC).
Maternal and Child Health
49 World Bank Lao PDR Economic Monitor, Lao PDR in the time of COVID-19, June 2020
50 Draft Background Paper for the Multi-Stakeholder Taskforce to Study the Impact of COVID-19 to support
a Determination of the 9th NSEDP and SDG Localization in Lao PDR – Theme 3: Investing in the Human
Capital of Lao PDR. September 2020.
Final Evaluation Report 98
Maternal and child mortality have been reduced. Maternal mortality decreased from 197 (2015)
to 185 (2017), and under-five mortality fell from 79 (2012) to 46 (2017). Significant progress has
been achieved on these indicators however, Lao PDR still has the highest rates of mortality
among ASEAN countries. COVID-19 may also slow the progress achieved over the past decade.
The low education of pregnant mothers, poor access in some geographic areas, and limited
cultural understanding can further intensify disparities and inequities in access to essential health
services among mothers and children. To mitigate the impact of COVID-19, ensuring access to
essential health services for those most vulnerable groups needs to be highlighted.
The mid-term evaluation of 8th NSEDP suggests that a significant proportion of interventions
required to reduce maternal and child mortality lie outside the health services sector, such as
sparse populations in geographical regions, women’s education, the conditions that would make
it conducive to like skills education on family planning and sexual and reproductive health,
livelihood and socio-economic status, culture and behavior. The health services indicators show
significant improvement from that in 2011/12 but nonetheless remain low. The rates for
immunization, antenatal care, skilled attendant at delivery, and institutional delivery need to be
further improved. Indicators for reproductive health also show improvement, with increased use
of modern contraceptives, and a reduction in adolescent birth rate.
Water-Sanitation
The use of clean water has increased from 69.9 percent in 2011/12 to 83.9 percent in 2017. There
remain many mountainous and remote provinces with lower coverage, and water sources may
be prone to contamination from the increasingly frequent floods. The use of improved sanitation
facilities has increased significantly from 56.9 in 2011/12 to 71 percent in 2017. The rate of open
defecation has decreased from 37.9 percent in 2011/12 to 23.9 in 2017, but the practice is still a
significant health risk. Flooding also poses risks to sanitation facilities and sanitation in general.
UN supports:
According to provided information51 to the ET, during the current UNPF cycle, there are 29 UN
supported projects to the Outcome 5. Among the 29 projects, 23 projects have been supported
directly to Ministry of Health through different UN agencies which are IAEA, UNAIDS, UNFPA,
UNICEF, UNOPS, WFP and WHO. Other projects to a variety of government partners were
through UNODC, UNESCO, UNIDO, UN-Habitat, FAO and IOM. Total UN delivery to the
Outcome 5 from 2017 to 2019 through the 29 projects was US$46,393,032 which accounts for
26% of total three-year UNPF delivery and highest among all Outcomes; and accounts for 71%
of planned budget, US$64,755,00, of Outcome 5.
51 File name: UN project mapping V1
Final Evaluation Report 99
In response to Covid-19, UNCT has prepared the UN Lao PDR Socio-Economic Response Plan
(SERP) to COVID-19 which is considered as an essential package of support offered by the UN
Development System (UNDS) in Lao PDR over the next 18 months to contribute to Lao PDR’s
recovery effort and to protect the needs and rights of people living under the duress of the
pandemic, with a particular focus on the most vulnerable people and groups, who are at risk of
being left behind. In addition to the SERP, different UN entities also conducted Rapid Assessment
of Covid-19 impact in their focused areas. Among other UN AFP responses to Covid -19, two UN
projects under the United Nations COVID-19 Response and Recovery Fund were approved to
support the Lao PDR Government’s preparedness and response to Covid-19.
Table 5: Status of UNPF Outcome and Output 5 Indicators
Indicators, Baselines, Means of
UNFP Outcome 5 Progress
Targets Verification
5.1. Maternal mortality
ratio
Baseline: 197 per 100,000
(2015) 5.1. Annual global 5.1 Maternal mortality ratio:
UN estimate 185 (2017) - UNFPA State of
Target: 160 per 100,000
World Population 2020;
(2020)
5.2. Lao Social
5.2. Under-five mortality
Indicator Survey 5.2. Under-five mortality rate:
rate, girls/boys (LSIS) (2016/17) 46 (2017) - LSIS II 2017;
Baseline: 79 per 1,000
Outcome 5: People
(girls: 83per 1,000 / boys:
enjoy improved access
95 per 1,000) (2012)
to quality health
5.3. Percentage of population
services, and water, Target: 40 per 1,000 (girls
using an improved drinking
sanitation and hygiene and boys) (2020)
water source and sanitation
facility
5.3. Annual
5.3. Percentage of
UNICEF/WHO - Proportion of population using
IAEA, IOM, UN-Habitat, population using an
an improved source of drinking
Joint Monitoring
UNAIDS, improved drinking water:
Programme
UNESCO, UNFPA, water source and 83.9% - LSIS II 2017;
estimates;
UNICEF, UNODC, sanitation
UNV, WFP, WHO facility Annual Ministry of - Proportion of population having
Public Works and an improved but not shared
Baseline: 76% water
Transport data; sanitation facility is
supply coverage (2015);
73.8% - LSIS II 2017
71% sanitation
Annual Ministry of
coverage (2015)
Health data
Target: 90% water supply
coverage (2020); 80%
sanitation coverage (2020)
Final Evaluation Report 100
Due to the large availability of illicit drugs, Lao PDR also faces significant challenges with drug
use, particularly Amphetamine-Type-Stimulants and opiates. There is a need to introduce and
enhance availability of voluntary and evidence-based treatment for drug users, including
Community Based Treatment.
Results Group 6: Food Security & Nutrition
Outcome 6: the most vulnerable people benefit from improved food security and nutrition.
Outcome 6 is linked to SDG2 on zero hunger and improved nutrition and the eighth national socio-
economic development plan (2016-2020) Outcome 2, Output 2 on food security and malnutrition
being reduced.
Situation
Lao PDR achieved the MDG1 target to reduce hunger by half but did not achieve its MDG target
in reduction of malnutrition. Malnutrition continues to be one of the main challenges. The Lao
Social Indicators Survey-II 2017 showed that stunting and underweight among children are still a
major concern. Between 2012 and 2017, stunting among children under age five decreased from
44 % to 33%, moderate or severe wasting increased from 9% to 6 %, and underweight was
reduced from 27% to 21% 1. Overall, 11 out of 18 provinces have critical levels of stunting above
the WHO recommended threshold of 30 per cent, and there exists wide disparity in prevalence of
stunting among people living in different geographical areas, by wealth quintile, and ethnicity2.
Children living in rural areas suffer twice the rate of overlapping deprivation in all three
dimensions, nutrition, health and sanitation (32.3-39.0 per cent) compared to those living in urban
areas (17.7 per cent) 2. Stunting in rural areas without road access (43.3%) is twice than in urban
areas (21.5%) 3.
Data from the most recent Lao PDR Expenditure and Economic Survey 6 revealed that slightly
over a fifth of the population experienced ‘severe’ or ‘moderate’ food insecurity2. Food insecurity
is not a major determinant of stunting. Stunting prevalence was found in 20% of the richest
quintile1. An inadequate nutrient intake in children is from the lack of dietary diversity, including
poor child feeding practices. Food expenditure and consumption are underpinned by mothers’
education levels, poor households, social norms and practices. The households still eat more rice
(31%) than other foods.
1.Minimum Dietary Diversity (MDD) is met by only 16 percent of children 6-23 months. 2. Minimum
Dietary Diversity for Women (MDD-W) is met by 36 percent of non-pregnant women and 44
percent of pregnant women. 3. 40 percent of children less than 6 months are exclusively
breastfed, and the average duration is 20 months. 4. 67% of health center staff have not received
appropriate training on nutrition and tend not to recognize stunted children or offer appropriate
recommendations about nutrition and growth promotion. 5. 44% of health care workers never
undergo in-service training. Most health care workers are female (57%, but 42% of health staff
conducting deliveries are male 6. That surfaces a cultural barrier that can create resistance in
Final Evaluation Report 101
access to maternity services. Social, gender, and cultural norms and practices are rarely
addressed in health promotion activities or at health facilities.
Factors contributing to stunting and malnutrition include poverty, poor quality diets during
pregnancy, inadequate feeding practices for infants and young children, limited access to clean
water and good sanitation facilities, poor hygiene behaviors, and limited access to and utilization
of quality health services. Nationally, 19.6 % of population do not have toilets and 9.3% of villages
cannot access clean water. Nearly three in four stunted children are deprived in the sanitation
dimension (77.3%), as compared to 67.0% among none stunted children and 14.3 per cent out of
the 32.9 per cent of children deprived in water are stunted. The likelihood of being stunted is 10%
higher among children conceived by women below the age of 17.
Prior to the COVID-19 pandemic outbreak, 67,800 people are estimated to have been food
insecure beginning from March 2020 as the impacts of drought and flooding in 20197. The
Covid19 could push more people into poverty8 and an additional 383,000 people could fall into
poverty as a result of the pandemic9. The rapid assessment of food security and agriculture in
Lao PDR conducted by WFP on May 2020 revealed that perceptions around changes in the heath
and malnutrition status of communities were not significant. The restrictions in movement have
visible impacts on food supply chain and prices, food availability, accessibility and food
consumption. A higher share of the population (47.5%) will be at risk of food insecurity and severe
food insecurity due to the Covid-19 crisis and a small share of households will also be at risk of
experiencing extreme food insecurity after COVID-1910. Low income households, those engaged
in daily labour, and informal workers are likely to fall back to less diverse diets leading to increased
rates of malnutrition.
Table 6: UNPF results framework 2017-2021
UNPF 2017-2021
Indicators
Targets
Baselines Means of verification
2021
44% 34%
6.1 percentage of children under 5 years 1.National nutrition survey (2016)
girls 43% girls & boys
of age affected by stunting 2.Lao social indicator survey
boys 46%
(2016-2017)
(2012)
6.2 prevalence of undernourishment in the 22%
10% Annual FAOSTAT data
population (2014)
1.Annual risk and vulnerability
11.2% survey
6.3 percentage of rural households with
8% 2.Biennial government
poor and borderline food consumption
(2013) 3.WFP Food Security
Assessment
Final Evaluation Report 102
Table 7: Draft 2019 UNPF Progress Report, 2020
Draft UNPF Progress 2019
Targets
Indicators Baselines Status 2019
2021
9.4% of households have ‘severe’
6.1 Prevalence of moderate and severe FIES with
and 10.9% ‘moderate’ experience of
food insecurity (FIES 2018) the LECS TBC
food security
(National SDG Indicator 2.1.2) 2017/2018
(LECS6)
45.3% of children 6-23 months
6.2. Percentage of children 6-23 month TBC
TBC received minimum dietary diversity
with improved dietary diversity (LSISII)
(LSISII)
6.3. Wasting prevalence among children 9.6% 9% of children under age 5 with
under 5 years (LCASS 5% weight for height below -2 Standard
(National SDG indicator 2.2.3) 2015) Deviations (wasted)
1.4. Annual data on nutrition First two rounds of surveillance were
Annual
generated by nation Nil undertaken in 2019 and round 2 still
report
1.5. l nutrition surveillance system under analysis
34%
44%,
6.5. Percentage of children under 5 years girls &
girls 43%
of age affected by stunting boys 33%, girls 32%/boys 34%
boys 46%
(National SDG Indicator 2.2.1)
(2012)
16.5% (2016-2018), FAOSTAT
6.6. Prevalence of undernourishment in 22%
10% 17.1% Mid-term review NSEDP
the population (2014)
(2018)
1.8 % households have poor and
6.7. Percentage of rural households with 11.2%
8% 4.5% have borderline food
poor and borderline food consumption (2013)
consumption
Intervention
The UN has engaged in a number of different areas to ensure malnutrition is addressed in a
coordinated, sequenced and targeted manner across the health, water, sanitation, agriculture and
education sectors. These are related to food security and nutrition, agricultural production,
expansion of markets, behavioral change campaign, strengthening coordination structures within
the Government and partners, data and monitoring and evaluation.
Lessons Learned for 2019
- Nutrition must not be seen as a separate, independent programme area but rather as
Final Evaluation Report 103
being mainstreamed across existing programmes and delivery vehicles. This rests with
the relevant programmes/programme managers
- Prioritization of nutrition interventions
- Capacity of Government across sectors and levels for planning, preparedness and
response to emergencies includes the availability of key commodities and supplies.
o Governance, Rule of Law and Participation in National
Decision Making
Results Groups 7 & 8: Institution Building and Access to Justice
Outcome 7: Institution Building
Linked in particular to SDG 16 on peace, justice and strong institutions, the UNPF’s Outcome 7,
aims to ensure that Lao PDR’s institutions and policies both at national and local levels, contribute
to the delivery of quality services that respond to Lao PDR citizens’ needs, and facilitate the
achievement of strategic development goals.52
The National SDG Steering Committee officially endorsed a comprehensive set of 238 SDG
indicators in June 2019, and allocated them across line ministries for ownership, monitoring, and
reporting. Sixty per cent of the SDG indicators include baselines and are mainstreamed into the
current 8th NSEDP.
Lao PDR has one of the highest proportions of women in parliament in the region. There were
25% of women in the National Assembly from 2011 to 2016. Since 2016, these figures rose to
27,5% women in the National Assembly. Despite an increase in terms of percentages from 6% in
2012 to 19 % in 2019, women are still under-represented in senior Government positions53. In
2019, mine risk education took place in 572 villages, benefitting 265,556 people from which 70,
000 were reached in Xieng Khouang54.
Recognizing the improvements in service delivery that can come from configuring institutional
structures to empower local decision makers, the Government also took measures to further
operationalize the decentralization process (known as 'Sam Sang’, or ‘Three Builds’) which was
officially extended to all 148 districts nationwide.
Projects that tested locally identified, innovative solutions to address chronic bottlenecks in the
provision of local public services, contributed to efforts to improve the quality, relevance, and
alignment of basic services. The successful implementation and completion of these projects led
52 2019. Draft- UNPF Progress Report. P 77
53 2019. Draft-UNPF Progress Report. P 87
54 2019. Draft-UNPF Progress Report. P 83
Final Evaluation Report 104
to improved service delivery for at least 70,000 people, of whom, 50 per cent were women, over
75 per cent ethnic minorities, and 50 per cent were children and youth.
Driven by strong economic growth and rapidly improving health and education, Lao PDR is on
track to graduate from LDC status. Given the importance of LDC graduation as a policy priority,
a smooth transition strategy to help the country phase out certain international support measures,
will be important to maintain development momentum and support of the 2030 Agenda and the
9th NSEDP (2021- 2025).
Table 8: Status of UNPF Outcome and Output 7 Indicators
Outcome 7: Institutions and policies at national and local level support the
delivery of quality services that better respond to people’s needs
Indicator Baseline Target Status 2019
7.1. Number of new 373,948 households 600,000 386,115 Households (2019)
households (2015) households *It is anticipated that the number
receiving 2 or more (2021) of households will increase when
basic One Door Service Centres
services from their (including, those established in
districts 2019 and those planned for
2020), become fully operational.
7.2 Percentile rank on 39.4% (2014) 45% (2021) 24.5% (2018)
aggregate Government
effectiveness
7.3 Extent to which Limited extent (2015) Target: Large LaoInfo, managed by the Lao
National extent Statistics Bureau (LSB) continues
Socio-Economic (2021) to be used on a limited basis;
Development Plan Ministries provided limited data
monitoring informs against indicators of the 8th
evidence-based policy NSEDP; The provincial statistics
making database (LaoInfo) system was
established in five provinces for
statistics dissemination, serving
policy and decision making; the
provincial database is linked to
the national system used to track
progress on SDGs.
Strengthening National Institutions to Implement the NSEDP and Achieve the SDGs
During 2019, UNDP continued to deliver support to the National Assembly (NA) and Provincial
People’s Assemblies (PPAs):
o to further develop their effectiveness in oversight the 8th NSEDP objectives and SDGs.
Support was extended to the legislative agenda of the 7th and 8th Ordinary Sessions of the
NA during which it completed its legislative plan for 2019 including adoption of several
laws.
Final Evaluation Report 105
o for the organization of two intersessional programmes in June and November to provide
a platform for the provision of independent opinions ahead of the Ordinary Session, with
participation from the NA, line ministries, representatives of PPAs as well as Members of
the Parliamentarian Performance Review Group.
o through outreach missions and public consultations in nine districts within two provinces
(Houaphanh and Salavan), allowing for feedback and inputs from constituents and key
stakeholders55 on draft laws and amendments prior to their adoption.
As part of UN analytical support to the achievement of the SDGs, DESA, in cooperation with the
National Institute for Economic Research, supported research and dialogue on the potential
implications of the Belt and Road Initiative (BRI) on the 2030 Agenda.
As part of efforts to ensure continued development momentum towards the SDGs through the
graduation process, the UN has been working with the Government to start developing a smooth
transition strategy.
As part of building the system to track progress against the SDGs, the National SDG Steering
Committee Meeting adopted a set of 238 national SDG indicators in June 2019, that are intended
to serve as a “living document”. In support of national statistics efforts, DESA’s Statistics Division
organized several activities:
o two national activities in 2019, in support of capacity development towards improved SDG
monitoring and dissemination,
o a user engagement workshop brought together the LSB and line ministries to develop
SDG indicators working closely with policy-makers, academia, civil society and other user
groups that make use of the data, to share experiences, discuss challenges and draft a
strategy for continued user engagement for SDG monitoring,
o a workshop on metadata for SDG indicators was conducted with participants from LSB
and 20 line ministries and agencies, building their capacity to compile metadata according
to international standards and resulting in compilation of draft metadata for several
national indicators.
Sam Sang Decentralization
In 2019, UNCDF and UNDP jointly supported the Sam Sang decentralization process through the
integration of the DDF into national planning and finance systems at sub-national level. They also
provided support to improved transparency and accountability in the transfer of finance to districts
via the national treasury system.
55 Comprised of approximately 839 participants, of whom 243 were women
Final Evaluation Report 106
As part of the DDF’s third cycle, in 2019, UNCDF in partnership with UNDP, explored an
innovative approach to the Performance-based Grants (PBGs)56. To ensure citizens’ participation
in local planning, only projects that were identified and listed within the provincial government
approved three-year district investment plans were considered for short-listing. Through this, an
additional 7 DDF projects were selected using the explicit ‘Leave No One Behind’ methodology,
reaching a total of 2,400 households, including 50 per cent poor households and 2,000 non Lao-
Tai ethnic households.
UNCDF and UNDP also jointly supported greater local engagement in the delivery of public
services through the Public Service Innovation Facility (PSIF). In 2019, the PSIF provided
financial and technical assistance to 16 local partners, including local authorities and Non-Profit
Associations (NPAs), to promote the participation of local communities and civil society in the
improvement of local service delivery with a special focus on vulnerable groups including women,
youth and ethnic groups.
In 2019, UN-Habitat supported Sam Sang decentralization across eight districts57 in three
provinces (Xekong, Salavan and Attapeu) and the Vientiane Prefecture. This support included
the collection of large quantities of data at the village level, which were subsequently developed
into a series of infographics that were translated into the Lao PDR language to support more
effective and inclusive knowledge management and decision-making at local level.
In a practical example of how decentralized decision making can address priority development
needs, UN-Habitat also finalized climate change action plans that identified resilience-building
measures that fed into local development plans.
WHO has not provided active support to implement Sam Sang decentralization as yet. In the
updated Health Sector Reform Strategy, which was developed at end of 2019, it suggests
strengthening primary health care through implementation of Sam Sang as a key strategic
direction to achieve universal health coverage by 2025.
Improving Access to Services
At the sub-national level, in 2019, MoHA conducted a user survey in four districts (Hinboun,
Xaysettha, Khoau and Xiengkhor) with support from UNDP. This feedback collected from 1,700
households on local public services, administrative performance, and governance practices,
provided district authorities and the Provincial People’s Assembly (PPA), with important
information to guide improvement of public service delivery. As a practical step to improve
structures for service delivery, UNDP also supported a significant upgrade to the One Door
Service Centres (ODSC) in Bachiangchaleunsook district, Champasack province, allowing for
56 through transitioning from an equal distribution model, to one which promotes SDG acceleration and the focused
targeting of measures, applying the principals of Leaving No One Behind to ensure equitable access to basic services
for the most vulnerable communities.
57 (Kaleum, Dakcheung, Xaysetha, Sammakhixay, Sanxay, Phouvong, Samuoi and Ta Oi).
Final Evaluation Report 107
more convenient and timely delivery of district services to citizens including for example, access
to legal certificates including birth, marriage, death and land entitlements.
To support the fair and efficient administration of land, in 2019, UN-Habitat worked with MoNRE,
Village Focus International, and a range of district- and provincial-level decision makers58 to
develop innovative, fit-for-purpose, gender-appropriate tools to improve citizens’ access to land.
As a result, over 70 government staff from district and provincial levels have benefitted from
training developed through consultations with key partners and the identification and prioritization
of GLTN tools. Also, in 2019, through support from MoNRE, UN-Habitat’s Social Tenure Domain
Model, was translated into the Lao PDR language to simplify land certification.
in 2019, WHO provided technical support to MoH departments during a review and update of
health policies and strategies, including the National Health Insurance Strategy, the National
Financing Strategy, and the Health Workforce Strategy. WHO's technical support for this includes
support for implementation of the Health Sector Reform Strategy and a review and update of it,
and technical support for the RMNCAH strategy including an immunization program and key
disease programs (communicable diseases). WHO also provided support to Government
development of an implementation plan including a baseline survey on the capacity of health care
facilities, a costing exercise of health workforce planning and management to meet minimum
requirements to deliver services. The costing exercise is for essential health service package and
national health insurance benefit package, not for human resources for health. It aims to provide
data/information to improve sustainable health financing. For human resources for health (HRH),
it is more about strategic planning for HRH, including distribution, retention, incentives and quality
improvement in medical education.
Outcome 8: Access to justice
According to the latest Freedom House report (2020), Lao PDR is not free and scores 14 out of
100 in the global freedom ranking59. In fact, due process rights are outlined in the law, but these
rights are routinely denied. Defendants are often presumed guilty, and long procedural delays in
the judicial system are common. In addition, equal rights are constitutionally guaranteed but are
not upheld in practice. Discrimination against members of non Lao-Tai ethnic tribes is common.
Gender-based discrimination and abuse are widespread. Discriminatory traditions and religious
practices have contributed to women’s limited access to education, employment opportunities,
and worker benefits. Therefore, social freedoms can be restricted, especially for women and
children. In 2016, a survey supported by the UN and the World Health Organization (WHO)
revealed that nearly a third of women in Lao PDR had experienced domestic violence. Children
as young as 12 years old also may be legally employed in Lao PDR.
58 The Provincial Natural Resources and Environment Department, the District Office of Natural Resources
and Environment, the District Agriculture and Forestry Office, and the Provincial Agriculture and Forestry
Office.
59 2020. Freedom House. Freedom in the world-Laos.
Final Evaluation Report 108
Furthermore, given its strategic geographic location bordering multiple countries, Lao PDR is
vulnerable to increased flows of drugs and pre-cursor chemicals necessary for drug production.
In recent years, countries in the Mekong sub-region have witnessed a significant increase in the
production, trafficking, and consumption of Amphetamine-Type-Stimulants. They also are
vulnerable to human trafficking which is common in the Mekong sub-region, as well as for
laundering of money gained from illicit activities. In Lao PDR, the UN works in partnership with
national authorities to improve access to justice and realization of human rights under UNPF
Outcome 8. Access to justice is a basic necessity for the rule of law60. Aspirations for SDG 16
are most clearly articulated in the Government’s ongoing efforts to ensure its citizens enjoy
expanded and equitable access to justice, as part of the transition to a ‘Rule of Law State’ by
202061.
Table 9: Status of UNPF Outcome and Output 8 Indicators
Outcome 8: People enjoy improved access to justice and fulfilment of their human
rights
Indicator Baseline Target Status 2019
8.1. Number of people’s Formal Courts Formal Courts: Formal Courts: 4,644
grievances redressed 4,000; 7,000 Village Mediation Units: 6,109
through courts and Village Mediation Village Mediation
village mediation units Units 4,746 (2015) Units: 8,000 (2021)
using legal aid services
8.2. Number of Laws 0 (2014) 8 (2021) Eight laws on track: Penal code,
certified by the Ministry Law on
of Justice that are Lawyers, Law on Judgement
compliant with the Enforcement, Law on Treaties
requirements of drafting and
/ amending and public International Agreement, Law on
consultations Supreme People’s Prosecutor,
and
Law on Disaster on Climate
Change, Civil Code, Land Law
8.3. Percentage of 0 (2015) 60% / 70 of 116 On track – the Government
accepted (2021) adopted 116 recommendations
recommendations of from a total of 196
the 2nd UPR cycle recommendations (59%).
Implemented
60 The UNSG Report stated, “the rule of law is ensured by national institutions that can generate and
implement clear, public and just laws, and that provide fair, equitable and accountable public services to all
people equally.” Report of the UNSG, “Delivering justice: programme of action to strengthen the rule of law
at the national and international levels”, 16 March 2012, A/66/749.
61 Master Plan on Development of the Rule of Law in the Lao PDR toward the Year 2020 (2009)
https://www.la.undp.org/content/dam/laopdr/docs/Reports%20and%20publications/2018/LSMP__Sep_20
09_.pdf
Final Evaluation Report 109
8.4. Percentage of 27.5% in National 35% in National 27.5% (41 out of 149
women in National Assembly (2016); Assembly and 20% parliamentarians).
Assembly, and in 6.06% in leadership in leadership 31% (20,772 out of 66,828
leadership positions in positions in state positions in state leadership position and equivalent
state and party and party (2013) and party (2021) positions 1st Minister and
(National SDG Indicator equivalent to 8th Deputy head of
16.7.1) Unit and equivalent
10% (1 out of 11 Politburo
members, 7 women out of 69
central committee members).
Fulfilment of Human Rights
Following the completion of the second UPR62 of Lao PDR, the Government adopted 116 of 196
recommendations. To support the need for a well-elaborated action plan for follow-up, the UN
works with national counterparts to strengthen capacity to facilitate harmonization with
international obligations and standards.
The Government’s steady progress was noted under the implementation of the Legal Sector
Master Plan, with improvements in capacity, procedures, and standards for legislative
development and implementation, effectiveness and responsiveness of judicial institutions,
systematic development of legal and judicial professionals, public understanding of legal rights
and information, participation in the legal system, adoption, implementation, enforcement,
monitoring and reporting of international legal instruments.
As part of outreach to better engage disadvantaged groups in the development of legislation, the
Legal and Institutional Oversight Sub Sector Working Group, provided opportunities for multi-
stakeholder engagement on the Penal Code and access to justice for groups including women
and persons with disabilities in October 2019, jointly co-chaired by the MoJ, UNDP and the EU.
In 2019, UNFPA, in collaboration with the LWU, the NCAWMC, international organizations, Lao
PDR civil society organizations, media agencies, and the UN system worked together to raise
awareness under a 16-day public campaign focused on gender equality and ending violence
against women and girls around International Women’s Day and the International Day for the
Elimination of Violence Against Women and Girls, reaching an estimated 500,000 people in Lao
PDR.
As part of the emergency response in Attapeu province, in 2019 the LWU, with support from
UNFPA, managed two Women’s Friendly Spaces (WFSs) in two temporary camps in Sanamxay
district:
62 The UPR mechanism facilitates a review of the human rights record of all UN Member States on a rotating
basis. It also provides states with the opportunity to share actions undertaken to address their human rights
record as part of their obligations under international law.
Final Evaluation Report 110
• This included a total of 30 participants from LWU, Public Security, Health sector, Labour
and Social Welfare Sector and Lao PDR Youth Union staff who were trained with skills
on counselling and how to respond to GBV in an emergency setting.
• Psycho-social support and counselling were provided to 175 cases, of which 96 were
health related, and 79 were related to psychological issues.
• Recreational activities to relieve stress for the affected people living in temporary camps
reached more than 2,000 people.
To support protection of children’s rights, by the end of 2019, the Child Protection Network (CPN)
was established in a total of 1,248 villages nationwide. The capacity of 93 government officials
and village coordinators from five (5) villages in Savannakhet province and 13 villages in Xieng
Khouang province was strengthened in 2019, through four (4) training sessions and the collection
of critical data on CWD. More than 100 parents of CWD, received training on care and support
for CWD in 2019. Subsequently, 109 SWDs (of which 44 female) from target villages benefited
from support, including referrals.
UNICEF also provided psychosocial support through Child-Friendly Schools (CFS) to 3,039
children and documented the experience to form the country’s first-ever lessons learnt in Child
Protection in Emergency. MoHA, through UNICEF’s support, also provided mobile birth
registration services to 783 children (353 girls and 430 boys) who were not registered at birth or
those who had lost legal documents during the disaster.
Access to Justice
The first Lao PDR Penal Code was enacted on 10 September 2019, with support from UNDP,
serving as the key legal reference for the Judiciary. The Penal Code subsumes legal provisions
and laws related to critical issues for the protection of human rights, including violence against
women, children’s rights, and environmental protection and is expected to improve access and
referencing of laws by legal authorities.
Efforts to increase access to justice continued throughout 2019, with support provided by UNFPA,
UNDP, IOM, and UNICEF, focusing on disadvantaged groups including women, particularly those
who were survivors of GBV and natural disasters. Support mechanisms for GBV victims were
strengthened through the launch and upgrade of the Women-Children Consultation Service
Centre in Xieng Khouang province in partnership with the MoJ and the LWU.
To support improved access to justice for vulnerable migrant populations, IOM, in partnership with
INGO Village Focus International, provided direct assistance services to 907 deported migrants
from the Vangtao - Chongmek Lao-Thai border, among which 485 were deemed to be vulnerable
In 2019, the Office of Supreme People’s Prosecutor (OSPP) developed three key manuals on
Interview Skills Training, Case Management, and OSPP’s In-House Manual on Trafficking-in-
Persons Prosecution, for Lao PDR prosecutors with support provided by IOM.
With regard to access to justice for children, approximately 930 children (431 boys and 499 girls)
from targeted provinces, benefited from legal and social assistance, community-based diversion
Final Evaluation Report 111
including strengthening community awareness on child protection issues including Violence
Against Children, child marriage, and trafficking.
Legal and judicial institutional capacities of evidence-based policy and legislative-development
and justice service delivery were further enhanced through training supported by UNDP, with the
participation of more than 1,000 people including lawyers, officials from the MoJ, People’s
Supreme Court, Office of the Supreme People’s Prosecutors, police officers, as well as law
professors and students.
o Issues Emerging from Preliminary Desk Review of
Documents: Initial Thoughts on Thematic Challenges
The UNPF 2017-2021 identified the following key challenges:
• A main development challenge is ensuring that benefits from high economic growth are
evenly distributed and translated into inclusive and sustainable human development
because there are widening gaps between the rich and the poor, women and men, ethnic
groups and residents from different regions of the country which need to be addressed;
• A key driver of poverty in Lao PDR is largely attributed to the heavy reliance on the
agricultural sector and the need for expansion in education and targeted government
investment in poverty related interventions;
• Lao PDR’s economic boom (driven by foreign direct investment in national resource
extraction and hydropower) needs to be conducted in an economically sustainable way
that respects the rights of communities and individuals and generates revenue for all;
• In order for Lao PDR to benefit from its formal accession to the WTO in 2013 and closer
integration with ASEAN and the world, it will be necessary for Lao PDR to deal with its
skills deficit, reliance in the agricultural sector and its need to invest in machinery;
• The need to deal with unexploded ordinances (UXO) from the Indochina War (1964-73) is
important since there may well be a link between UXO contamination and the prevalence
of poverty (with 42 of the 46 poorest districts affected by UXO); and,
• The three Pillars and eight Outcomes of the UN Partnership Framework prioritize the
needs in the context of Lao PDR to both achieve the SDGs and graduate from LDC status.
(Lao PDR – UN Partnership Framework 2017-2021 pp 7-8).
Overall, most recently in October 2020, the World Bank Review states that: “Lao PDR has made
good development progress over the past twenty years, halving poverty, reducing malnutrition
and improving education and health outcomes. However, there is room for further improvement.
A child born in Lao PDR today will only be half as productive as she could be if she enjoyed full
Final Evaluation Report 112
health and education. Malnutrition continues to be a critical issue, with stunting (impaired growth
and development from poor nutrition) affecting over 30 percent of children under five. The
maternal mortality rate is also high, at 185 per 100,000 births (2017). While a Lao PDR child goes
to school for 10.8 years on average, she only receives the equivalent of 6.4 years of learning.”
The 8th National Socio-Economic Development Plan 2016–20 outlined the Lao PDR
government’s plan to address these challenges through greener, more inclusive growth that
improves local livelihoods by diversifying income sources and private sector support for
sustainable forest management and nature-based tourism. Given that Lao PDR is the most
ethnically diverse country in the region, implementing inclusive development is challenging in
terms of access to resources coupled with issues related to issues related the urban and rural
divides.
Given that many people in Lao PDR are close to the poverty line, major issues have significant
impact. For example, the World Bank concludes that “The COVID-19 pandemic has brought
renewed challenges to this agenda. The pandemic has severely affected economic growth, which
will decline to an estimated range of between -0.6 to -2.4 percent in 2020. The service sector,
including travel and tourism has been hit hard by lockdown measures while remittances, a vital
source of income for many families, have dried up. The unemployment rate rose to 25 percent in
May 2020, from 16 percent at the end of 2019. Structural vulnerabilities have been exacerbated
by COVID-19, leading to a significant deterioration in the macroeconomic situation. State
revenues are declining and the fiscal deficit is projected to increase to between 7.6 and 8.9
percent, constraining the government’s ability to mitigate the economic impacts of the pandemic.”
https://www.worldbank.org/en/country/lao/overview.
In short, COVID-19 has exacerbated the structural weaknesses and made it more of a challenge
for Lao PDR to develop quickly.
In reviewing overall challenges, flooding again must be noted since it affects so many other areas
in an integrated fashion. For example, at a meeting in October, 2019 in Vientiane, members of
the Lao PDR Ministry of Planning and Investment (chaired by Lao PDR Deputy Minister Kikeo
Chanthaboury) plans were developed to deal with widespread flooding in 2019 in six central and
southern provinces where widespread flooding occurred along with, crop and livestock diseases
and dengue fever outbreaks. These all impacted on Lao PDR development plans.
(http://www.xinhuanet.com/english/2019-10/15/c_138473104.htm)
Inclusive Growth, Livelihoods, Climate Change and Environment
Human security, built in terms of livelihoods over time and resilience, in Lao PDR is threatened
by environmental disasters such as storms and flooding. The question is whether it is possible to
achieve real sustainability in terms of livelihoods without working more diligently on preventing
climate disasters.
Indeed, there has been progress on many other thematic areas but a series of natural disasters
have hit Lao PDR coupled with poorly function early-warning systems.
Final Evaluation Report 113
In turn they have led to a number of interrelated issues which include:
o lack of understanding among officials,
o lack of risk information relevant to sector, and
o the need to clarify roles and responsibilities as defined by the new DRM Law.
Together, these present key challenges in the implementation of the Sendai Framework for
Disaster Risk Reduction while lack of coordination and delays in response serve to increase
vulnerability in sectors such as: forestry, agriculture, WASH, to name a few.
Human Development: Education, Health, WASH, Food Security and Nutrition
Given that the interrelated variables of education, health and nutrition are affected by climate
change and environment, should environment and climate change be a key cross cutting theme
for this evaluation?
For example, although the percentage of Grade 1 enrolment of primary education with pre-school
experience has increased from 51% in 2015 to 64,6% in 2018 and The Early Childhood Education
(ECE) has gradually improved with increased number of kindergartens and pre-primary facilities,
the drop-out rate of grade 1 students has increased from 5, 8% to 6,3%.
There are many reasons for this including, the increasing number of severe natural disasters -
which have their own difficult effects on children’s education, health and nutrition as follows:
o School infrastructure was destroyed, resulting in some schools being unable to
begin or carry on with their academic year, and
o Families having to relocate had adverse implications for their children who had to
drop-out of school to follow them.
Thus, getting more children in school and keeping them there is a key and multifaceted challenge.
Apart from the schools themselves, the impact of flooding and other natural disasters on the
Government’s impacted fiscal allocations which also effected education budgets which left little
reserves for improving education quality.
Additionally, children are still expected to help their parents during the harvest which compromises
their ability to complete their studies. Another critical factor is the low salaries of teachers which
leads to absences of educators and a large percentage of students’ truancy.
There are also issues in relation to skills development, e.g., access to TVET and employment
services are limited – this is especially true in remote areas of the countries. Issues related to
nutrition are multi-faceted and include such factors as poverty, poor diet during pregnancy and
inadequate diet for infants and young children. Access to clean water is also an issue etc.
Discussion of other emerging themes have been added to discussions in the document review
for the particular results groups.
Final Evaluation Report 114
Governance: Institution Building and Access to Justice
To promote the participation of local communities and civil society in the improvement of local
service delivery with a special focus on vulnerable groups including women, youth and ethnic
groups, in 2019, both UNCDF and UNDP supported the Sam Sang decentralization process.
UNCDF and UNDP also jointly supported greater local engagement in the delivery of public
services through the Public Service Innovation Facility (PSIF).
Yet questions remain in terms of decentralization however as follows: Is the decentralization
process enhancing gender equality which it doesn’t usually do? Are there sufficient women and
ethnic minorities on local councils that deal with flooded storm control and other climate issues?
The recurring floods highlight the need to strengthen emergency preparedness and DRR/DRM
programming. This needs to be done as an integrated response from government stakeholders,
the UN and key development partners and is not always easy to accomplish at the local levels.
Capacity at the local level is often lower than at the national level which presents challenges.
In Lao PDR, the UN also works in partnership with national authorities to improve access to justice
and realization of human rights under UNPF Outcome 8. As discussed, in the latest Freedom
House report (2020), Lao PDR scores 14 out of 100 in the global freedom ranking63. Although,
due process rights are outlined in the law, these rights are routinely denied, defendants are often
presumed guilty, and there are still long procedural delays in the judicial system. Similarly,
although equal rights are constitutionally guaranteed they are not upheld in practice. For example,
discrimination against members of ethnic minorities are common, gender-based discrimination
and abuse are widespread and discriminatory traditions and religious practices contribute to
women’s limited access to education, employment opportunities, and worker benefits.
Overall, it is clear that there are a myriad of issues which are linked, and which all need to be
considered during the evaluation. As background to building our understanding, we are beginning
with an understanding of what the UNCT shared with us in our first zoom call as follows:
Some Systemic Issues Identified by UN Country Team in initial discussion with ET
1. The UNCT identified the strength of the current UNPF as being the documentation in the
annual reports from 2017, 2018 and 2019.
2. They also indicated that the thematic areas are well aligned with selected Lao PDR
national priorities (8th NSEDP).
The team indicated many challenges of which many surfaced in the document review.
1.There will be challenges reporting against targeted indicators and a lack of baseline
indicators, some of which are not aligned with UN activities, or scale of interventions or
63 2020. Freedom House. Freedom in the world-Laos.
Final Evaluation Report 115
with end targets or the indicators in the 8th NSEDP. As requested, the ET will acknowledge
challenges and seek to suggest ways to improve work on indicators.
2.There will be uneven progress of Result Groups. Some are less active needing more
joint planning and coordination of RG themes with SDG themes. We will verify these
issues and as requested we will suggest ways to improve RGs in the next CF.
3.There is a lack of oversight by the Joint Steering Committee which met only twice in 4
years. We will seek to identify ways to leverage more regular meetings take place.
4.There is a lack of a clearly articulated theory of change, with identified key assumptions
that can be reviewed as the situation changes to identify when changes are needed. This
is not the case at present.
5.There is limited content or objectives focused on means of implementation and
monitoring, in particular Department of Economic and Social Affairs (DESA) in
statistical/data capacity and indicators for SDG 17. We will address this and report on it.
6.Needs to incorporate stronger elements of disaster risk reduction to prevent and mitigate
damage and loss from future disasters in Lao PDR UN Disaster Risk Reduction (UNDRR).
As noted above, we will look at the impact of environmental, climate change and disaster
and the need for integrated approaches in Lao PDR by the UN.
7.Insufficient ownership of responsibility for Results Groups (RG) reporting and delivery.
To address this, improving ownership will be discussed in RG focus groups.
8.UNESCO seeks to ensure that the UNPF ensures learning opportunities for
marginalized and disadvantaged, especially non Lao-Tai ethnic communities and those
with disabilities. The evaluation will review this, and other issues related to marginalized
groups.
9.Higher education, research, pre-service and in-service teacher education, and Technical
and Vocational Education and Training (TVET) broadly (not just vocational) are critical for
Lao PDR to graduate from LDC status quickly. This will be a focus of our questions with
relevant RGs and interviewees. Graduation is a key area for the ET.
Final Evaluation Report 116
ANNEX 3: DATA COLLECTION TOOLS/
PROTOCOLS-DISTRIBUTION LIST
INTERVIEW PROTOCOL
The table outlines questions that will facilitate the collection of relevant information from key
informants participating in the interviews. For each interview, the evaluation team may develop
an individualized, personalized guide derived from the contents of this table.
The protocols and guides are designed to enable the collection of relevant information from four
categories of key informants participating in interviews carried out by the evaluators. Questions
will be different based on the category of informants interviewed. The evaluation team will put
special care into adapting the language to recipients and situations.
Categories of key informants
Criteria, questions, and sub-questions
Governmen
UNRC UN AFP Other Partners
t
Hello, my name is [name of evaluator], and I am here today to discuss about the
Evaluation of Lao PDR’s UN Partnership Framework (UNPF) 2017-2021. Before
going any further, we would like to thank you for the time you are giving us, so
we can better understand how you perceive UN support to Lao PDR. We have
been asked to evaluate work carried out so far by this Partnership Framework,
and as such it is important for us to interview key persons who can provide us
with valuable insights. Please note that what you say will remain strictly
confidential.
[Ask if the person has questions before beginning]
   
If you agree to be interviewed, you will be asked to share openly your opinion
regarding your experience with the UNPF. Do we have your consent?
We have a lot of ground to cover and may not have enough time to do so today.
However, please don’t feel rushed to share your thoughts at the point. If, at the
end of our discussion, there are still a number of outstanding questions, we can
send you a list afterwards. This way, you will have a chance to review the
questions at leisure, and supply us with written answers if you wish.
Introduction
Final Evaluation Report 117
Categories of key informants
Criteria, questions, and sub-questions
Governmen
UNRC UN AFP Other Partners
t
Can you tell us about the nature of your involvement in the UNPF (or UN
   
supported activities, project or programme)?
Relevance
1. Has the UN System supported achievement of national development goals
and targets in alignment to relevant national plans and frameworks for Lao
PDR’s 8th NSEDP?
1.1Has the UN system paid proper attention to regional and cross-border issues
of importance, e.g., ASEAN, Mekong and other cross border issues of
importance?
2. To what extent did the UNPF foster synergies among agencies and involve
concerted efforts to optimize results and avoid duplication?
2.1. COVID 19? (Related issues with respect to e.g., health, economic well-
being, human security, etc.)
3. Has the UN system remained responsive to emerging and unforeseen needs
of Lao PDR and its people?
4.To what extent has interagency cooperation and collaboration with other
entities facilitated or hampered the achievement of results?
4.1. Using an assessment of the evaluation criteria, how has the UNCT
contributed to national development results in Lao?
Effectiveness
5. To what extent has the UN system promoted or supported policies consistent
with each other and across sectors, given the multi-sectorial nature of
economic development?
5.1 Have UN policies been used effectively as partnership tools?
6.Has the cooperation framework strengthened the position, credibility, and
reliability of the UN system as a partner for government and other relevant
actors?
Final Evaluation Report 118
Categories of key informants
Criteria, questions, and sub-questions
Governmen
UNRC UN AFP Other Partners
t
7. To what extent has interagency cooperation and collaboration with other
entities facilitated or hampered the achievement of results?
7.2. Using an assessment of the evaluation criteria, how has the UNCT
contributed to national development results?
Efficiency
8.Has the Cooperation Framework reduced transaction costs for partners?
8.1What factors have affected UNAFPs working together to achieve the UNPF
strategic intent and principles?
8.2What factors have affected the UNCT support and contributions through the
UNPF highlighting good practices and bottlenecks?
8.3To what extent has the UNPF outcomes related to Human Development been
achieved?
8.4 To what extent has the UNPF outcomes related to Inclusive Growth,
Livelihoods and Resilience been achieved?
8.5To what extent has the UNPF achieved outcomes related to Governance,
Rule of Law and Participation in National Decision-Making been achieved?
9. Was the Cooperation Framework supported by integrated funding framework
and by adequate funding instruments?
9.1What were the performance, progress or gaps in the UNPF support to
national goals and priorities?
Sustainability
10.Has the UN system support been extended in such a way to build national
and local capacities to ensure long term, sustainable gains?
10.1 What other types of partners have been approached to ensure the
sustainability, e.g., private sector?
Final Evaluation Report 119
Categories of key informants
Criteria, questions, and sub-questions
Governmen
UNRC UN AFP Other Partners
t
11.To what extent has the UN programming assisted Lao’s government to
scaled-up to achieve its goal of becoming a middle-income country?
11.1 Can the UN continue to be a catalyst?
12. To what extent has the UN system helped to support Lao PDR’s journey
towards becoming a sustainable middle-income country?
Cross-Cutting Principles
13. Has the UN system’s support been extended in a way that promotes gender
equity in Lao PDR?
13.1 To what extent did UNPF make use and promote gender equality standards
and principles (e.g., participation, non-discrimination, accountability, etc.) to
achieve its goals?
14. Has the UN system supported followed the principles of a HRs based
approach?
14.1 To what extent did UNPF make use of and promote human rights standards
and principles to achieve its goals?
15. Has the UN system support been designed and delivered following the
programming principles of environmental sustainability?
15.1 To what extent did UNPF effectively use the principles of environmental
sustainability to strengthen its contribution to national development results?
16. Have the programming principles of RBM been used to monitor and track
results?
16.1 To what extent did UNPF make use of programming principles of RBM to
monitor and track its results?
17. Has the overall UN program been designed with programming principle of
capacity development at its core?
17.1 To what extent has UNPF been designed with the programming principles
of capacity building at its core?
Final Evaluation Report 120
Categories of key informants
Criteria, questions, and sub-questions
Governmen
UNRC UN AFP Other Partners
t
Forward Looking
18.What are the lessons learned that could be identified for informing the
planning and decision-making of the UNSDCF 2022-2026?
18.1 What specific recommendations should be included in the 2022-2026
UNSDCF?
19.Has the current UNPF 2017-2021 contributed to preparedness for emergency
situations?
20.If you were involved in joint initiatives, what was their value-added and/or
good practices?
Final Evaluation Report 121
INTERVIEW PROTOCOL- FOCUS GROUP DISCUSSIONS
A brief overview of the project and goals for the FGD/Roundtable are provided below. This full
description is not likely to be needed but it is useful to have in case it is needed to respond to questions.
Participants will be provided with information about process, time, breaks, location of bathrooms and
other details.
–
Baastel, an evaluation consulting firm headquartered in Gatineau, Canada, was mandated to carry out
independently, an evaluation (with some formative and summative elements) of the Lao PDR UNPF.
More specifically, the evaluation is taking place on two levels: 1. At the formative level to assess the
function of the current UNPF and gain insights and recommendations for improvements and, 2. At the
summative level to assess results achieved by the UNPF 2017-2021 to determine the success of the
UN’s/Lao PDR government’s implementation and development of a sustainability plan and method.
In scope - The scope of this evaluation is limited to the current UNPF. The evaluation studied information
provided on the current UNPF. Since UNPF is designed to be implemented across the country to all
peoples, the evaluation is national. The evaluation will also make recommendations for the UNSDCF
2022-2026.
We are currently in the data collection phase and are therefore consulting the UN and the Government
of Lao PDR, as well as other local implementing partners of the UNPF and seeking their views of these
stakeholders in the country.
Presentations
▪ Presentation of evaluation process, explanation of purpose of focus group and obtaining consent
o Consent forms – Templates used will be approved by UN prior to this FGDs/Stakeholder
Roundtable. (Participants will be asked to review the templates, ask questions, and sign
the consent forms. A copy of a consent form, unsigned, will be offered to each
participant. Some will want a copy, others will not, but the evaluation team will always
offer to provide one).
▪ Please ensure that all members of the focus group respond to the following:
o Specify your position and your level of seniority
o Present your organization / department / section (since the focus group roundtable will
include cross stakeholder groups)
o Present your links to the UNPF and/or to partnership arrangements (if applicable).
▪ Name tags will be distributed for the FGD/roundtable (first names only) for face to face sessions.
▪ Basic guidelines will be provided for the focus group/roundtable. These will be reviewed with
participants and posted for everyone to see. These guidelines will include the following:
Final Evaluation Report 122
o If you feel uncomfortable during the meeting, you have the right to leave or to pass on
any question. There is no consequence for leaving. Being here is voluntary.
o Keep personal stories “in the room”; do not share other participants’ information or
what anybody else said outside of the focus group/roundtable.
o Everyone’s ideas should be respected.
o One person talks at a time please…Everyone has the right to talk. (The facilitator(s) may
ask someone who is talking a lot to step back and give others a chance to talk and may
ask a person who isn’t talking if he or she has anything to share).
o Everybody has the right to pass on a question.
▪ Participants should know that evaluators will be taking notes about what is discussed, but that
individual names or identifying information will not be attached to comments.
▪ At the end of the process all those participating will be thanked and told how important their
participation has been to the evaluation being conducted.
If you have questions about the evaluation, or to obtain more information, ask questions about the
research procedures, express concerns about your participation, or report illness, injury or other
problems, please contact UN Lao PDR: banthida.komphasouk@un.org
Agreement: Unless you say otherwise prior to beginning the interviews, our understanding will be that
you agree to participate in the evaluation of the Lao PDR UNPF as described above.
Signature of key informant _________________________________ Date ____________________
Name of key informant ____________________________________
Signature of witness _______________________________________ Date ___________________
Name of witness __________________________________________
Relationship between witness and key informant __________________________________
Evaluation Questions and Responses:
Especially in mixed groups, the facilitator(s) should take pains to ensure that views of all stakeholders
participating in the focus group are considered:
This includes gender equity sensitivities and other intersectional matters (e.g., ethnic minorities).
All have a right to have their unique perspective heard.
The questions below are partly from the Terms of Reference and partly probes or questions added to
explore with the participants several issues discovered during data gathering.
Final Evaluation Report 123
Relevance:
20. Has the UN System supported achievement of national development goals and targets in
alignment to relevant national plans and frameworks for Lao PDR’s 8th NSEDP?
20.1. Has the UN system paid proper attention to regional and cross-border issues of importance,
e.g., ASEAN, Mekong and other cross border issues of importance?
– Responses
21. To what extent did the UNPF foster synergies among agencies and involve concerted efforts to
optimize results and avoid duplication?
2.1. COVID 19? (Related issues with respect to e.g., health, economic well-being, human security, etc.)
– Responses
22. Has the UN system remained responsive to emerging and unforeseen needs of Lao PDR and its
people?
– Responses
23. To what extent has interagency cooperation and collaboration with other entities facilitated or
hampered the achievement of results?
– 4.1 Using an assessment of the evaluation criteria, how has the UNCT contributed to national
development results in Lao?
– Responses
Perception of relevance according to the focus group interviewed:
Negative ☐
Neutral ☐
Positive ☐
Final Evaluation Report 124
Effectiveness:
24. To what extent has the UN system promoted or supported policies consistent with each other and
across sectors, given the multi-sectorial nature of economic development?
5.1 Have UN policies been used effectively as partnership tools?
Responses
25. Has the cooperation framework strengthened the position, credibility and reliability of the UN
system as a partner for government and other relevant actors?
Responses
26. To what extent has interagency cooperation and collaboration with other entities facilitated or
hampered the achievement of results?
– Perception of effectiveness according to the focus group interviewed:
– Negative – ☐
– Neutral – ☐
– Positive ☐ – ☐
– Perception of Quality of Services and Referral according to the focus group interviewed:
– Negative – ☐
– Neutral – ☐
– Positive – ☐
Efficiency:
Final Evaluation Report 125
7. Has the Cooperation Framework reduced transaction costs for partners? 7.1 What factors
have affected UNAFPs working together to achieve the UNPF strategic intent and principles?
7.2 What factors have affected the UNCT support and contributions through the UNPF
highlighting good practices and bottlenecks?
7.3 To what extent has the UNPF outcomes related to Human Development been achieved?
7.4 To what extent has the UNPF outcomes related to Inclusive Growth, Livelihoods and
Resilience been achieved?
7.5 To what extent has the UNPF achieved outcomes related to Governance, Rule of Law and
Participation in National Decision-Making been achieved?
– Responses
8. Was the Cooperation Framework supported by integrated funding framework and by
adequate funding instruments?
8.1 What were the performance, progress or gaps in the UNPF support to national goals and
priorities?
– Responses
– Perception of efficiency according to the focus group interviewed:
– Negative – ☐
– Neutral – ☐
– Positive – ☐
Sustainability:
9. Has the UN system support been extended in such a way to build national and local capacities to
ensure long term, sustainable gains?
9.1What other types of partners have been approached to ensure the sustainability, e.g., private
sector?
Final Evaluation Report 126
– Responses
10. To what extent has the UN programming assisted Lao’s government to scaled-up to achieve its
goal of becoming a middle-income country?
10.1 Can the UN continue to be a catalyst?
– Responses
11. To what extent has the UN system helped to support Lao PDR’s journey towards becoming a
sustainable middle-income country?
– Responses
–
Perception of sustainability according to the focus group interviewed:
– Negative – ☐
– Neutral – ☐
– Positive – ☐
– –
Cross-Cutting:
12. Has the UN system’s support been extended in a way that promotes gender equity in Lao PDR?
– 12.1 To what extent did UNPF make use and promote gender equality standards and principles
(e.g., participation, non-discrimination, accountability, etc.) to achieve its goals?
– Responses
13. Has the UN system supported followed the principles of a HRs based approach?
– 13.1 To what extent did UNPF make use of and promote human rights standards and
principles to achieve its goals?
– Responses
Final Evaluation Report 127
14. Has the UN system support been designed and delivered following the programming principles of
environmental sustainability?
– 14.1 To what extent did UNPF effectively use the principles of environmental sustainability to
strengthen its contribution to national development results?
– Responses
15. Have the programming principles of RBM been used to monitor and track results?
15.1To what extent did UNPF make use of programming principles of RBM to monitor and track its
results?
– Responses
16. Has the overall UN program been designed with programming principle of capacity development
at its core?
16.1 To what extent has UNPF been designed with the programming principles of capacity building
at its core?
–
– Responses
–
– Perception of equity and gender according to the focus group interviewed:
– Negative – ☐
– Neutral – ☐
– Positive – ☐
–
Looking Forward:
17. What are the lessons learned that could be identified for informing the planning and decision-
making of the UNSDCF 2022-2026?
– 17.1What specific recommendations should be included in the 2022-2026 UNSDCF?
– Responses
Final Evaluation Report 128
18. Has the current UNPF 2017-2021 contributed to preparedness for emergency situations?
– Responses
–
– Perception of equity and gender according to the focus group interviewed:
– Negative – ☐
– Neutral – ☐
– Positive – ☐
– Conclusion: Lessons Learned and Recommendations
– 19. What are the main lessons (success and failure factors) that you would draw from the work of
implementing the current UNPF in Lao PDR?
– Responses
– R1 26. What are the main recommendations you would make to inform the development of the
next phase and scale up which would avoid making mistakes going forward?
– Responses
Final Evaluation Report 129
SURVEY QUESTIONNAIRE
FOR Government REPRESENTATIVES
EMAIL INVITATION
Subject: Survey for the Evaluation of the “United Nations Partnership Framework - UNPF”
The Lao PDR UN Country Team (UNCT) is currently evaluating its UNPF. The purpose of this evaluation is to
assess the extent to which the UNPF outcomes are aligned and contribute to the national development
priorities set forth in the 8th NSEDP and to determine the extent to which UNPF outcomes have been
attained. As you have been informed in a previous email, the UNPF is presently being evaluated by an
independent evaluation team of consultants employed by Le Groupe-conseil Baastel. As an important
component of this evaluation, our team has prepared this online survey (OLS) for government representatives
working with UNCT agencies.
Our records indicate that your institution was involved with a UN Agency, which is why we are requesting
your participation to an OLS (see below for survey link) administered within the context of the evaluation.
This survey has been prepared and is managed directly by us, at Le Groupe Conseil Baastel. It will take
approximately 10–15 minutes of your time to fill out the OLS questionnaire. We invite you to provide
additional qualitative information to explain and/or detail your responses when you believe it to be relevant
in the available answer boxes.
All your contributions will be strictly confidential and will be highly valuable to help understand the relevance
and the effectiveness of the UNPF as well as to improve them in the future. Your responses will be transferred
to a database accessible solely by the independent evaluator.
We thank you in advance for your help and your responses.
SURVEY INTRODUCTION
Dear Sir or Madam:
Welcome to the online survey (OLS) for the evaluation of the Lao PDR UNPF.
The OLS is designed to provide useful information that will help improve the UNPF as a whole and help
generate constructive recommendations in order to strengthen all UN agencies work in Lao PDR. Your
participation in this OLS is especially important. A summary of the recommendations will be made
available to relevant stakeholders.
We kindly request you to respond to this survey by TBD64. Your insights and responses are greatly
appreciated and are valuable to the success of the UNPF. Your individual feedback will be kept confidential
to Baastel.
This survey has been designed and is managed by Mr. Alexandre Daoust. You may contact Mr. Daoust via
alexandre.daoust@baastel.com if you have any questions on the survey.
64 Date to be determined
Final Evaluation Report 130
We thank you in advance for your valuable contribution to this important evaluation exercise.
Section A: Identification
1. For which institution do you work for? (open-ended questions)
2. With which UN agency have you been working? (please select from list, more than one response possible)
o UNICEF
o WFP
o UNFPA
o UNDP
o ILO
o IOM
o UNHCR
o …
*
Please note all questions will be related to the agency(ies) selected here.
3. What is your current position? (open-ended question)
4. Please specify your gender
Male, Female, Rather not Gender diverse (specify)
5. Are you able to clearly identify activities delivered by the UN agency you work with among those delivered by
other programs?
• Yes
• No
• I don’t know
6. How long have you personally been involved with the UN agency you work with? (open-ended question)
7. When did your institution start receiving support from the UN agency mentioned above? (open-ended
question)
Section B: Relevance
8. How satisfied are you, in general, with the process followed for the identification and planning of the UN
agency activities?
• Very satisfied
• Somewhat satisfied
• Somewhat unsatisfied
• Very unsatisfied
9. To what extent is the UN approach aligned with the approach of your institution?
Final Evaluation Report 131
• Very aligned
• Aligned
• Misaligned
• Very misaligned
• N/A Do not know
Please provide comments, details or explanations related to your answer:
10. To what extent has the UN’s actions and support been aligned with your institutional plans and frameworks
for Lao PDR’s 8th NSEDP?
• Very aligned
• Aligned
• Misaligned
• Very misaligned
• N/A Do not know
Please provide comments, details or explanations related to your answer:
Section C: Effectiveness
11. (If worked with multiple agencies) To what extent do you consider the UN agencies you have worked with
have coordinated their efforts?
• A lot of coordination
• Some coordination
• Minimal coordination
• No coordination
Please provide comments, details or explanations related to your answer:
12. To what extent do you consider that during the last five years, the UN has enhanced its credibility and
reliability for your institution (cross table for the two variables)?
• To a large extent
• To some extent
• To a small extent
• Not at all
Please provide comments, details or explanations related to your answer:
13. In your opinion, to what extent has the UN advanced the establishment of partnerships between national and
regional counterparts, civil society, and/or the private sector?
• To a large extent
• To some extent
• To a small extent
Final Evaluation Report 132
• Not at all
• I do not know
Please describe these partnerships:
14. To what extent has interagency cooperation and collaboration with other entities enhanced the possibility of
achieving joint results with your institution (cross table for the two variables)?
• To a large extent
• To some extent
• To a small extent
• Not at all
Please provide comments, details or explanations related to your answer:
15. To what extent has the UN contributed to increasing coordination among national/ regional institutions and
organizations (cross table for the two variables)?
• To a large extent
• To some extent
• To a small extent
• Not at all
Please provide comments, details or explanations related to your answer:
Section D: Efficiency
18. How satisfied are you with the human, knowledge and material resources made available by the UN to achieve
the joint results (cross table for the two variables)?
• Very satisfied
• Somewhat satisfied
• Somewhat unsatisfied
• Very unsatisfied
Please provide comments, details or explanations related to your answer:
19. How satisfied are you with the timeliness with which UN activities were delivered?
• Very satisfied
• Somewhat satisfied
• Somewhat unsatisfied
• Very unsatisfied
Please provide comments, details or explanations related to your answer (e.g. challenges or constraints that
affected the timeliness implementation):
Final Evaluation Report 133
Section E: Sustainability
22. How satisfied are you with the involvement of your institution in UN’s planning and implementation process?
• Very satisfied
• Somewhat satisfied
• Somewhat unsatisfied
• Very unsatisfied
Please provide comments, details or explanations related to your answer:
23. To what extent has the UN programming assisted Lao’s government to scaled-up to achieve its goal of
becoming a middle-income country?
• To a large extent
• To some extent
• To a small extent
• Not at all
Please provide comments, details or explanations related to your answer:
Cross-cutting Principles
24. To what extent has the UN system’s support been extended in a way that promotes gender equity, human
rights, environmental sustainability, RBM use in Lao PDR (cross table for the two variables)?
• To a large extent
• To some extent
• To a small extent
• Not at all
• I do not know
Please describe these partnerships:
FOR UN Agencies
Section A: Identification
1. For which UN agency have you been working? (please select from list)
o UNICEF
o WFP
o UNFPA
o UNDP
o ILO
o IOM
o UNHCR
Final Evaluation Report 134
*
Please note all questions will be related to the agency(ies) selected here.
2. What is your current position? (open-ended question)
3. With which national and regional institutions and organizations do you work with? (Open ended question)
4. Please specify your gender
Male, Female, Rather not say Gender diverse (specify)
5. How long have you been working for the UN agency? (open-ended question)
Section B: Relevance
6. To what extent is the process followed for the identification and planning of the UN agency activities
participative (with national and regional institutions and organizations – cross table)?
• To a large extent
• To some extent
• To a small extent
• Not at all
Please provide comments, details or explanations related to your answer:
7. To what extent is the UN approach aligned with the approach of national and regional institutions and
organizations (Cross table)?
• Very aligned
• Aligned
• Misaligned
• Very misaligned
• N/A Do not know
Please provide comments, details or explanations related to your answer:
8. To what extent has the UN’s actions and support been aligned with your institutional plans and frameworks
for Lao PDR’s 8th NSEDP?
• Very aligned
• Aligned
• Misaligned
• Very misaligned
• N/A Do not know
Please provide comments, details or explanations related to your answer:
Section C: Effectiveness
11. To what extent do you consider the UN agencies have coordinated their efforts to support the country towards
achieving SDGs?
• A lot of coordination
• Some coordination
Final Evaluation Report 135
• Minimal coordination
• No coordination
Please provide comments, details or explanations related to your answer:
12. To what extent do you consider that during the last five years, the UN has enhanced its position, credibility,
and reliability for your institution (cross table for the three variables)?
• To a large extent
• To some extent
• To a small extent
• Not at all
Please provide comments, details or explanations related to your answer:
13. In your opinion, to what extent has the UN advanced the establishment of partnerships between national and
regional counterparts, civil society, and/or the private sector?
• To a large extent
• To some extent
• To a small extent
• Not at all
• I do not know
Please describe these partnerships:
14. To what extent has UN interagency cooperation and collaboration with other entities enhanced the possibility
of reaching SDGs targets (cross table for the two variables)?
• To a large extent
• To some extent
• To a small extent
• Not at all
Please provide comments, details or explanations related to your answer:
15. To what extent has the UN contributed to increasing coordination among national/ regional institutions and
organizations (cross table for the two variables)?
• To a large extent
• To some extent
• To a small extent
• Not at all
Please provide comments, details or explanations related to your answer:
Section D: Efficiency
Final Evaluation Report 136
18. How satisfied are you with the human, knowledge and material resources made available by the UN to reach
SDG targets (cross table for the two variables)?
• Very satisfied
• Somewhat satisfied
• Somewhat unsatisfied
• Very unsatisfied
Please provide comments, details or explanations related to your answer:
19. How satisfied are you with the timeliness with which UN activities were delivered?
• Very satisfied
• Somewhat satisfied
• Somewhat unsatisfied
• Very unsatisfied
Please provide comments, details or explanations related to your answer (e.g. challenges or constraints that
affected the timeliness implementation):
Section E: Sustainability
22. How satisfied are you with the participation of national and regional institutions and organizations in UN’s
planning and implementation process (cross table for all variables type of organizations)?
• Very satisfied
• Somewhat satisfied
• Somewhat unsatisfied
• Very unsatisfied
Please provide comments, details or explanations related to your answer:
23. To what extent has the UN programming assisted Lao’s government to scaled-up to achieve its goal of
becoming a middle-income country?
• To a large extent
• To some extent
• To a small extent
• Not at all
Please provide comments, details or explanations related to your answer:
Cross-cutting Principles
24. To what extent has the UN system’s support been extended in a way that promotes gender equity, human
rights, environmental sustainability, RBM use in Lao PDR (cross table for the two variables)?
• To a large extent
• To some extent
• To a small extent
• Not at all
Final Evaluation Report 137
• I do not know
Please describe these partnerships:
For Development partners
Section A: Identification
1. For which institution do you work for? (open-ended questions)
2. With which UN agency have you been working? (please select from list, more than one response
possible)
o UNICEF
o WFP
o UNFPA
o UNDP
o ILO
o IOM
o UNHCR
o …
*
Please note all questions will be related to the agency(ies) selected here. If more than one agency,
question on coherence to be prompted
3. What is your current position? (open-ended question)
4. Please specify your gender
Male, Female, Rather not say Gender diverse (specify)
5. Are you able to clearly identify activities delivered by the UN agency you work with among those
delivered by other programs?
• Yes
• No
• I don’t know
6. How long have you personally been involved with the UN agency you work with? (open-ended
question)
7. When did your institution start partnership with the UN agency mentioned above? (open-ended
question)
Section B: Relevance
8. How satisfied are you, in general, with the process followed for the identification and planning of the
UN agency activities?
Final Evaluation Report 138
• Very satisfied
• Somewhat satisfied
• Somewhat unsatisfied
• Very unsatisfied
9. To what extent is the UN approach aligned with the approach of your institution?
• Very aligned
• Aligned
• Misaligned
• Very misaligned
• N/A Do not know
Please provide comments, details or explanations related to your answer:
10. To what extent has the UN’s actions and support been aligned with your institutional plans and
frameworks for Lao PDR’s 8th NSEDP?
• Very aligned
• Aligned
• Misaligned
• Very misaligned
• N/A Do not know
Please provide comments, details or explanations related to your answer:
Section C: Effectiveness
11. (If worked with multiple agencies) To what extent do you consider the UN agencies you have worked
with have coordinated their efforts?
• A lot of coordination
• Some coordination
• Minimal coordination
• No coordination
Please provide comments, details or explanations related to your answer:
12. To what extent do you consider that UN complements well in the sectors that your organization is
involved in?
• To a large extent
• To some extent
• To a small extent
• Not at all
• N/A Do not know
Please provide comments, details or explanations related to your answer:
13. To what extent do you consider that UN in Lao PDR has the mandate, capacity and positioning in
the following thematic area: Inclusive Growth, Livelihoods and Social Protection; Climate Change;
Final Evaluation Report 139
Disaster Management and Environment; Basic Education, Health, Water and Sanitation; Food Security
and Nutrition; Institution building and Access to Justice (cross table for the variables)
• To a large extent
• To some extent
• To a small extent
• Not at all
Please provide comments, details or explanations related to your answer:
14. To what extent do you consider that during the last five years, the UN has enhanced its credibility
and reliability for your institution (cross table for the two variables)?
• To a large extent
• To some extent
• To a small extent
• Not at all
Please provide comments, details or explanations related to your answer:
15. For which of the following does your organization view UN in Lao PDR as an important partner:
(please select from list, more than one response possible)
• Normative framework
• Convening power
• Monitoring of SDGs
• Policy Advice
• Capacity building
• Organizing development discourse
• Networks
16. To what extent does your organization view UN in Lao PDR as an important partner for: 1. its
normative framework 2. convening power 3. monitoring of SDGs 4. policy advice 5. capacity building 6.
organizing development discourse 7. Networks (cross table for the variables)
• To a large extent
• To some extent
• To a small extent
• Not at all
Please provide comments, details or explanations related to your answer:
17. In your opinion, to what extent has the UN advanced the establishment of partnerships between
national and regional counterparts, civil society, and/or the private sector?
• To a large extent
• To some extent
• To a small extent
Final Evaluation Report 140
• Not at all
• I do not know
Please describe these partnerships:
18. To what extent has interagency cooperation and collaboration with other entities enhanced the
possibility of achieving joint results with your institution (cross table for the two variables)?
• To a large extent
• To some extent
• To a small extent
• Not at all
Please provide comments, details or explanations related to your answer:
19. To what extent has the UN contributed to increasing coordination among national/ regional
institutions and organizations (cross table for the two variables)?
• To a large extent
• To some extent
• To a small extent
• Not at all
Please provide comments, details or explanations related to your answer:
Section D: Efficiency
20. How satisfied are you with the human, knowledge and material resources made available by the UN
to achieve the joint results (cross table for the two variables)?
• Very satisfied
• Somewhat satisfied
• Somewhat unsatisfied
• Very unsatisfied
Please provide comments, details or explanations related to your answer:
21. How satisfied are you with the timeliness with which UN activities were delivered?
• Very satisfied
• Somewhat satisfied
• Somewhat unsatisfied
• Very unsatisfied
Please provide comments, details or explanations related to your answer (e.g. challenges or constraints that
affected the timeliness implementation):
Section E: Sustainability
Final Evaluation Report 141
22. How satisfied are you with the involvement of your institution in UN’s planning and implementation
process?
• Very satisfied
• Somewhat satisfied
• Somewhat unsatisfied
• Very unsatisfied
Please provide comments, details or explanations related to your answer:
23. To what extent has the UN programming assisted Lao’s government to scaled-up to achieve its goal
of becoming a middle-income country?
• To a large extent
• To some extent
• To a small extent
• Not at all
Please provide comments, details or explanations related to your answer:
24. In your opinion, what should UN in Lao PDR do more in next 5 years?
25. In your opinion, what should UN in Lao PDR do less in next 5 years?
26. In your opinion what can UN in Lao PDR do to best support the Government in accelerating SDG
progress?
27. In your opinion what can UN in Lao PDR do to support your organization towards SDGs / national
development goals?
Cross-cutting Principles
28. To what extent has the UN system’s support been extended in a way that promotes gender equity,
human rights, environmental sustainability, RBM use in Lao PDR (cross table for the two variables)?
• To a large extent
• To some extent
• To a small extent
• Not at all
• I do not know
Please describe these partnerships:
Final Evaluation Report 142
ANNEX 4: UNPF STAKEHOLDERS
Table 1: UN Mapping and number of supported projects
No Agency # projects OC 1 OC 2 OC 3 OC 4 OC 5 OC 6 OC 7 OC 8 JSC RGs
1 FAO 36 1 13 1 4 17 x
2 IAEA 15 1 4 7 3
3 IFAD 4 4
4 ILO 7 4 1 1 1
5 IOM 12 4 3 2 1 2
6 ITC 4 4
7 UN-Habitat 9 6 2 1 x
8 UN Women 3 2 1
9 UNAIDS 1 1
10 UNCDF 4 2 1 1
11 UNCITRAL 3 3
12 UNDP 38 9 20 5 4 x x
13 UNEP 5 5
14 UNESCO 8 1 2 3 2
15 UNFPA 5 1 1 3 x x
16 UNICEF 15 1 1 2 4 1 4 2 x x
17 UNIDO 4 3 1
18 UNODC 10 1 1 8
19 UNOPS 7 1 5 1
20 WFP 4 1 1 1 1 x x
21 WHO 5 5 x
22 UNV 1 1
23 UNDRR 4 4
24 UNESCAP 6 6
Total 210 27 8 58 10 29 37 20 21
Source: UN project V1 and compiled by ETTable 2-A: Government Mapping
Final Evaluation Report 143
UNPF UNFPA CP WFP CP UNDP CP FAO CP
List of Partners - UNPF 2017-2021
OC 1 OC 2 OC 3 OC 4 OC 5 OC 6 OC 7 OC 8 JSC RG on going on going on going Planned
Government
1 Ministry of Planning and Investment x x x x x x x x x
2 Ministry of Labour and Social Welfare x x x x x x x x
3 Ministry of Health x x x x x x x x x
4 Ministry of Education and Sports x x x x x x x
5 Ministry of Natural Resources and Environment x x x x x x
6 Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry x x x x x x x
7 Ministry of Public Works and Transport x x
8 Ministry of Home Affairs x x x x x
9 Ministry of Finance x x
10 Ministry of Justice x x x
11 Ministry of Foreign Affairs x x x x
12 Ministry of Public Security x
13 Bank of Lao PDR x
The National Commission for the Advancement of
14 x x
Women, Mothers and Children
15 Lao Federation of Trade Unions x x x
16 Lao Women’s Union x x x x x x
17 Office of Supreme People's Prosecutor x
18 People's Supreme Court x
Lao National Chamber of Commerce and
19 x x x x
Industry (LNCCI)
20 State Audit x
21 Ministry of Industry and Commerce x
22 Ministry of Energy and Mines
23 Ministry of Information and Culture
24 Ministry of Science and Technology
25 National Assembly
26 Lao Youth Union x
Table 2 - B: Government Mapping (at department level)
Final Evaluation Report 144
Ministries/Govt.
Department UN partners
agencies
Dept of Skills Development and Employment IOM
National Regulatory Authority for Mine/UXO in Lao PDR (NRA) UNDP
Lao Social Security Organization ILO
MOLSW
Disaster Management Dept. UNDRR
Dept. of Labour Management ILO/IOM
Dept. of Social Welfare IOM/UNDP/UNDRR
Dept. of International Cooperation UN
Dept. of Planning UNFPA
MPI Dept. of Investment Promotion UNDP
Center for Development Policy (CDR) UNFPA/UNICEF
Lao Statistics Bureau UNFPA/UNICEF
MOFA Dept. of International Organization UN/DESA/IOM
Dept. of Planning and Cooperation IFAD/FAO
Dept. of Agriculture ITC
Dept. of Forestry UNDP/FAO
MAF
National Agriculture and Forestry Research Institute (NAFRI), IAEA
Dept. of Livestock and Fisheries IAEA
Dept. of Agricultural Land and Management (DALaM) UN-Habitat
MOJ Dept. of International Cooperation UNDP/UNICEF/UNWOMEN
Dept. of Planning and Cooperation UNFPA/UNICEF/WFP
Centre for HIV/AIDS and STI, UNAIDS
Midwifery schools UNFPA
Dept. of Food and Drug (FDD) UNFPA
MOH
Lao Tropical and Public Health Institute UNFPA
Dept. of Hygiene and Health Promotion IAEA
Dept. of Communicable Disease Control (DCDC) IOM
Dept. of Health Professional Education (DHPE) UNFPA
Final Evaluation Report 145
Dept. of Planning and Cooperation UNFPA/UNICEF/WFP
Dept. of Teacher Training UNESCO/UNFPA
Dept. of Non-Formal Education (DNFE) UNESCO/UNFPA
MOES
Dept. of Technical and Vocational Education UNFPA
Vocational Education Development Institute (VEDI) UNFPA
Dept. of General Education UNFPA
Dept. of Climate Change UNDP/FAO/UN-Habitat
Dept. of Water Resources UNDP
Dept. of Planning and Finance
MONRE Dept. of Mereology and Hydrology
Dept. of Disaster Management and Climate Change (DDMCC) UNEP
Natural Resources and Environment Statistic and Research Institute UNIDO
Pollution Control and Monitoring Dept. UNIDO
MOHA Dept. of Planning and Cooperation UNDP/UNCDF
Dept. of Housing and Urban Planning (DHUP) UN-Habitat
MPWT
Dept. of Water Supply (DWS UN-Habitat
Dept. of Planning and Cooperation ITC/UNCITRAL
MOICom
Dept. Industry and Handicraft UNIDO
MOF Customs Dept. UNODC/UNOPS
Institute of Renewable Energy Promotion (IREP) UNDP
MEM Renewable Energy Research Institute IAEA
Renewable Energy and New Materials Institute IAEA
Heritage Dept. UNESCO
MOIC (info.)
Mass Media Dept. UNDP
The Dept. of Immigration IOM
MOPS Office of the Supreme People’s Prosecutor (OSPP) IOM
Laos Police Force UNIDO
BOL Financial Institution Dept. UNCDF
Dept. of Planning and Cooperation UNDP/UNFPA/UNWOMEN/WPF
LWU
Counselling and Protection Centre for Women and Children’ IOM
Final Evaluation Report 146
LYU Dept. of Planning and Cooperation UNFPA/UNESCO
Lao Federation of Trade Unions ILO
NCAWMC UNFPA
LNCCI UNDP/ILO/ITC
National Assembly UNDP
Lao National Commission for Drug Control and Supervision (LCDC) UNODC
State Inspection and Anti-Corruption Authority UNODC
The People's Supreme Court UNICEF
The People's Supreme Prosecutor UNICEF/IOM
Secretariat to the National Committee on Anti-Trafficking in Persons IOM
Provincial Government - (Attapeu province)
Source: UN stakeholder and project mapping_NOV2020; UNFPA CP 6 Data Collection Itinerary_30Oct20; UNDP CP Evaluation_IR_Sep 2020; WFP draft field data
collection 13/09/20. Note: Survey was sent to all partners in the list
Final Evaluation Report 147
Table 3: Other Partners Mapping
UNFPA UNDP
UNPF
CP WFP CP CP FAO CP
List of Partners - UNPF 2017-2021
on on
JSC on going Planned
OC 1 OC 2 OC 3 OC 4 OC 5 OC 6 OC 7 OC 8 going going
Other Partners
1 ADB x x x x
2 World Bank x x x x x x x x
3 Australia DFAT/Australian Embassy x x x x x
4 European Union x x x x x x x x
5 Japan International Cooperation Agency x x x x x x
6 Luxembourg Government x x x x
7 Korea Internal Cooperation x x x x
8 Swiss Development Cooperation x x x
9 USAID x x x x
10 Global Fund x
11 Gavi x
12 Southeast Asian Ministers of Education organization x
13 Korea Foundation for International Health care x
Commission on Information and Accountability
14 x
for Women’s and Children’s Health
15 CARE International x x x
16 Oxfam x x
17 Save the Children x x x
18 Plan International x x x x
19 World Vision x x
20 Child Fund x
21 Catholic Relief Services x x
22 Helvetas x x
23 Village Focus Group x
24 Lao Bar Association x
Note: Survey was sent to all partners in the list
Final Evaluation Report 148
ANNEX 5: LIST OF DOCUMENTS CONSULTED
• ADB Briefs (2020). The impact of Covid-19 on Tourism Enterprises in the Lao People’s
democratic Republic.
• Government of the Lao People’s Democratic Republic (2018). Lao People’s Democratic
Republic: Voluntary National Review on the Implementation of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development. Vientiane, Lao PDR.
• Government of Lao PDR (2020). Draft 2 – the 9th Five-Year National Socio-Economic
Development Plan 2021-2025.
• Government of Lao PDR - United Nations (2020). Draft Background Paper for the Multi-
Stakeholder Taskforce to Study the Impact of COVID-19 to support a Determination of the
9th NSEDP and SDG Localization in Lao PDR – Theme 3: Investing in the Human Capital
of Lao PDR. September 2020
• Government of Lao PDR - United Nations (2015). Lao PDR Evaluation Report United
Nations Development Assistance Framework 2012-2016
• Government of Lao PDR - United Nations (2016). Partnership Framework 2017-2021 A
Partnership for Sustainable Development. Vientiane, Lao PDR.
• Government of Lao PDR - United Nations (2018). 2017 Annual Progress Report -
Partnership Framework 2017-2021 A Partnership for Sustainable Development. Vientiane,
Lao PDR.
• Government of Lao PDR - United Nations (2019). 2018 Annual Progress Report -
Partnership Framework 2017-2021 A Partnership for Sustainable Development. Vientiane,
Lao PDR.
• Government of Lao PDR (2018). The Post-Disaster Needs Assessment 2018 Floods, Lao
PDR
• Government of Lao PDR - United Nations (2020). Draft 2019 Annual Progress Report -
Partnership Framework 2017-2021 A Partnership for Sustainable Development. Vientiane,
Lao PDR.
• IMF (2019). Lao PDR Staff Report for the 2019 Article IV Consultation.
• Lao Statistics Bureau, Ministry of Planning and Investment (2020). Highlight result of 6th
Lao Consumption and Expenditure Survey (LECS VI), 2018/2019. Vientiane, Lao PDR.
• Lao Statistics Bureau (2018). Lao Social Indicators Survey II 2017, Survey Findings Report.
• Ministry of Justice (2009). Master Plan on Development of Rule of Law toward 2020
https://www.la.undp.org/content/dam/laopdr/docs/Reports%20and%20publications/2018/L
SMP__Sep_2009_.pdf
• Ministry of Planning and Investment (n.d.). Pre-Final Draft Mid-Term Review of the Eight
National Socio-Economic Development Plan 2016-2020.
• MAF/DOF (2018). The Lao PDR’s Forest Reference Emission Level and Forest Reference
Level for REDD+ Results Payment under the UNFCCC
• Ministry of Education and Sports (2019). Education and Sports Sector Performance Annual
Report 2018-2019
• MONRE (2020). Draft Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC)
• Ministry of Planning and Investment/LSB (2020). Highlight result of 6th Lao Consumption
and Expenditure Survey (LECS VI), 2018/2019. Ministry of Planning and Investment/Lao
Statistics Bureau, Vientiane, Lao PDR.
Final Evaluation Report 149
• OEDC (2020). Education at a Glance 2020. https://read.oecd-
ilibrary.org/education/education-at-a-glance-2020_69096873-en#page263
• United Nations (2017). Monitoring and Evaluation Strategy – UNPF 2017-2021.
• United Nations (2012). Report of the UNSG, “Delivering justice: programme of action to
strengthen the rule of law at the national and international levels”, 16 March 2012, A/66/749.
• United Nations Evaluation Group (2019). Interim Cooperation Framework evaluation
guideline.
• United Nations (2020). Cooperation Framework Companion Package.
• United Nations (2020). Cooperation Framework Companion Package - Consolidated
Annexes
• UN (2020). Draft 2019 Progress Report: Lao PDR-United Nations Partnership Framework
2017-2021
• United Nations Evaluation Group (2016). Norms and Standards for Evaluation.
New York: UNEG.
• UNDDR. Disaster Risk Reduction in Lao PDR. Status Report 2019.
• UNDDR (2019). Summary Report. Workshop on the Understanding the Sendai Framework
in coherence with the SDGs in Lao PDR: Towards the implementation of the national
disaster risk reduction strategy and Sendai Framework Monitoring.
• World Bank (2012). ASEAN Advancing Disaster Risk Financing and Insurance in ASEAN
Member States: Framework and Options for Implementation
• World Bank Group (2016). Nutrition in Lao PDR: Causes, Determinants, and Bottlenecks
• World Bank Group (2016). Lao PDR Health Centre Workforce Survey
• World Bank.2020. Lao PDR Economic monitor: Lao PDR in the time of COVID-19
• World Bank Group (2020). Lao People’s Democratic Republic Poverty Assessment 2020:
Catching up and Falling Behind.
• WFP (2017). Fill the Nutrient Gap Lao PDR.
• https://www.worldbank.org/en/country/lao/overview#1. Consulted on November 4th, 5th
2020
• https://www.worldbank.org/en/news/press-release/2011/08/17/lao-pdr-now-lower-middle-
income-
economy#:~:text=The%20World%20Bank%20has%20raised,estimates%20using%20the
%20Atlas%20method. Consulted on November 4th, 5th 2020
• https://www.fitchratings.com/research/sovereigns/fitch-downgrades-laos-to-ccc-23-
092020#:~:text=Fitch%20Ratings%20%2D%20Hong%20Kong%20%2D%2023,of%20'C
CC'%20or%20below. Consulted on November 5th, 2020
Final Evaluation Report 150
ANNEX 6: LIST OF PEOPLE CONSULTED
No Name Tittle Organization
Government
1. Mr. Kanya Khammoungkhoun Deputy Director General Department of International
Organization, Ministry of Foreign
Affairs
2. Mr. Vanthadaxay Akkharath-Sisane Deputy Director - UN Department of International
Social and Economic Organization, Ministry of Foreign
Affairs Division Affairs
3. Ms. Viengdalat Somphet Technical Officer, UN Department of International
Social and Economic Organization, Ministry of Foreign
Affairs Division Affairs
4. Ms. Sisomboun Ounavong Director General Department of International
Cooperation, Ministry of Planning and
Investment
5. Mr. Sysomphorn Phetdaoheuang Deputy Director General Department of International
Cooperation, Ministry of Planning and
Investment
6. Mr. Alounsith Technical Officer Department of International
Cooperation, Ministry of Planning and
Investment
7. Ms. Sipaphaphone Choulamany Deputy Director of Department of Planning, Ministry of
Division Planning and Investment
8. Mr. Khamphasone Bounthanavong Technical Officer Department of Planning, Ministry of
Planning and Investment
9. Ms. Chanthapany Mahathilath Deputy Director of Department of Administration, Lao
Division Statistics Bureau
10. Ms. Phuangmala Lasasy Deputy Director of Department of Social Statistics, Lao
Division Statistics Bureau
11. Ms. Khamkhounhuan Technical Officer Department of Social Statistics, Lao
Statistics Bureau
12. Mr. Canda Sinpaseuth, Deputy Director - Customs Department, Ministry of
International Cooperation Finance
Division
13. Mr. Bouasavanh Vongbounleua Technical Officer Department of Disaster Management
and Climate Change, Ministry of
Natural Resources and Environment
14. Mr. Amphayvanh Ondomdeth Director of General Affairs Department of Disaster Management
Division and Climate Change, Ministry of
Natural Resources and Environment
15. Mr. Vanxay Bouttanavong Director of Planning Department of Disaster Management
Division and Climate Change, Ministry of
Natural Resources and Environment
Final Evaluation Report 151
No Name Tittle Organization
16. Mr. Bountee Deputy Director Department of Disaster Management
and Climate Change, Ministry of
Natural Resources and Environment
17. Mr. Virasack Chundar Director General Natural Resources and Environment
Statistic and Research Institute,
Ministry of Natural Resources and
Environment
18. Mr. Oulaphone Ongkeo Director of the Modeling Natural Resources and Environment
Division Statistic and Research Institute,
Ministry of Natural Resources and
Environment
19. Mr. Vilayphong Sisomvang Director General Department of Social Welfare
Department/ Secretariat of NDMC,
Ministry of Labour and Social Welfare
20. Mr. Bounsouan Xaiyasinh, Director of Employment Department of Skill Development and
Promotion Division Employment, Ministry of Labour and
Social Welfare
21. Ms. Bouasy Thammasack Director, Polices and Department of Skill Development and
Planning Division Employment, Ministry of Labour and
Social Welfare
22. Mr. Vanthieng Phommasalin Director Department of Agriculture, Ministry of
Agriculture and Forestry
23. Mr. Bouapha Bounkhamphone Deputy Director Department of Agriculture, Ministry of
Agriculture and Forestry
24. Mr. Phomma Souliyasith Department of Agriculture, Ministry of
Technical officer Agriculture and Forestry
25. Ms. Thatsamaly Saphongthong Department of Agriculture, Ministry of
Acting Director Agriculture and Forestry
26. Ms. Phonethip Sommany Department of Agriculture, Ministry of
Director Agriculture and Forestry
27. Ms. Yatkeo Phoumidalyvanh Department of Agriculture, Ministry of
Deputy Director Agriculture and Forestry
28. Mr. Phanisone Samountry Deputy Director - Department of Planning and Finance,
International Cooperation Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry
Division
29. Mr. Kynong Keopaseuth Deputy Director - Department of Planning and Finance,
Planning Division Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry
30. Dr. Mr. Phouthone Southalack Director National Center for HIV/AIDS and STI
31. Dr. Ms. Vanvilay Saphabmixay Deputy Director of National Center for HIV/AIDS and STI
Administration Division
32. Dr. Ms. Souphanthong Manichanh Deputy Director of National Center for HIV/AIDS and STI
Administration Division
33. Dr. Mr. Bounlerd Vilayhong Director of Administration National Center for HIV/AIDS and STI
Division
Final Evaluation Report 152
No Name Tittle Organization
34. Dr. Ms. Ketmala Banchongpanith Director of MAS Division National Center for HIV/AIDS and STI
35. Mr. Phetphonechay Sinlaphakit (PhD) Deputy Director General Department of Housing and Urban
Planning, Ministry of Public Works and
Transport
36. Mr. Sengdara Duangmixay Director of Division Department of Housing and Urban
Planning, Ministry of Public Works and
Transport
37. Mr. Lonchanh Yangjubulom Deputy Director of Department of Housing and Urban
Division Planning, Ministry of Public Works and
Transport
38. Mr. Vongxay Phanthavong, Deputy Secretary General Commission for Drug Control and
Supervision, Ministry of Public Security
39. Mr. Khamnoi Xaybounheung, Director of Division Commission for Drug Control and
Supervision, Ministry of Public Security
40. Mr. Khamsudchay Phengsamphanh Director of Division Commission for Drug Control and
Supervision, Ministry of Public Security
41. Ms. Phetsakhone Duangthongsouk Domestic Coordination The Department of Immigration,
and International Ministry of Public Security
Cooperation Division
42. Ms. Soudalak Phounsavanh, Deputy Director Counselling and Protection Centre for
Women and Children, Lao Women’s
Union
43. Ms. Manivone Somleudy Technical Officer Counselling and Protection Centre for
Women and Children, Lao Women’s
Union
44. Ms. Vilayvanh Keopasert Deputy Director General Department of Planning and
International Cooperation, Lao
Women’s Union
45. Ms. Chanhsom Vongthongkham Director of Division Department of Planning and
International Cooperation, Lao
Women’s Union
46. Mr. Chantho Milattanapheng Director General Institute of Renewable Energy
Promotion, Ministry of Energy and
Mines
47. Mr. Sermkham Thummavongsa (PhD) Deputy Director General Institute of Renewable Energy
Promotion, Ministry of Energy and
Mines
48. Mr. Vithayaphone Phiouon Technical Officer and Institute of Renewable Energy
International Cooperation Promotion, Ministry of Energy and
Coordinator, Executive Mines
Information Division.
49. Mr. Somfong Soulivanh Deputy Director General Department of Industry and Handicraft,
Ministry of Industry and Commerce
50. Mr. Kinon Kunvisith Director of Division Department of Industry and Handicraft,
Ministry of Industry and Commerce
Final Evaluation Report 153
No Name Tittle Organization
51. Mr. Khamsonvanh Phutdavong Deputy Director General Department of Planning and
Cooperation, Ministry of Industry and
Commerce
52. Mr. Sounakhone Keoviengkham Director General Attapeu Provincial Planning and
Investment Department
UN
53. Ms. Sara Sekkenes UN Resident Coordinator UN RCO
54. Mr. Matthew Johnson-Idan Senior Economist UN RCO
55. Ms. Lin Yang Head of RC Office UN RCO
56. Ms. Banthida Komphasouk Data Management and UN RCO
Result Monitoring/
Reporting Officer
57. Mr. Nasar Hayat Representative FAO
58. Mr. Aleksandar Nikolovski Chief Technical Officer FAO
59. Ms. Yee Un Program Support Officer FAO
60. Mr. Soulivanh Pattivong Country Programme IFAD
Officer
61. Ms. Anne-Katrin Pfister Senior Programme ITC, Vienna
Coordinator
62. Mr. Thongdeng Silakoune Country Manager UNAIDS
63. Ms. Ricarda Rieger Resident Representative UNDP
64. Ms. Mariam Khan Representative UNFPA
65. Ms. Siriphone Sally Sakulku Sexual and Reproductive UNFPA
Health Programme
Coordinator
66. Mr. Oloth Sene-Asa National Programme UNFPA
Analyst, Sexual and
Reproductive Health
67. Ms. Sisouvanh Vorabouth , Gender Programme UNFPA
Analyst
68. Mr. Avi Sarkar Regional Advisor, South UN-Habitat
East Asia
69. Ms. Pia Rebello Britto Representative UNICEF
70. Dr. Ms. Annemarie Schuller Tot UN Joint Programme UNICEF
Peursum Coordinator
71. Ms. Leotes Helin Chief of Education Section UNICEF
72. Mr. Sommai Faming Country Representative UNIDO
73. Mr. Erlend Audunson Falch Programme Manager and UNODC
Officer-in-Charge
UNODC Country Office
74. Mr. Jan Delbaere Country Director and WFP
Representative
Final Evaluation Report 154
No Name Tittle Organization
75. Dr. Mark Jacobs Representative WHO
76. Dr Yu Lee Park HSD Technical Officer WHO
77. Mr. Paul Martin Regional Technical UNCDF
Advisor, ASEAN & Pacific
Local Development
Practice
78. Mr. Graeme Buckley Regional Director ILO, Bangkok
79. Mr. Charles Davies Programme Management UN DESA, New York
Expert
80. Dr. Benno Böer Chief, Natural Science UNESCO Bangkok
Unit
81. Ms. Ushio Miura Programme Specialist, UNESCO Bangkok
Future of Learning,
Section for Educational
Innovation and Skills
Development
82. Mr. Ichiro Miyazawa Programme Specialist, Life UNESCO Bangkok
long Learning
83. Ms. Nantawan Hinds Programme Specialist, UNESCO Bangkok
Education
84. Ms. Kamonrat Chayamarit Programme Specialist UNESCO Bangkok
85. Mr. Nyi Nyi Thaung Programme Specialist, UNESCO Bangkok
Education
86. Ms. Shareen Tuladhar Chief of Mission IOM
87. Ms. Zena Van Bemmel-Faulkner Head of Office (to June IOM
2020)
Development Partners
88. Mr. Rattanatay Luanglatbandith Public Management ADB
Specialist
89. Mr. Ignacio Colina – Cruz Programme Manager EU
90. Dr. Chansy Phimphacanh Deputy Chair Lao CSO Coordination Committee
(LCCC)
91. Mr. Viengakhone Souiyou Head of Lao PDR CSO Lao PDR CSO Coordination Office
Coordination Office
92. Mr. Michael Ronning Country Representative USAID
93. Ms. Silavanh Vongphosy Project Management USAID
Specialist – Governance
and Vulnerable
Populations
94. Mr. Nicolas Tasch Attaché Grand Duchy of Luxembourg Embassy
95. Mr. Khamphy Khammavong Active Citizenship and OXFAM
Gender Justice
Programme Manager
Final Evaluation Report 155
No Name Tittle Organization
96. Ms. Chaipasird Phunphouvanna Gender Justice OXFAM
Programme Coordinator
97. Ms. Yen Mai INGOs Coordinator INGO Network
98. Mr. Viengsamay Vongkhamsao Country Director PSI Laos
99. Mr. Soumya Brata Guha Country Director Plan International Laos
100. Ms. Viengsamay Srithirath Senior Country Officer World Bank
101. Mr. Phouthaphone Vorabouth Program Officer Japan International Cooperation
Agency
102. Ms. Anna Dyason First Secretary, Education Australia DFAT/Australian Embassy
and Governance
103. Ms. Bounmy Souvannalath Senior Program Officer Australia DFAT/Australian Embassy
104. Mr. Christian Engler – (SDC) Deputy Director of Swiss Development Cooperation
Cooperation for the
Mekong Region
Final Evaluation Report 156
ANNEX 7: LIST OF ORGANIZATIONS CONSULTED
UN
# of KIIs
Status GOV. Dept.s
# of KIIs
Status Other Partners
# of KIIs
Status
requested requested requested
RC 1 Done Dept of Skills Development and Employment 1 Done ADB 1 Done
FAO 1 Done
MOLSW
Disaster Management Dept. 1 Done Australia DFAT/Australian Embassy 1 Done
IFAD 1 Done Dept. of International Cooperation 1 Done European Union 1 Done
MPI 1 Done
Japan International Cooperation
ILO 1 Done Dept. of Planning Agency 1 Done
IOM 1 Done Lao Statistics Bureau 1 Done Korea Internal Cooperation Agency 1 Declined
ITC 1 Done MOFA Dept. of International Organization 1 Done Luxembourg Government 1 Done
UN Habitat 1 Done Dept. of Planning and Cooperation 1 Done Swiss Development Cooperation 1 Done
UNAIDS 1 Done
MAF
Dept. of Agriculture 1 Done USAID 1 Done
UNCDF 1 Done MOH Centre for HIV/AIDS and STI, 1 Done World Bank 1 Done
MONRE Dept. of Disaster Management and Climate 1 Done CSO Network Coordinator and their
UNDP 1 Done Change (DDMCC) members 1 Done
Natural Resources and Environment Statistic and
1 Done
INGO Network Coordinator and their
UNESCO 1 Done Research Institute members 1 Done
UNFPA 1 Done MPWT Dept. of Housing and Urban Planning (DHUP) 1 Done Oxfam 1 Done
UNICEF 1 Done MOIC Dept. of Planning and Cooperation 1 Done Village Focus Group 1 Declined
UNIDO 1 Done Dept. Industry and Handicraft 1 Done Total 13 11
UNODC 1 Done MOF Customs Dept. 1 Done
WFP 1 Done MEM Renewable Energy Research Institute 1 Done
WHO 1 Done MOPS The Dept. of Immigration 1 Done
LWU Dept. Planning and Cooperation and Counselling 1 Done
UNDESA 1 Done and Protection Centre for Women and Children’
Total 18 18 Lao National Commission for Drug Control and Supervision 1 Done
inputs
Provincial Government/DPI - (Attapeu province) 1 provided
in writing
Total 20 19
Final Evaluation Report 157
ANNEX 8: SURVEY RESULTS
Three online surveys were carried out as part of the evaluation of UNPF in Lao PDR conducted by Le
Groupe-conseil Baastel Itée. Online survey aims to gather the views of a wide range of stakeholders that
have been involved in the UNPF, in order to obtain insights and inform lessons that can feed into the next
UNPF. Each survey was adapted and sent respectively to government representatives (an audience of 85
persons), UN agencies representatives (an audience of 23 persons) and development partners (an
audience of 14 persons). The response rate was 26% for the government representatives survey, 57% for
the UN agencies survey, and 14% for the development partners survey. Results of the development
partners have not been analysed since only one (1) questionnaire out of two was fully completed.
Government UN Agencies Survey Development
representatives partners
survey survey
Population 85 23 14
Emails sent 85 23 14
Questionnaire 8 8 2
filled through
email
Questionnaire 14 5 0
filled through the
anonymous link
Total of 22 13 2
responses
Response rate 26 % 57% 14%
Relevance
Government representatives
Government representatives’point of views are very positive regarding the alignement of UN’s actions
and support with government entities approach and their plans and frameworks for Lao PDR’s 8th NSEDP.
In fact, government representatives think that UN’s actions and support are very aligned ( 25%) and
aligned (75%) with their institutional plans and frameworks for Lao PDR’s 8th NSED. 17% of government
representatives state that the UN is very aligned with the appraoch of their institution while 83% state
that it is aligned.
Final Evaluation Report 158
Government representatives view
To what extent has the UN’s actions and support been
aligned with your institutional plans and frameworks for Lao 25% 75%
PDR’s 8th NSEDP?
To what extent is the UN approach aligned with the
17% 83%
approach of your institution?
Very aligned Aligned Misaligned Very misaligned Do not know
58% of government representatives are very satisfied with the process followed for the identification
and planning of UN Agency activities that include national and governmental institutions. 33 % of
government representatives are somewhat satisfied. 8% are somewhat unsatisfied.
Government representatives view
How satisfied are you, in general, with the process
followed for the identification and planning of the UN
58% 33% 8%
agency activities that include national and
governmental institutions
Very satisfied Somewhat satisfied Somewhat unsatisfied Very satisfied Do not know
UN Agencies
When it comes to the alignment of UN’s actions and support with governments institutional plans and
framework for Lao PDR’s 8th NSEDP, 50 % of UN Agencies representatives state that they are very
aligned, 33% think they are aligned and 17% do not know.
For the alignment of UN approach with the approach of NGO, 67 % of UN agencies representatives do
not know while 33% think they are aligned.
Final Evaluation Report 159
Concerning the alignment of UN Approach with the approach of regional institutions, 17 % UN agencies
representatives state that they are very aligned. For 58%, they are aligned while 8% think that they are
misaligned and 17% do not know.
When it comes to the alignment of UN approach with the approach of national institutions, 58% of UN
agencies representatives think they are very aligned. For 25% they are aligned while 17% do not know.
UN Agencies representatives view
To what extent has the UN’s actions and support been
50% 33% 17%
aligned with governments institutional plans and …
To what extent is the UN approach aligned with the
33% 67%
approach of non governmental organizations ?
To what extent is the UN approach aligned with the
17% 58% 8% 17%
approach of regional institutions ?
To what extent is the UN approach aligned with the
58% 25% 17%
approach of national institutions ?
Very aligned Aligned Misaligned Very misaligned Do not know
To the question related to the inclusion of:
- NGO in the process followed for the identification and planning of the UN Agency activities
o 8% of UN Agencies representatives answer that they were included to a large extent
o 33 % state they were included to some extend
o 17% think they were included to a small extent
o 42% do not know.
- Regional institutions in the process followed for the identification and planning of the UN
Agency activities
o 25% of UN Agencies representatives answer that they were included to a large extent
o 33 % state they were included to some extent
o 17% think they were included to a small extent
o 17% state that they were not included at all.
o 8% do not know
- National institutions in the process followed for the identification and planning of the UN
Agency activities
o 50% of UN Agencies representatives answer that they were included to a large extent
o 8% state they were included to some extent
o 17% think they were included to a small extent
o 8% state that they were not included at all.
o 17% do not know
Final Evaluation Report 160
UN Agencies representatives view
To what extent has the process followed for the
identification and planning of the UN agency activities 8% 33% 17% 0% 42%
included non-governmental organizations?
To what extent has the process followed for the
identification and planning of the UN agency activities 25% 33% 17% 17% 8%
included regional institutions?
To what extent has the process followed for the
identification and planning of the UN agency activities 50% 8% 17% 8% 17%
included national institutions?
To a large extent To some extent To a small extent Not at all I Do not Know
Effectiveness
Government representatives
For 50% of government representatives, there is a lot of coordination between the UN agencies they
have worked with. 40% state that some coordination has been done. For 10%, there was minimal
coordination.
Government representatives view
To what extent do you consider the UN agencies you
50% 40% 10%
have worked with have coordinated their efforts?
A lot of coordination Some coordination Minimal Coordination No Coordination
According to 60% of government representatives, UN has enhanced its reliability to a large extent for
government institution since 2017. For 30%, UN has enhanced its reliability to some extent while for 10
% UN reliability has been enhanced to a small extent.
According to 50% of government representatives, UN has enhanced its credibility to a large extent for
government institution since 2017. For 40%, UN has enhanced its credibility to some extent while for 10
% UN credibility has been enhanced to a small extent.
Final Evaluation Report 161
Government representatives view
To what extent do you consider that since 2017, the UN
60% 30% 10%
has enhanced its reliability for your institution?
To what extent do you consider that since 2017, the UN
50% 40% 10%
has enhanced its credibility for your institution?
To a large extent To some extent To a small extent Not at all
When it comes to the extent of which UN advanced the establishment of partnership between:
- Private sector:
o 10% of government representatives answer that it has advanced to a large extent
o 50% state it has advanced to some extent
o 30% think it has advanced to a small extent
o 10% do not know.
- NGO:
o 20% of government representatives answer that it has advanced to a large extent
o 50 % state it has advanced to some extent
o 20% think it has advanced to a small extent
o 10% do not know
- Regional institution:
o 30% of government representatives answer that it has advanced to a large extent
o 60 % state it has advanced to some extent
o 10% do not know
- National institutions
o 40% of government representatives answer that it has advanced to a large extent
o 50 % state it has advanced to some extent
o 10% do not know
Final Evaluation Report 162
Government representatives view
To what extent has the UN advanced the establishment of
10% 50% 30% 10%
partnerships between Private sector?
To what extent has the UN advanced the establishment of
20% 50% 20% 10%
partnerships between NGO?
To what extent has the UN advanced the establishment of
30% 60% 10%
partnerships between Regional institution ?
To what extent has the UN advanced the establishment of
40% 50% 10%
partnerships between National institutions?
To a large extent To some extent To a small extent Not at all Do not Know
Government representative’s opinion about interagency cooperation and collaboration with other
entities are incredibly positive. For 30% of government representatives, interagency cooperation with
other entities has enhanced to a large extent the possibility of achieving joint results with government
institutions. For 70% it has enhanced it to some extent.
When it comes to interagency coordination, 50 % of government representatives think that it has
enhanced to a large extent the possibility of achieving joint results with government institutions. 50%
state it has enhanced it to some extent.
To what extent has interagency cooperation and collaboration with other
entities enhanced the possibility of achieving joint results with your
institution?
Government representatives opinion
Cooperation 30% 70%
Coordination 50% 50%
To a large extent To some extent To a small extent Not at all
UN Agencies
For 30% of UN Agencies representatives, there is a lot of coordination between the UN agencies to
support the country towards achieving SDGs. 50% state that some coordination has been done. For 20%,
there was minimal coordination.
Final Evaluation Report 163
UN Agencies representatives view
To what extent do you consider the UN agencies have
coordinated their efforts to support the country towards 30% 50% 20%
achieving SDGs?
A lot of coordination Some ccordination Minimal Coordination No Coordination
According to 30% of UN agencies representatives, UN has enhanced its reliability to a large extent within
their agency since 2017. For 60%, UN has enhanced its reliability to some extent while for 10 % UN
reliability has been enhanced to a small extent.
According to 40% of UN agencies representatives, UN has enhanced its credibility to a large extent
within their agency since 2017. For 50%, UN has enhanced its credibility to some extent while for 10 %
UN credibility has been enhanced to a small extent.
According to 30% of UN agencies representatives, UN has enhanced its position to a large extent within
their agency since 2017. For 70%, UN has enhanced its position to some extent.
UN Agencies representatives view
To what extent do you consider that since 2017, the UN has
30% 60% 10%
enhanced its reliability for your institution ?
To what extent do you consider that since 2017, the UN has
40% 50% 10%
enhanced its credibility for your institution?
To what extent do you consider that since 2017, the UN has
30% 70%
enhanced its position for your institution ?
To a large extent To some extent To a small extent Not at all I Do not Know
When it comes to the extent of which UN advanced the establishment of partnership between:
- Private sector:
o 10% of UN agencies representatives answer that it has advanced to a large extent
Final Evaluation Report 164
o 40% state it has advanced to some extent
o 50% think it has advanced to a small extent
- NGO:
o 60% of UN Agencies representatives answer that it has advanced to some extent
o 10% think it has advanced to a small extent
o 30% do not know
- Regional institution:
o 10% of UN Agencies representatives answer that it has advanced to a large extent
o 70 % state it has advanced to some extent
o 10% think it has advanced to a small extent
o 10% do not know
- National institutions
o 50% of UN Agencies representatives answer that it has advanced to a large extent
o 40 % state it has advanced to some extent
o 10% think it has advanced to a small extent
UN Agencies representatives view
To what extent has the UN advanced the establishment of
10% 40% 50%
partnerships between private sector?
To what extent has the UN advanced the establishment of
60% 10% 30%
partnerships between NGO?
To what extent has the UN advanced the establishment of
10% 70% 10% 10%
partnerships between regional institutions?
To what extent has the UN advanced the establishment of
50% 40% 10%
partnerships between national institutions?
To a large extent To some extent To a small extent Not at all I Do not Know
When it comes to UN contribution to increasing coordination among
- NGO:
o 50% of UN Agencies representatives answer that it has increased to some extent
o 30% think it has increased to a small extent
o 20% do not know
- Regional institution:
o 10% of UN Agencies representatives answer that it has increased to a large extent
o 70 % state it has increased to some extent
o 10% think it has increased to a small extent
o 10% think it has not increased at all
Final Evaluation Report 165
- National institutions
o 30% of UN Agencies representatives answer that it has increased to a large extent
o 60 % state it has increased to some extent
o 10% think it has increased to a small extent
When it comes to UN interagency cooperation and collaboration with other entities, 40 % of UN
agencies representatives think that it has enhanced to a large extent the possibility of reaching SDGs
targets. 50% state it has enhanced it to some extent. For 10% of UN agencies representatives, it has
enhanced it to a small extent.
UN Agencies representative view
To what extent has the UN contributed to increasing
50% 30% 20%
coordination among NGOs ?
10%
To what extent has the UN contributed to increasing
10% 70% 10%
coordination among regional institutions ? -
To what extent has the UN contributed to increasing
30% 60% 10%
coordination among national institutions ? -
To what extent has UN interagency cooperation and
collaboration with other entities enhanced the possibility 40% 50% 10%
of reaching SDGs targets?
To a large extent To some extent To a small extent Not at all I Do not Know
Efficiency
Government representatives
30% of Government representatives are very satisfied with the timeliness with which UN activities were
delivered. 70% are somewhat satisfied.
When it comes to material resources made available by the UN to achieve the joint results, 30 % of
government representatives were very satisfied; 50% were somewhat satisfied while 20% were
somewhat unsatisfied.
Regarding the knowledge resources made available by the UN to achieve the joint results, 50 % of
government representatives were very satisfied and 50% were somewhat satisfied.
For the human resources made available by the UN to achieve the joint results, 40 % of government
representatives were very satisfied and 60% were somewhat satisfied.
Final Evaluation Report 166
Government representatives view
How satisfied are you with the timeliness with which UN
30% 70%
activities were delivered?
How satisfied are you with material resources made
30% 50% 20%
available by the UN to achieve the joint results? -
How satisfied are you with the knowledge resources made
50% 50%
available by the UN to achieve the joint results? -
How satisfied are you with the human resources made
40% 60%
available by the UN to achieve the joint results? -
Very satisfied Somewhat satisfied Somewhat unsatisfied Very unsatisfied
UN Agencies
When it comes to material resources made available by the UN to reach SDG targets, 50 % of UN
agencies representatives are satisfied; 38% are dissatisfied while 13% do not know.
Regarding the knowledge resources made available by the UN to reach SDG targets, 75% of UN agencies
representatives are satisfied and 25% are dissatisfied.
When it comes to financial resources made available by the UN to reach SDG targets, 38 % of UN
agencies representatives are satisfied; 50% are dissatisfied while 13% are very dissatisfied.
For the human resources made available by the UN to reach SDG targets, 63 % of UN agencies
representatives are satisfied and 38% are dissatisfied.
63% of UN agencies representatives are satisfied with the timeliness with which UN activities were
delivered. 25% are dissatisfied while 13% do not know.
Final Evaluation Report 167
UN Agencies representatives view
How satisfied are you with the material resources made
50% 38% 13%
available by the UN to reach SDG targets?
How satisfied are you with the knowledge resources made
75% 25%
available by the UN to reach SDG targets?
13%
How satisfied are you with the financial resources made
38% 50%
available by the UN to reach SDG targets?
How satisfied are you with the human resources made
63% 38%
available by the UN to reach SDG targets?
How satisfied are you with the timeliness with which UN
63% 25% 13%
activities were delivered?
Very satisfied Satisfied Dissatisfied Very dissatisfied I Do not Know
Sustainability
Government representatives
33% of government representatives are very satisfied with the involvement of their institution in UN’s
planning and implementation process. 67% of government representatives are somewhat satisfied.
How satisfied are you with the involvement of your
institution in UN’s planning and implementation 33% 67%
process?
Very satisfied Somewhat satisfied Somewhat unsatisfied Very unsatisfied
33% of government representatives state that UN programming has assisted to a large extent Lao’s
government to scaled-up to achieve its goal of becoming an upper middle-income country. For 67% of
government representatives, it has assisted to some extent.
Final Evaluation Report 168
To what extent has the UN programming assisted
Lao’s government to scaled-up to achieve its goal of 33% 67%
becoming a upper middle-income country?
To a large extent To some extent To a small extent Not at all Do not Know
UN Agencies
25% of UN Agencies representatives state that UN programming has assisted to a large extent Lao’s
government to scaled-up to achieve its goal of becoming a middle-income country. For 50% of UN
Agencies representatives, it has assisted to some extent. According to 13% of representatives, it has
assisted to a small extent. 13% do not know.
UN Agencies representatives view
To what extent has the UN programming assisted Lao’s
government to scaled-up to achieve its goal of 25% 50% 13% 13%
becoming a middle-income country?
To a large extent To some extent To a small extent Not at all I Do not Know
When it comes to the participation of NGO in UN’s planning and implementation process, 25% of UN
agencies representatives are satisfied, 50% are dissatisfied, 13% are very dissatisfied and 13% do not
know.
Final Evaluation Report 169
Concerning the participation of regional institutions in UN’s planning and implementation process, 13%
of UN agencies representatives are very satisfied, 50% are satisfied, 25% are dissatisfied and 13% are
very dissatisfied.
Regarding the participation of national institutions in UN’s planning and implementation process, 25% of
UN agencies representatives are very satisfied, 63% are satisfied, 13% are dissatisfied.
UN Agencies representatives view
How satisfied are you with the participation of NGO in
25% 50% 13% 13%
UN’s planning and implementation process?
How satisfied are you with the participation of regional
13% 50% 25% 13%
institutions in UN’s planning and implementation process?
How satisfied are you with the participation of national
25% 63% 13%
institutions in UN’s planning and implementation process?
Very satisfied Satisfied Dissatisfied Very dissatisfied I Do not Know
Cross-cutting Principles
Government representatives
When it comes to the extent of which the UN system’s support has been extended in a way that
promotes:
- RBM use in Lao PDR
o 44% of government representatives answer that it has been extended to a large extent
o 44% % think it has been extended to some extent
o 11% do not know
- Sustainability in Lao PDR
o 56% of government representatives answer that it has been extended to a large extent
o 33% think it has been extended to some extent
o 11% do not know
- Human rights use in Lao PDR
o 67% of government representatives answer that it has been extended to a large extent
o 22% % think it has been extended to some extent
o 11% do not know
Final Evaluation Report 170
- Gender equity in Lao PDR
o 67% of government representatives answer that it has been extended to a large extent
o 22% % think it has been extended to some extent
o 11% state it has been extended to a small extent
To what extent has the UN system’s support been extended
44% 44% 11%
in a way that promotes RBM use in Laos?
To what extent has the UN system’s support been extended
56% 33% 11%
in a way that promotes environmental sustainability in Laos?
To what extent has the UN system’s support been extended
67% 22% 11%
in a way that human rights use in Laos?
To what extent has the UN system’s support been extended
67% 22% 11%
in a way that promotes gender equity in Laos?
To a large extent To some extent To a small extent Not at all Do not Know
UN Agencies
When it comes to the extent of which the UN system’s support has been extended in a way that
promotes:
- RBM use in Lao PDR
o 25% of UN agencies representatives answer that it has been extended to a large extent
o 50% % think it has been extended to some extent
o 13% state it has been extended to a small extent
o 13% state that it has not been extended at all
- Sustainability in Lao PDR
o 25% of UN agencies representatives answer that it has been extended to a large extent
o 25% think it has been extended to some extent
o 25% state it has been extended to a small extent
o 13% state it has not been extended at all
o 13% do not know at all
- Human rights use in Lao PDR
o 50% of UN agencies representatives answer that it has been extended to a large extent
o 38% % think it has been extended to some extent
o 13% do not know
- Gender equity in Lao PDR
o 50% of UN agencies representatives answer that it has been extended to a large extent
o 25% % think it has been extended to some extent
Final Evaluation Report 171
o 13% state it has been extended to a small extent
o 13% do not know
UN Agencies representatives view
To what extent has the UN system’s support been extended
25% 50% 13% 13%
in a way that promotes RBM use in Laos ?
13%
To what extent has the UN system’s support been extended
in a way that promotes environmental sustainability in Laos 25% 25% 25% 13%
?
To what extent has the UN system’s support been extended
50% 38% 13%
in a way that promotes human rights in Laos ?
To what extent has the UN system’s support been extended
50% 25% 13% 13%
in a way that promotes gender equity in Laos ?
To a large extent To some extent To a small extent Not at all Do not Know
Final Evaluation Report 172
ANNEX 9 : TERMS OF REFERENCE
Final Evaluation Report 173
Final Evaluation Report 174
Final Evaluation Report 175
Final Evaluation Report 176
Final Evaluation Report 177
Final Evaluation Report 178
North American Office European Office
Le Groupe-conseil Baastel ltée Le Groupe-conseil Baastel srl
92, rue Montcalm Boulevard Adolphe Max 55
Gatineau (Québec) B-1000 Brussels
Canada, J8X2L7 Belgium
P: +1 819 595 1421 P: +32 (0)2 893 0032
F: +1 819 595 8586 F: +32 (0)2 503 3183
Representation France Representation Jamaica
Olivier Beucher & Gaetan Quesne Curline Beckford
T: +33 7 82 92 44 98 P: +1 876 298 6545
E: olivier.beucher@baastel.com E: curline.beckford@baastel.com
gaetan.quesne@baastel.com