Real-Time Evaluation (RTE) of the COVID-19 Response in Sao
Tome and Principe (February-November 2020)
Country Report
December 2020: A doctor looks at her notes before examining a pregnant woman Health
Center in Praia Gamboa (@UNICEF/2020)
Evaluation Commissioned by the UNICEF Country Office in Sao Tome
and Principe
Evaluator: Patricia Carvalho
January 2021
Foreword
This real-time evaluation (RTE) covers the response of UNICEF and other national partners to COVID-19
in Sao Tome e Principe. It is part of a regional evaluation exercise involving several countries in all
UNICEF regions. The five other Country Offices (COs) involved include Côte d'Ivoire, Gabon, Democratic
Republic of Congo, Chad and Mauritania.
The rationale for this exercise is twofold: (i) to take stock and initiate joint reflection by development
partners on the prospects for adapting approaches and interventions on the ground to the evolving
crisis and (ii) to use the lessons learned and good practices thus identified to inform the response to the
pandemic in the future as outlined in the HAC cycle and multi-sectoral work plans.) The UNICEF West
and Central Africa Regional Office (WCARO) has legitimate expectations to better fulfill its role in
overseeing the implementation of the PB response to COVID-19.
This evaluation was conducted by a national consultant, Ms. Patricia Carvalho. The evaluator would like
to thank all those who supported them during their data collection and questionnaire administration
activities in a particularly difficult context, marked by the early stages of the second wave of the
pandemic.
The consultants would like to make special mention of the UNICEF Representative and Country Office
colleagues who provided essential support to the mission by supplying all the necessary documentation
and answering all their questions clearly and promptly.
1
List of acronyms
AFD - Agence Française de Développement
CNES - Centro Nacional de Educação para a Saúde
CO – Country Office
CPD - Country Programme Document
EMOPS - Office of Emergency Programmes
GBV - Gender Based Violence
GPE - Global Partnership for Education
IMF - International Monetary Fund
INE – Instituto Nacional de Estatistica
IPC - Infection Prevention and Control
PPE - Personal Protective Equipment
RRCCE - Risk Communication and Community Engagement
RTE - Real Time Evaluation
SEIA - Socioeconomic Impact Assessment
SERP - Socioeconomic Response Plan
SRP - Strategic Response Plan
TVS - Televisão Santomense
UN - United Nations
UN - United Nations
UNDP - United Nations Development Programme
UNFPA - United Nations Population Fund
WASH - Water, Sanitation and Hygiene
WCARO - UNICEF Regional Office for West and Central Africa
WFP - World Food Program
WHO - World Health Organization
2
Table of Contents
1. Introduction .............................................................................................................. 8
2. Evaluation Purpose .................................................................................................... 9
3. Evaluation Objectives ................................................................................................ 9
4. Evaluation Scope ..................................................................................................... 10
5. Evaluation Criteria and Questions ............................................................................ 10
6. Evaluation Methodology .......................................................................................... 12
7. Key Findings (by criterion) ....................................................................................... 12
7.1 Adaptability .................................................................................................................. 12
7.2 Effectiveness of the UNICEF Response ................................................................... 16
7.3 Quality ...................................................................................................................... 21
8 Emerging Themes/Conclusions ................................................................................ 25
9 Gender Equality and Women’s Empowerment .......................................................... 27
10 Lessons Learned ..................................................................................................... 29
11 Recommendations .................................................................................................. 30
12 Annexes .................................................................................................................. 31
3
Executive Summary
1. Evaluation Object
This report presents the findings, conclusions and recommendations of the real-time evaluation (RTE)
focusing on the COVID-19 response mounted by UNICEF and its country partners in Sao Tome e Principe.
During the last nine months of the year 2020, Sao Tome e Principe, like the rest of the world, was
confronted with the COVID-19 pandemic with peaks of cases in June and December. Since then, it has
been facing the negative repercussions of this situation on socio-economic life, especially for the most
affected groups: women and children. In response, the Government and its partners have implemented
a multisectoral response plan. UNICEF-supported interventions focused on the areas of
health/nutrition, infection prevention/control/WASH, child protection, education/distance learning and
risk communication/community engagement. In order to better understand the achievements of the
response to this date and as a way to identify strategically and operationally relevant lessons learned
that could help improve the response in the coming months, UNICEF – in collaboration with the
Government of Sao Tome- commissioned an independent evaluation of the strategies and interventions
rolled out to curb the egregious effects of the pandemic. The evaluation was conducted by a Lusophone
evaluation consultant between November 2020 and January 2021.
2. Evaluation Purpose and Objectives
The RTE aims to promote a forward-looking reflection and generate strategically and operationally
relevant learning on the current implementation of the UNICEF response to COVID-19, specifically in
Sao Tome and Principe in this case. This is expected, among others, to: (i) improve the adaptations of
the response based on both the populations’ emerging needs and changes in context; and (ii) increase
the quality and effectiveness of the response on the ground
The main RTE objectives are to identify:
• “The effects that the COVID-19 pandemic had on basic services, particularly for the most
vulnerable population and of activity initiated as a response to COVID-19;
• The implications of the COVID-19 response on UNICEF’s regular/pre-COVID programme
delivery; and the quality of the related delivery; while also providing early insights on the
outcomes achieved”1.
3. Evaluation Scope
In terms of the thematic scope, the RTE mainly focused on the UNICEF’s public health response and the
early stages of the socio-economic response. Geographically, this evaluation looked at the COVID-19
response implemented at the national level. While the program document review and the interviews
with the key actors of the response at the central level focused on the whole country, the field data
collection took place in the two purposefully selected districts of Água Grande and Caué2.
Chronologically, the evaluation focused on all the response activities implemented between February
and November 2020.
4. Evaluation Criteria
1 Terms of Reference, RTA COVID19, Sao Tome and Principe, September 2020.
2 The selection of the districts was supported by the country office and based on the fact that Água Grande is the most central and wealthiest
district, while Caué is one of the most remote districts and with the highest levels of poverty in the country.
4
In line with its learning purpose and the evaluation strategy of the response to COVID-19 in the rest of
the region, the evaluation was guided by the three following criteria: adaptability, effectiveness and
efficiency of implementation; and quality. Although these criteria are not the OECD-DAC criteria, their
content de facto overlaps with that of some OCED-DAC criteria. The relevance of the selected
evaluation criteria is all the greater as they were agreed upon in a participatory manner by UNICEF and
the other evaluation’s expected users, namely the Ministry of Health and other line ministries with a
vested interest in the COVID-19 response, as well as the other development partners.
5.Methodology
The RTE relied on a mixed-methods approach consisting in a simultaneous and converging use of
qualitative and quantitative data collection and analysis methods. The data collection methods included
a short survey monkey questionnaire aimed at all UNICEF Country Offices in the region, including the
one in STP; semi-structured interviews at the national level with UNICEF CO staff members, and other
key informants, namely governmental partners and media and communication partners; semi-
structured interviews and focus groups discussions at the sub-national level with frontline workers,
professors, school directors, health staff members and health community agents, and community
members based in the districts of Água Grande and Caué. WASH infrastructures were also observed in
the visited schools in Água Grande and Caué. Furthermore, a child-focused method (Body Mapping) was
used with small groups adolescents and youth people in some of the schools visited during the field
work, in order to explore their experiences with COVID-19 and understand what changes (if any) the
pandemic had on their lives and those of other children in their respective communities (see annex 5.1
for complete list of interviews and focus groups carried out).
5. Findings and Conclusions
In response to the COVID-19 outbreak, the UNICEF Country Office (CO) in STP implemented a host of
interventions, both at the national and local level, that aimed at curbing the negative socio-economic
impacts that the epidemic was observed to be producing on the lives of many children and caregivers
in STP. In the education sector, for instance,
UNICEF made a specific effort to ensure the
continuity of education services, by also
adapting its strategies to the evolving COVID-
19 context, be through the production of
distance learning programs on radio and TV or
the reopening of schools at the conditions
that hand-washing points as well as
psychosocial support for school teachers and
directors be made available. Likewise, in the
health sector, the response focused on
ensuring the continued provision of essential
health services, especially for women and
children, through the supply of vaccines, Figure 1. A doctor is a about to examine a pregnant woman to
follow up with her pregnancy in the Health Centre of Praia
medicines, HIV tests and nutritional
Gamboa.(@UNICEF/2020)
supplements for pre- and post-natal care. On
the Risk Communication and Community Engagement (RCCE) front, the STP government developed a
communication plan and led the dissemination of key COVID prevention messages amongst all families
and communities nationwide through different communication channels, such as radio, TV, social
5
media, and door-to-door sensitization sessions, in partnership with Centro Nacional de Educação para
a Saúde (CNES).
While the UNICEF Sitrep data shows that the RCCE-
related targets were fully achieved, those of the
Water, Sanitation and Hygiene (WASH) and Infection
Prevention and Control (IPC) pillars were not.
Likewise, targets were only partially achieved in
relation to the continuity of provision of health care
for women and children; the access to continuous
education and, lastly, the provision of child protection
and Gender Based Violence (GBV) services.
Beyond the varying degree of achievements of the
response depending on the sector, one thing is clear:
Figure 1.. A young girl collects water on a public tap in
UNICEF worked profusely with a variety of response
Roça Diogo Vaz (@UNICEF/2020)
implementing partners across the country to ensure
the equity of their interventions. In particular, UNICEF worked hard to focus the response on the
prevention and mitigation of the secondary impacts of the pandemic amongst the most vulnerable
population groups (boys, girls, adolescents and their caregivers), mainly in the areas of education, WASH
and social protection.
The design of UNICEF-supported activities implemented as part of the COVID-19 response responded
to the country’s needs. The UNICEF response plan, for instance, was based on the orientations received
from the UN and the information collected during its consultations with the governmental partners,
mainly the Ministry of Health. The response was also aligned with the 2020 WHO Global Strategic
Response Plan (SRP) and the 2020 UNICEF COVID-2019 Humanitarian Action for Children (HAC) appeal,
which identified a list of key pillars for the response. That said, no contingency plan was developed by
the Country Office or the UN office in the country at any point. Moreover, the lack of prior experience
amongst the Country Office staff in dealing with a humanitarian crisis and the lack of training on
emergency response procedures represented a challenge during the response planning process.
Although no specific studies were conducted on the national impact of COVID-19 at the onset of the
crisis, the CO worked closely with national partners to ensure that their interventions be based on an
adequate needs and risk assessment. The signalling of street children and adolescents in Sao Tome is a
good illustration of that.
The UNICEF response to COVID-19 allowed the country to learn more about how to respond to a crisis
response and led to capacity development in this area. Learning opportunities included the piloting of
new emergency response models and approaches, especially in new areas that were not a priority
before, such as distance learning.
However, two key challenges were observed during the implementation of the response: the lack of
monitoring capacity, which would have been useful to track the effectiveness of the response
interventions over time (mostly in schools); and the excessive time required to procure essential
supplies during both the preparedness and response phases. The lack of specialized technical support
to strengthen some of the sectoral response programs; and the lower-than-expected NGOs capacity in
6
the field to respond to the emergency, were some additional factors hindering the successful
attainment of the response envisaged results.
One of the evaluation conclusions is that the positive impact of the COVID-19 response on the lives of
children and their communities can be enhanced through a closer field monitoring of the health sector
and schools’ needs. In this vein, the provision of protective gears and sanitation materials and
equipment for health professionals; as well as the organization of COVID-19 awareness programmes in
schools, is particularly desirable. Likewise, the identification of other relevant negative impacts of the
epidemic (such as increased violence against children, sexual abuse, early pregnancy) and the
implementation of mitigation measures are particularly important.
6. Lessons Learned
The main lessons learned by the CO include the following: (i) having a contingency plan developed in
timely manner proves to be a pre-condition for mounting an effective emergency response; (ii)
disposing of resources to monitor the progress of the response against its envisaged targets is key to
adjusting the course of action and enhancing the impact on the ground; (iii) good relationships and
constant dialogue with the national partners facilitate both planning and implementation of an
emergency response; (iv) prepositioning critical supplies allows a more effective and timely response to
emergency and yet predictable needs; (v) the diversification of implementing partners in an emergency
can hugely affect the timeliness of an emergency response; (vi) evaluating the communication strategy
and its reach of an emergency response is relevant to combat misinformation and its harmful effects,
and promote behaviour change; (vii) promoting ongoing data collection and digitization of information
is very important to be able to take informed decisions for the emergency response; (viii) close field
monitoring of response interventions ensures that prevention measures are being implemented and
correctly enforced at the local level.
7. Recommendations
The main action points for the strengthening of the COVID-19 in the future at the CO level, which were
discussed by the UNICEF CO in Sao Tome and its relevant in-country partners and which will serve as
the basis for the development of the management response, include the following: (i) To improve data
collection in the different health, education and social protection sectors to inform response; (ii) To
scale up the prevention measures and sensitization already put in place in the education sector; (iii) To
introduce an emergency preparedness and a contingency plan into Country Program Documents (CDPs)
and workplans; (iv) To strengthen the CO’s internal capacity in emergency management; (v) To
strengthen the social protection work, through better identification of the most vulnerable children,
that are especially affected during the pandemic; (vii) To conduct more rapid evaluations of each
sectoral program (with a focus on results and process) in order to better understand what the next steps
of the response should be; (viii) To find alternatives for supplies that comes from abroad, through the
procurement of local goods and the recruitment of in-country consultants/resource persons.
Some action points for both the CO and the country and the Regional Offices include: (i) To increase CO
capacity for monitoring of COVID indicators through the provision of further tools and training that
would allow for better sectoral monitoring ; and (ii) To support the CO in identifying mechanisms for
pre-positioning of supplies to facilitate the emergency response.
A more detailed description of the recommendations could be found in the corresponding section
included in the main body of the report.
7
1. Introduction
After the outbreak of COVID-19 in Sao Tome and Principe in early 2020, the UNICEF Country Office
committed to contributing to the national response to prevent the pandemic, in alignment with the UN joint
multi-sectoral COVID-19 response strategy and the national Ministry of Health contingency plan. The
objective of such support was to minimize the humanitarian consequences of the pandemic, by
implementing a two-pronged strategy:
1. Addressing the emerging health care needs, implementing a new risk communication strategy and
providing the affected population groups with better access to WASH services in the immediate
term. Overall, against a total population of approximately 200,000 people, STP has recorded 1142
confirmed cases of COVID-19 with 17 deaths3 and 995 recovered cases between March 2020 and
January 2021.
2. Mitigate the socio-economic impacts of the pandemic in the medium and long term. With respect
to this last point, it is worth noting that, according to the International Monetary Fund (IMF), the
COVID-19 pandemic had a severe impact on the economy of São Tomé and Príncipe, with GDP
dropping 6% in 2020 due to weak external demand and containment measures4. It is worth noting
that the island is highly dependent on external aid and is currently experiencing disruption of
economic and social activities, such as tourism.
More specifically, the UNICEF contribution to the COVID-19 response in Sao Tome and Principe included the
following interventions in different sectors: (i) supporting the Ministry of Health with the provision of
protective equipment; (ii) supporting the Ministry of Education in the installation of handwashing facilities
in schools; (iii) providing technical and financial assistance to enhance the effectiveness and coverage of the
response; (iv) contributing to the development and dissemination of a national communication strategy
focusing on COVID-19 prevention messages aimed at all families and communities within the country.
UNICEF was not the only UN agency to response to the pandemic. The United Nations System as a whole,
through the UN Joint Multi-Sectoral Response to COVID-19 Strategy, has been rather instrumental in
supporting the government to better face this crisis. The UN agencies, namely the United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP), the United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA) and UNICEF, with the
coordination of the World Health Organization (WHO), led interventions in the field of health and
contributed to limiting transmission and reduce morbidity and mortality. In addition, the UN system
supported the mobilization of resources to ensure the implementation of the planned activities to mitigate
socio-economic impact, in partnership with the government.
In order to understand how STP managed to respond to the pandemic, the UNICEF Regional Office for West
and Central Africa (WCARO) commissioned a Real Time Evaluation (RTE) on the UNICEF ongoing COVID-19
response. The RTE, funded by UNICEF’s Office of Emergency Programmes (EMOPS), was launched
simultaneously in 5 other countries in the region (Ivory Coast, Gabon, Mauritania, Democratic Republic of
Congo and Chad) in October 2020.
Not long after the onset of the COVID-19 in STP in March 2020, a state of emergency was declared by the
government on 17th March 2020, enabling the government to take restrictive measures to prevent and
combat the pandemic. The government then prepared a contingency plan that aimed to “(i) reduce the
transmission, mortality, and socio-economic impact of COVID-19 nationwide; and (ii) ensure adequate
protection of both the country’s population and environment5.” The first measures adopted were of
sanitary and preventive nature and aimed at preventing the virus from entering the country. Subsequently,
3 Source: https://covid19.who.int/region/afro/country/st
4Source:https://www.lusa.pt/article/LBs1j_HJCybqlv76YYvSAjMSZM5iuSI1/covid-19-pandemia-atrasou-reformas-em-s%C3%A3o-tom%C3%A9-e-
pr%C3%ADncipe-mas-programa-de-ajuda-%C3%A9-est%C3%A1vel-fmi
5 Terms of Reference, RTA COVID19, Sao Tome and Principe, September 2020.
8
after confirming the existence of the first few positive cases in the country, the focus shifted towards fighting
and controlling the spread of the virus within the country’s population.
Testing capacity and technical skills amongst Ministry of Health staff gradually increased, thanks to the roll
out of ad hoc capacity building activities, the distribution of protection gears for medical teams and, finally,
the installation of a field hospital and PCR tests laboratory in the country’s capital.
Such interventions were all the more needed given the country’s health system is rather weak, with
shortages in both health professionals, and hospital beds6. Furthermore, structural deficiencies in other
response key sectors affected the rapidity and effectiveness of the response (e.g., on the WASH front, the
majority of schools lacked access to water and basic hygiene conditions, just like the majority of the
country’s population7). In addition, some of the other constraints that were identified during the first
months of pandemic and that affected the response included the following: the limited capacity of suppliers
to respond to the increasing demand for medical equipment, testing and prevention and individual
protection materials, as well as the difficulties in transporting the equipment due to border closures.
As of January 2021, low incidence of COVID-19 has been recorded in the country for several months.
2. Evaluation Purpose
The RTE has a distinct purpose: to promote a forward-looking reflection and generate strategically and
operationally relevant learning on the current implementation of the UNICEF response to COVID-19,
specifically in Sao Tome and Principe in this case. This is expected, among others, to: (i) improve the
adaptations of the response based on both the populations’ emerging needs and changes in context; and
(ii) increase the quality and effectiveness of the response on the ground. The learning that this evaluation
is expected to generate aims to inform the decision-making of a variety of users: not only the UNICEF
Country Office (CO) in Sao Tome and Principe (STP) but also the country’s Ministry of Health and other line
ministries with a vested interest in the COVID-19 response, as well as other development partners.
3. Evaluation Objectives
The objectives of the RTE include a rapid assessment of the following:
- “The effects that the COVID-19 pandemic had on basic services, particularly for the most vulnerable
population and of activity initiated as a response to COVID-19;
- The implications of the COVID-19 response on UNICEF’s regular/pre-COVID programme delivery; and
- The quality of the related delivery; while also providing early insights on the outcomes achieved”8.
The RTE identified a few lessons learned during the response, which could also be of benefit to other
countries in the region. Furthermore, the RTE put forward some action points for the UNICEF CO
consideration so as to enhance its contribution to the national COVID-19 response in the short- and
medium-term.
6 UNICEF Sao Tome and Principe Covid-2019 2020 Response Plan.
7 UNICEF Sao Tome and Principe Covid-2019 2020 Response Plan.
8 Terms of Reference, RTA COVID19, Sao Tome and Principe, September 2020.
9
4. Evaluation Scope
4.1. Thematic scope
The RTE mainly focused on the UNICEF’s public health response and the early stages of the socio-economic
response.
4.2. Geographic scope
The RTE looked at the COVID-19 response implemented at the national level. While the program document
review and the interviews with the key actors of the response at the central level focused on the whole
country, the field work concentrated on the two purposefully selected districts of Água Grande and Caué9.
4.3 Chronological scope
The RTE focused on all the response activities implemented between February and November 2020.
5. Evaluation Criteria and Questions
In line with its learning purpose and the evaluation strategy of the response to COVID-19 in the rest of the
region, the evaluation was guided by the three following criteria: adaptability, effectiveness and efficiency
of implementation; and quality. Although these criteria are not the OECD-DAC criteria, their content de
facto overlaps with that of some OCED-DAC criteria (it is the case of the section overarching evaluation
question that ended up covering, among others relevance and equity questions). The relevance of the
selected evaluation criteria is all the greater as they were agreed upon in a participatory manner by UNICEF
and the other evaluation’s expected users, namely the Ministry of Health and other line ministries with a
vested interest in the COVID-19 response, as well as the other development partners.
The evaluation also tried to address four overarching questions spelled out in the ToR (see Annex) that were
jointly developed by the Evaluation Office and the Regional Office as part of the multi-country evaluation of
the COVID-19 response in the West and Central African region (WCAR). Each one of the 4 questions served
as the basis for the development of other specific evaluation sub-questions.
As a result of all the data collection and analysis, evaluation was also tasked with the identification of
emerging conclusions/lessons learned and the formulation of tailored recommendations geared towards
the strengthening of the in-country response to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Three overarching questions
Overarching questions Evaluation Criterion Sub-questions
formally retained
How well is the CO adapting Adaptability ▪ How did the STP CO adapt to the COVID-19 epidemic,
to the needs of the lockdown and remote working?
population, including the ▪ How did it adapt to the needs of the population over
socio-economic impact of time, including the socio-economic impact of the
the pandemic? How have pandemic?
these needs been ▪ To what extent did it adopt new and different
determined in each country? approaches, by filling gaps, and seeking local
solutions?
How effectively is the CO Effectiveness and ▪ Effectiveness of the UNICEF response to COVID-19 in
implementing the response Efficiency of the country.
to COVID-19 so far? How is Implementation
9 The selection of the districts was supported by the country office and based on the fact that Água Grande is the most central and wealthiest
district, while Caué is one of the most remote districts and with the highest levels of poverty in the country.
10
the quality of the response to o Extent to which UNICEF has been able to
COVID-19 being affected by contribute to offsetting the negative effects
remote working modalities of the pandemic on access to basic services
and the generally [ensuring coverage and scale-up].
constrained operating
o UNICEF’s success in reaching the most
environment?
vulnerable segments of the population and
ensuring equity.
o How has UNICEF been able to meet
programming standards and protocols?
o To what extent has UNICEF been able to
ensure/sustain community
engagement/AAP mechanisms?
▪ How has the CO utilized preparedness and
contingency planning during COVID-19 response?
▪ To what extent has the CO revised COVID-19 response
plan been based on the population’s evolving needs?
▪ What is known about the needs in the country and
how did UNICEF CO determine and verify these needs?
Quality ▪ What we know about the quality of the UNICEF
response to COVID-19 in the country.
o The effects of the crisis and related
constraints on lockdown and movement
upon UNICEF’s ability to deliver quality.
o How has the UNICEF CO ensured the quality
of the response and put in place processes
and monitoring systems used to ensure
quality?
Two Additional Questions
What are the early lessons (for Emerging ▪ The emerging positives on UNICEF’s performance in
CO/RO/HQ) that are emerging Themes/Conclusions the COVID-19 response in the country.
from the implementation of ▪ The challenges encountered in the country from
the response? What are the UNICEF’s implementation of the COVID-19
emerging positives from the response.
response? and what have been ▪ Medium to long-term implications for vulnerable
the greatest challenges in children and their communities in focal countries,
responding to COVID-19 so far? and implications for UNICEF’s strategy and action in
Are there discernable trends the medium to long term.
that are applicable to different ▪ (Re)focusing UNICEF’s programming to reach
settings (i.e. urban/rural; low- vulnerable children in the medium to long term [e.g.
resource/high-resource to include additional/new opportunities; need to act
settings etc.)? differently or transform, etc).
What more should be done? Lessons/Suggested N/A
What should be done Action Points
differently to enhance COVID-
19 response programming for
children and their
communities?
11
6. Evaluation Methodology
The RTE is a real time exercise using a mixed-methods approach consists in the simultaneous and coverage
use of qualitative and quantitative data collection and analysis methods.. The data collection methods
included a short survey monkey questionnaire aimed at all UNICEF Country Offices in the region, including
the one in STP; semi-structured interviews at the national level with UNICEF CO staff members, and other
key informants, namely governmental partners and media and communication partners; semi-structured
interviews and focus groups discussions at the sub-national level with frontline workers, professors, school
directors, health staff members and health community agents, and community members based in the
districts of Água Grande and Caué. WASH infrastructures were also observed in the visited schools in Água
Grande and Caué. A child-focused method (Body Mapping) was also used with small groups adolescents
and youth people in some of the schools visited during the field work, in order to explore their experiences
with COVID-19 and understand what changes (if any) the pandemic had on their lives and those of other
children in their respective communities (see annex 5.1 for complete list of interviews and focus groups
carried out).
7. Key Findings (by criterion)
7.1 Adaptability
• How did the STP CO adapt to the COVID-19 epidemic, lockdown and remote working?
• How did it adapt to the needs of the population over time, including the socio-economic
impact of the pandemic?
• To what extent did it adopt new and different approaches, by filling gaps, and seeking local
solutions?
Taking into consideration the different sectoral analysis carried out by the UNICEF CO and its partners to
identify the needs and vulnerabilities of the population10, one could state with confidence that the UNICEF
response rested on the implementation of national and local solutions that mainly aimed at preventing
the socio-economic impacts of the epidemic in communities across the country.
Remote working IT equipment, such as computers and video-conference software, was made available to
central and local staff members of the Ministry of Employment, Ministry of Education and Ministry of
Health in order to enable a quick adaptation to the epidemic and consequent lockdown, which allowed for
an efficient coordination for the implementation of the planned response activities, although this was only
truly necessary during the lockdown phase (April and May 2020).
In the education sector, the UNICEF CO staff stated that they were the first partner to show availability to
support the Ministry of Education. The support provided by UNICEF to the government aimed to ensure the
adaptation to the schools’ lockdown and the need to keep the education services available through the
promotion of new approaches adapted to the COVID-19 pandemic. This included the production of classes
(aimed at pre-primary, primary and secondary school students in all districts) broadcast over radio and
10 According to the interviews carried out with the UNICEF CO staff and the senior management.
12
television: this proved particularly useful to reach children in the most vulnerable and remote
communities. Although schools in the country reopened only in September 2020, the CO intends to
continue investing on the distance learning model to complement the classic in-person class experience, by
also reaching the children that are not returning to school. At the local level, UNICEF also made a specific
effort to ensure children’s access to continued learning during the confinement period: to this end, solar
radios were distributed to the households identified as not having access to energy; and food baskets
were provided to the most vulnerable children, in partnership with the World Food Program (WFP).
Moreover, UNICEF, in partnership with the Ministry of Education, also implemented a program (the Back to
School Program) that aimed to support the most vulnerable families at the local level by ensuring that their
children (around 6,000) go back to school after the confinement, through the provision of a school package
(backpacks, pencil, books, uniforms).
In view of the schools’ reopening and the need to adapt to the new public health prevention measures,
UNICEF provided support for the placement of hand-washing points in 25 schools; and promoted training
on hygiene and prevention for school staff, as well as psychosocial support activities for school teachers and
directors.
Figure 2 - Handwashing point, School in Angolares, Caué Figure 3 - Handwashing point, School in Angolares, Caué
(Nov. 2020) (Nov. 2020)
The school children whom the evaluator exchanged with during local focus group discussion using a body
mapping tool, stated that their knowledge increased and behaviour changed in terms of COVID-19
prevention measures, namely social distancing measures (no kissing nor hugging), use of masks and
frequent sanitization, which are habits that they have gradually integrated into their day-to-day routine. In
terms of responsibilities, they feel more responsible for their behaviour with others as they are aware that
they can infect each other.
13
Figure 4- Body Mapping Exercise with girls, School in Angolares, Caué (Nov.2020)
During the body mapping exercise carried out in the visited schools, students generally stated that they felt
more emotional and afraid as they spent less time with their friends and families. They have also shown
more concerns for others but also some confusion in terms of what would be the impact of COVID-19 in
their lives, and added that adults would limit their outings and freedom to protect them. There were
differences identified between the students in Água Grande (capital district) and Caué (one of the most
remote districts). In Caué, many children stated that they didn’t see many changes in the behaviour at
school in terms of protective measures (for example, students and teachers were not enforcing the wearing
of masks), whereas children in Água Grande identified more changes in their schools. In both districts,
children mentioned that that the measures were not being correctly applied in their schools, as there as
there was not enough social distancing as classrooms were crowded (with 2 to 3 students per desk) (see
figure 4 and 5); in addition, hand-washing points in schools in Caué and Água Grande were not being used
frequently; is some schools masks were not used at all neither by students nor by teachers. Most children
stated that they found the masks uncomfortable to breath, speak with or listen properly, or that they
weren’t able to clearly identify people anymore. They also stated that they would now avoid touching things
or people and sanitize their hands more frequently.
Figure 5 - Classroom, Angolares, Caué (Nov.2020)
14
Figure 6 - Classroom, Angolares, Caué (Nov.2020)
In their relationship with their parents and other adults, the students stated that they feel more vulnerable
to situations such as violence, school dropout, early pregnancy, and being forced to going to work due to
their parents increased financial constraints. In terms of food security and nutrition, students in Caué
stated hunger as a more present difficulty due to financial constraints, whereas in Agua Grande this was
not identified as an issue. A survey carried out by the country’s National Statistical Office (INE) in October
2020 found that around 10% of the interviewed families reported difficulties in accessing basic food items
because of the pandemic and 50% of the respondents stated that they were forced to skip at least one
meal11.
In regard to the social protection/child protection sectors, UNICEF response focused on the health socio-
economic needs identified together with the Ministry of Employment, namely (i) the technical assistance
for the identification of street children and for the preparation of an action plan to adapt the response to
their identified needs; (ii) the training of social workers (70) in psychological support; and (iii) the provision
of hygiene supplies to three childcare institutions.
In the health sector, other than the provision of
supplies to the Ministry of Health for the COVID-
19 (oxygen concentrators; personal protective
equipment, etc), the response interventions were
adapted to ensure the continuity of the essential
health services at the local level, especially for
women and children in remote communities.
UNICEF provided local health units with vaccines,
medicines, HIV tests and nutritional supplements
for pre- and post-natal care.
On the RCCE front, as the lead on communication
Figure 7. Two young mothers come to register their newborn at the
for the UN office, the UNICEF CO, developed, in
maternity center (@UNICEF/2020).
partnership with the WHO, a communication plan
and led the dissemination of key messages to reach all families and communities through different
communication channels, such as radio, TV, social media, billboards, door-to-door sensitization sessions (in
partnership with the Centro Nacional de Educação para a Saúde (CNES)), implemented in collaboration with
the different sectors (education, social protection, child protection, youth and health). Their activities
included the rehabilitation of community radio stations to increase the reach of the communication
11 Household Monitoring Survey: Impacto da COVID-19 nas Famílias Santomenses, INE; October 2020.
15
messages to the most remote communities; a
weekly interactive TV show was broadcasted
on Televisão Santomense channel (TVS) called
"Tempo de Reinventar", with the aim of
sensitizing and educating families about the
relevant thematic of COVID-19. In order to
sensitize and mobilize youth and adolescents,
UNICEF has also developed activities in
partnership with Instituto da Juventude,
including a number of video and audio spots on
COVID-19 prevention broadcast on radio and
social media; awareness campaigns in all
country districts; radio and TV programs
directed to youth on the thematic of COVID- Figure 8.. Students study in Campo School (Escola Campo) in
December 2020 (@UNICEF/2020)
19, as well as the creation of a social media
office within the Instituto da Juventude with the primary task to spread messages on social media.The local
social protection and health implementing partners in Caué and Água Grande interviewed by the evaluation
team assigned UNICEF response a score of 8 (on a 1 to 10 scale) for having provided a critical contribution
to address the needs of the most vulnerable. Most of the local health professionals mentioned that UNICEF
response to the pandemic was useful and timely. At the community level, community members consulted
during the focus groups meetings organized in Angolares and Água Grande mentioned that their
engagement in UNICEF response was very limited, as there was no relevant involvement of the community
members by UNICEF and its partners in order to identify their needs or collecting feedback since the
beginning of the pandemic. At the education level, the teachers and directors interviewed at the local
schools visited scored UNICEF’s response with 5 points (out of 10), stating that, although most of the
interventions were useful, it wasn’t enough to address the needs of the students and professors when
schools reopened.
7.2 Effectiveness of the UNICEF Response
7.2.1 Extent to which UNICEF has been able to contribute to offsetting the negative effects of the
pandemic on access to basic services [ensuring coverage and scale-up]
The actual coverage of the identified needs in terms of access to basic services varied across the different
response sectors. In terms of ensuring access to health supplies (personal protective equipment, oxygen
concentrators, vaccines and nutrition supplements and other medicines for essential services), CO staff
members stated that - at the central level- the response exceeded the needs, as it arrived late and it came
from multiple partners at the same time. However, the local partners interviewed in the health units in
Água Grande (Gamboa) and Caué (Angolares and Ribeira Peixe) were quite unanimous in stating that they
were still lacking masks and sanitizers, as well as adequate health equipment, such as appropriate clothing
for responding to positive COVID-19 cases, as well as sanitation points in the communities. Likewise, In spite
of the RCCE measures described in the previous chapter, local partners stated that the dissemination of
prevention measures at the community level, such as social distancing, using protective masks, correct
handwashing, and isolation of infected people, was not successful in influencing behaviour change,
especially in schools. School teachers mentioned that the equipment provided was also not adequate to
respond to the social distancing needs given the high number of students.
In terms of communication and awareness, UNICEF led a very strong effort to reach different groups,
through the use of different communication channels, such as TV, community radios, youth mobilization,
16
house visits, and flyers/brochures for distribution. The community radios12 located in the remote districts
of Santa Catarina, Neves, Lobata and Porto Alegre, which were not working before the pandemic, were
rehabilitated (4 radios out of 5), with UNICEF’s support, in order to be able to reach all communities with
the key messages about prevention and risk management. These radios mostly reached communities in the
most peripheral areas of the country.
According to the interviews carried out with the Ministry of Education and the UNICEF CO staff members,
the biggest challenge encountered during the adaptation of the education response regarded the distance
learning strategy and the lack of access to a TV or radio amongst most of the targeted beneficiaries. In
addition, the social services were not able to quickly identify who these children were, and, therefore, to
address their access needs as quickly as needed. Regarding the coverage of the distance learning program,
a survey carried out by INE found that approximately 1 out of 5 children that used to be in school did not
participate in the distance learning program. Most of the students that were involved in the distance
learning program were following the tv-classes (79%)13. Furthermore, at the local level, the consulted
schools stated that, after their re-opening, they were still facing several difficulties in terms of equipment,
infrastructures and sensitization. School teachers mentioned that the equipment was not adequate to
respond to the social distancing needs given the high number of students. The evaluation team also
observed that hygiene measures are not being correctly applied in schools and the social distance is not
being met. Classrooms are overcrowded and many schools, especially in most remote communities, and do
not enforce the use of masks nor their correct use.
In the social protection sector, the absence of the social services on the ground for around two months
did not allow for signalling cases of violence, which was a strong limitation for ensuring the continuity of
social/child protection services at a time when they were particularly needed14. At the local level,
community members that participated in the focus groups discussions in Caué and Água Grande stated that
they lacked material such as masks, cleaning products, potable water, handwashing points and latrines in
their communities. Furthermore, financial support and social housing for the most vulnerable were also
identified as crucial to help them overcome their difficulties.
Although most of the conceptual planning with partners (Ministry of Health, Ministry of Education, Ministry
of Employment, Solidarity and Family) was developed by the end of May, the implementation was slightly
stalled due to the lack of information regarding the evolution of the pandemic in the country. The UNICEF
Sitrep data provided by the CO showcases the level of achievement of the targets at the time of the
evaluation (see table 1). This data shows that the targets related to Risk Communication and Community
Engagement (RCCE) were already achieved. To the contrary, the targets from other pillars, such as Provision
of critical medical and water, sanitation and hygiene (WASH) supplies and improving Infection Prevention
and Control (IPC); Continuity of health care for women and children; and Access to continuous education,
child protection and Gender Based Violence (GBV) services, were partially achieved, with the exception of
indicators on parents and children’s mental health and psychosocial support; UNICEF personnel and
partners trained on GBV risk mitigation; and adolescents that participated in civic engagement, for which
no reliable data is available.
12 Radio Farol in Santa Catarina, Radio Tlachá in Neves, Radio Lobata and Radio Yogo in Porto Alegre.
13 Household Monitoring Survey: Impacto da COVID-19 nas Famílias Santomenses, INE; October 2020.
14 According to the interviews carried out with the Ministry of Employment, Solidarity and Family and the UNICEF CO
staff members,
17
Table 1- Level of response achievement (by sector)
Pillar Recommended Indicators for RO/CO Target Results Level of
Achiev. (%)
Risk Communication and Number of people reached on COVID-19 through 100000 100000 100%
Community Engagement messaging on prevention and access to services
(RCCE)
Number of people engaged on COVID-19 through RCCE 10000 10000 100%
actions
Provision of critical medical Total: 60000 Total: 13130 21%
and water, sanitation and Number of people reached with critical WASH supplies
Female: 30600 Female: N/A
hygiene (WASH) supplies (including hygiene items) and services
Male: 29400 Male: N/A
and improving Infection
Prevention and Control (IPC) Number of healthcare workers within health facilities 52 Total: 52 100%
and communities provided with Personal Protective
Female: 32
E quipment (PPE)
Male: 20
Continuity of health care for Number of children and women receiving essential Total: 38535 Total: 1307 Total: 3%
women and children healthcare, including prenatal, delivery and postnatal
Female: 22774 Female: 1007 Female: 4%
care, essential newborn care, immunization, treatment
Male: 15761 Male: 300 Male: 2%
of childhood illnesses and HIV care through UNICEF
supported community health workers and health
facilities.
Number of children 6-59 months admitted for treatment Total: 164 Total: 7 Total: 4%
of severe acute malnutrition (SAM)
Female: 80 Female: 3 Female: 1%
Male: 84 Male: 4 Male: 5%
Access to continuous Number of children supported with distance/home- Total: 51846 3350- pre- 6%
education, child protection based learning school
Female: 26016
and GBV services Others N/A
Male: 25830
Number of schools implementing safe school protocols 50 43 86%
(COVID-19 prevention and control)
Number of children, parents and primary caregivers N/A N/A N/A
provided with community based mental health and
psychosocial support
Number of UNICEF personnel and partners that have 100 N/A N/A
completed training on GBV risk mitigation and referrals
for survivors
Number of adolescent girls and boys who participate in N/A N/A N/A
or lead civic engagement (including online) in UNICEF-
supported programmes for COVID-19 preparedness,
response and building back better (more resilient,
peaceful, greener and sustainable) in the reporting year
[COVID]
Number of children and adults that have access to a safe 350 29 8%
and accessible channel to report sexual exploitation and
abuse
Achieved
Partially achieved
No data available
Source: List of Indicators for COVID-19 Global HAC and SitRep (data updated on 16 Sept 2020)
18
7.2.2 UNICEF’s success in reaching the most vulnerable segments of the population and ensuring equity
UNICEF worked with a number of national
implementing partners to enhance the equity of the
interventions implemented as part of the COVID-19
response, despite the lack of accurate information on
the actual number of infection cases in the
communities. Taking into consideration the low number
of testing in the country as well as the low level of
transmission15, the intervention strategies put in place
during the response mainly focused on the
mitigation/prevention of the secondary impacts of the
pandemic, mainly in the areas of education, WASH,
social support. The education sector, that heavily relied
on the distance learning approach, planned for the
identification of vulnerable children in communities
without access to electricity and for the distribution of
solar radios to the latter. A list of vulnerable children at Figure 9. A young mother helps her child with his homework
from home in Plano De Agua Ize (@UNICEF/2020)
risk of dropping out of school also benefited from
baskets with essential goods during the confinement,
and later in the year 2020 they benefited from a support package to return to school (Back to School
Program).
Also, on the social protection side, the Ministry of Employment, in collaboration with UNICEF, started the
identification of street children and institutionalized children and the assessment of their respective
needs in the context of the pandemic. This facilitated the provision of much needed support and protection.
However, this process did not take place in the Region of Príncipe, as the Ministry was not yet able to provide
the necessary tools and human resources to train the local technicians in vulnerability identification
techniques.
In regard to the health sector, interventions focused on: (i) enhancing the access of most disadvantaged
to vaccination; (ii) continuing the distribution of essential medicines in the most isolated and remote
communities; and (ii) ensuring the continued provision of essential health services.
According to the findings of the data collection conducted by the evaluation team in the field in November
2020, the ability of UNICEF interventions to reach the most vulnerable communities was scored quite high,
by both the health partners (average note: 8 out of 10) and the local partners working on social protection
programmes (average note: 7 out of 10) consulted. The local partners working in these two sectors, with
whom the evaluation team met with, agreed that the response to the COVID-19 pandemic was targeted at
the most vulnerable populations within their communities. However, at the community level, the
community members that participated in the focus group discussions scored the equity of UNICEF
interventions quite low (average note: 3.5. out of 10), indicating that the general level of community
engagement in the roll-out of the response was quite limited and that the majority of the vulnerable
community members did not receive much support in any sector (especially vulnerable mothers). The same
rather low score was given by local education partners interviewed: the overall perception was that schools
and communities don’t feel that UNICEF interventions addressed the needs of the most vulnerable people.
15 1142 cases and 17 deaths at the time of the evaluation (January 2021).
19
7.2.3 How has UNICEF been able to meet programming standards and protocols?
7.2.4 To what extent has UNICEF been able to ensure/sustain community engagement/AAP mechanisms?
Although the CO held some interaction with the UNICEF Regional Office to discuss the minimum quality
standards of the response interventions, little attention was paid to ensuring compliance with such
standards as the Core Commitment of Children in Humanitarian Action and/or Sphere Standards. That
was explained by the overall lack of experience in using emergency response procedures and the
seemingly lack of competencies within the UNICEF CO team to implement these specific standards and
mechanisms. Additionally, Accountability to Affected People (AAP) or other type of community
engagement mechanisms were not used as part of the CO response.
7.2.5 How has the CO utilized preparedness and contingency planning during COVID-19
response?
7.2.6 To what extent has the CO revised COVID-19 response plan been based on the
population’s evolving needs?
In São Tomé and Principe, The UNICEF CO planning of the response first relied on the Ministry of Health’s
contingency plan that was developed between February and March 2020, with UNICEF’s support.
Only later, UNICEF developed its response plan16 (early April 2020), which was aligned with the 2020
World Health Organization (WHO) Global Strategic Response Plan (SRP) and the 2020 UNICEF COVID-2019
Humanitarian Action for Children appeal. Such plans identified a list of key pillars to focus on as part of the
response: from the mitigation of the COVID-19 transmission and exposure; to the curbing of COVID-19
related morbidity and mortality ; until the prevention of the secondary impact of the pandemic; and the
partners’ coordination towards greater risk reduction and in-country preparedness. This response plan was
not based on a theory of change or log frame, but on the orientations received from the UN and the
information collected from consulting with the governmental partners, mainly the Ministry of Health.
A review of the in-country response plans reveals the lack of a truly concerted and intersectoral approach:
the Ministry of Education contingency plan, for instance, was prepared at the same time as the UNICEF
response plan, whilst the other ministries took longer before they could provide a response based on an
adequate response plan.
Further down the road, the United Nations developed, too, an intersectoral joint plan17 (May 2020), that
was aligned with the national contingency plan for COVID-19 led by the Ministry of Health (this national
plan, which envisaged a set of socio-economic measures that were geared towards the curbing the spread
of the pandemic at the country level, included three main intervention areas: (i) emergency response to the
health needs, accompanied by risk communication and WASH interventions; (ii) prevention of and
mitigation of the socio-economic impact of COVID-19 on public sectors, such as in education, nutrition,
social protection, etc; and (iii) recovery and strengthening the resilience of the population, particularly
vulnerable families and groups. The strategy also aimed at mobilizing financial resources to prevent and
contain the COVID-19 outbreak in the country.
No contingency plan was developed by the UNICEF Country Office or the UN office in the country at any
point. That is partly due to the lack of humanitarian experience and related competencies amongst the
UNICEF CO, as well as the other UN country offices staff. Although a disaster risk management training was
16 UNICEF Sao Tome and Principe Covid-2019 2020 Response Plan.
17 UN Strategic Response Strategy to COVID 19, Sao Tomé and Príncipe.
20
organized by UNICEF for the government in 2019, it did not lead to its operationalization into any type of
plan.
With respect to UNICEF ability to respond to the partners’ needs, the response was not as timely as one
would have hoped for (especially in the education sector where the distance learning strategy took longer
than expected to be materialized and was started only a few weeks before schools reopened). The same
applies to the purchasing of individual protective material that was ordered in late April/early May but
started arriving only in July/August18. The lack of testing capacity in the country also didn’t provide the
needed information for decision making or adaptation that one would have expected, as no one had
knowledge about the status of the levels of transmission.
7.2.7 What is known about the needs in the country and how did UNICEF CO determine and
verify these needs?
Although no specific studies were conducted on the impact of COVID-19 in the country at the time the
planning of the response was underway, the CO worked closely with the national partners to ensure that
their interventions be based on an adequate assessment of both needs and risks on the ground, especially
with the Ministry of Employment and the Ministry of Education.
That was all the more relevant given that the information made available by the national police and the
local hospitals attested to an increase of violence against women and children during the pandemic,
especially in March 2020. From July 2020 onwards, the epidemiology data services also started providing
information that would support the decision on the geographical focus of the interventions with regards to
the delivery of continuous health services.
In the health sector, a list of needs was initially identified based on some joint assessments conducted in
collaboration with WHO and the Ministry of Health in order to respond to the population needs identified
in the contingency plan.
An additional assessment of the needs of street children and other vulnerable groups in 5 districts of São
Tomé was also conducted in partnership with the Ministry of Employment (Social Protection Directorate)
in order to inform the UNICEF response. Likewise, an assessment was also carried out in partnership with
the Ministry of Education in order to identify the list of schools that needed handwashing infrastructures,
as well as a list of children that were at risk of dropping out and needed additional support.
Furthermore, the UN Coordinator’s Office launched a study to analyse the national socio-economic impacts
COVID-19 on the STP population (a Socioeconomic Impact Assessment (SEIA) and an associated
Socioeconomic Response Plan (SERP)). The results of the study, not yet officially published, will (i) inform a
medium-term recovery plan to be drawn up in order to mitigate the effects of the pandemic, with particular
attention to the most vulnerable groups and most affected sectors; and (ii) provide clear inputs for planning
a more sustained UN support as a whole to the STP government during the next programming cycle.
7.3 Quality
7.3.1 The effects of the crisis and related constraints on lockdown and movement upon UNICEF’s ability to
deliver quality
The epidemiological situation did not evolve in Sao Tomé and Principe with the same gravity as in other
countries in the region, and the regular testing only started taking place regularly in July 2020, which means
18 According to the information collected together with UNICEF CO senior management.
21
that before that there was lack of data to inform the response in response to the country’s epidemiological
progression. The country’s lockdown was limited to two months: April and May 2020, during which there
was no direct implementation of activities and supervision of partners on the ground, except for remote
work on planning for the response with the national partners. For this purpose, UNICEF provided IT
equipment and internet connection to government partners to allow them to work remotely. However, the
delays identified in the delivery of medical and protection supplies due to the borders’ lockdown was a
challenge that affected the provision in the most isolated communities to ensure the normal functioning
of health services.
No additional constraint was identified on UNICEF’s ability to deliver quality, given that the lockdown period
was quite short.
7.3.2 Timeliness of UNICEF response to COVID-19
The response from the national implementing partners became slower in the context of the pandemic. As
a result, the scheduling of activities was delayed (planned deadlines could no longer be met and
reimbursement requests could not be attended to). Delays were identified in the delivery of supplies, as
previously mentioned, due to the halt in production and the closing of borders; the implementing partners’
adaptation process to remote working mainly during April and May was also a constraint that resulted in a
few delays. However, the UNICEF simplified procedures (such as the L3 emergency procedure whose us
activated by the CO until December 2020 and just recently extended for the whole of 2021) allowed for a
more efficient implementation of activities with partners, especially in the area of procurement
(processes were overall described as simpler and quicker to follow)19.
With respect to the response overall funding and the level of financial execution, UNICEF’s response plan
had an initially planned budget of 455.000 USD to support the Government in the COVID 19 response (see
table 2).
Table 2 - UNICEF Sao Tomé and Principe COVID 19 Response Plan Budget
Sector to support as part of the COVID-19 Response Funding (USD)
Support coordination system 10 000,00
Strengthening risk communication and community engagement including digital engagement and 50 000,00
rumours monitoring
Providing critical hygiene, medical and prevention supplies of WASH and medical supplies along 90 000,00
with improved WASH services
Supporting provision of adequate health care and nutrition for women, children and vulnerable 105 000,00
communities including case management
Providing access to continuous education and child protection services 50 000,00
Data collection and analysis of disease and secondary impact on women and children 50 000,00
Consultancy and program support 100 000,00
TOTAL 455 000,00
The funding eventually obtained by the UNICEF CO exceeded the initial planned budget thanks to the
contributions provided by the UN headquarters, the Global Partnership for Education (GPE), USAID, the
French Development Agency A (AFD). The overall funding totalled an amount of 1.911.000 USD (see table
3) for the years of 2020 and 2021.
Table 3- Sources of funding, by donor
Funding of the COVID-19 response (2020-2021) by source Funding (USD)
Headquarters support to purchase supplies 300 000,00
19 According to the information provided by the UNICEF CO staff members.
22
Canadian Cooperation to fund WASH and RCCE interventions 50 000,00
GPE to support Education 820 000,00
USAID 216 000,00
AFD 250 000,00
MPTFII 120 000,00
Portuguese Committee for Child Protection and Adolescent Programme 55 000,00
Immediate Response Rephase 100 000,00
TOTAL 1 911 000,00
The total expenses made at the time of the RTE (December 2020) were equal to 462 109,77 USD for all the
different sectors (see table 4). Such amount exceeded the initial planned budget, which has been calculated
based on the estimation of needs in early 2020. As the magnitude of needs increased over time, the budget
increased accordingly. The greater commitment to supporting the response in in the country for 2020 and
2021 was also enabled by the launch of a GPE-financed project to support the education system response
in 2021 (820 000 USD) and the financing of a back-to-school package with focus on adolescent girls (120,000
USD) by a multi-partner Trust Fund.
Table 4 – STP COVID-19 Expenses, by sector
1. PROTECTION
Activities Used Budget (USD)
Various Material for hygiene, cleaning and comfort 3 600,00
1000 informative and entertaining pamphlets on COVID-19 and psychosocial support 9 700,00
and 200 boxes of colored pencils
Sewerage work and installation of a washbasin 1 700,00
Laptops and routers with unlimited internet for three months 5 000,00
Acquisition of the 27 solar radios 1 500,00
Signalling and Support Processes for Adolescents and Youth in Street Situations 9 800,00
Psycho-social support Training for social workers working at the DPSSF and the 4 600,00
Counselling Centre against Domestic Violence C
SUB-TOTAL 35 900,00
2. YOUTH AND ADOLESCENT
Activities Used Budget (USD)
Solar radio 11 500,00
Support the implementation of the youth's contingency plan 21 100,00
SUB-TOTAL 32 600,00
3. RCCE
Activities Used Budget (USD)
Support for community radio stations 7 200,00
Television show - Tempo de Reinventar 9 400,00
Support to the CNES in the realization of the bell towers of the information on the 5 500,00
districts with the CSOs
Printing of informative and entertaining pamphlets on COVID-19 9 500,00
Support to CNES in the production and printing of communication media on the 5 600,00
COVID-19 response
SUB-TOTAL 37 200,00
4. SOCIAL PROTECTION
Activities Used Budget (USD)
Laptops and routers with unlimited internet access 2 000,00
Signalling and Support Processes for Adolescents and Youth in Street Situations 9 800,00
Acquisition of solar radios 11 500,00
SUB-TOTAL 23 300,00
5. IPPC (WASH, HEALTH, ‘’survie de l’enfant’’)
Activities Used Budget (USD)
Kits de PPE 92 783,09
23
Vaccines, essential medicines and nutritional supplements, HIV tests and ARV drugs 29 154,69
Oxygen concentrators 3 989,70
WASH supplies 33 000,00
SUB-TOTAL 158 927,48
6. EDUCATION
Activities Used Budget (USD)
Laptop Computer 6 679,32
3G wifi router 328,56
Cell phone 517,34
Pen Drive 70,85
External Disk 98,47
Motorcycle 18 781,82
A4 Paper Ream 2 281,68
Polycopier 9 121,91
Color pencils 960,71
Solar Radio 51 390,00
Activities to prepare the learnings of response to COVID19 83 951,63
SUB-TOTAL 174 182,29
TOTAL 462 109,77
7.3.3 How has the UNICEF CO ensured the quality of the response and put in place processes and
monitoring systems used to ensure quality?
Although no direct presential supervision of partners was possible on the ground in April and May 2020 as
no activity was taking place, the coordination and supervision was made remotely through the provision of
internet facilities and IT equipment to local government partners so that they could work remotely.
Constant remote interaction and technical meetings were maintained with national partners in order to
ensure the efficiency and effectiveness of the planned activities. National implementing partners
interviewed, such as the Ministry of Employment and the Ministry of Education, stated a very close level of
remote supervision and support during the implementation phase.
However, the monitoring of the supplies provided to the Ministry of Health remained quite challenging to
perform on a systematic basis: all the supplies donated by the different organizations, including UNICEF,
were stored together and there was no clear supervision of the final destination and use of the equipment.
In order to tackle this issue, the STP government decided to set up a crisis committee composed by the
military forces that managed the equipment received. All deliveries were made directly to this committee,
and then the equipment would be directly delivered to the different health units upon request. UNICEF
role was more critical in the monitoring the availability of vaccines and drugs at the community level and
in its efforts to ensure the continuity of primary health services. To this end, UNICEF asked the Ministry of
Health for a copy of the distribution plan so that they could better monitor distribution of the vaccines and
drugs in the communities.
24
8 Emerging Themes/Conclusions
8.1 The emerging positives on UNICEF performance in the COVID-19 response in STP
According to the interviews carried out with the UNICEF CO senior management and staff members, the
response to the COVID-19 pandemic represented a real learning curve for the UNICEF CO and its partners
in that they acquired new knowledge and skills on how to deal with an unexpected humanitarian emergency
for the first time in their professional life. Other positive points that emerged from this response include:
• The crisis provided a vast array of learning opportunities, such as piloting new models and
approaches in the emergency context, exploring some thematic areas that were not a priority
before, such as distance learning options to reach children who never went to school and the
integration of hand-washing facilities in schools.
• Joint vision exercises and collective strategic intervention by the UN agencies (at the national and
regional levels) provided an opportunity to exchange experiences and to learn from each other,
facilitating the ongoing dialogue.
• Group cohesion and availability of government national partners to contribute to the response
increased the intersectoral articulation.
• Adaptation to working remotely for the UNICEF country office team as well as the national partners
certainly took some time but eventually allowed the key response actors to mount a continued
response to the unfolding emergency situation.
8.2 The challenges encountered in STP during the UNICEF’s implementation of the COVID-19 response
The biggest challenges observed during the response to the pandemic20 included:
• The procedures for procuring essential supplies - for both the preparedness and response phases-
affected the timeliness of the response;
• The lack of available data impacted the response, in that the country didn’t have the necessary data
available to inform its decisions concerning the pandemic;
• Shifting the government’s attention towards the need to prioritize interventions aimed at
vulnerable children – as a way to mitigate the negative impact of the pandemic within this special
population group- proved more challenging than expected;
• The UNICEF CO staff’s technical profiles were not the most suitable to plan and implement an
emergency response;
• Misinformation and contradictory messaging from different UN agencies, government and media
partners (radio and TV) created confusion amongst the public and required special concertation
between the response actors to convey the most relevant and clearest possible prevention
messages to communities.;
• The lack of specialized technical support for some sectoral programs, such as the production of
distance learning program, hindered the rapidity of the intervention in this specific sector;
• The lack of capacity of the NGOs in the field to respond to the emergency was a strong deterrent to
community engagement;
• The lower-than-expected level of awareness of COVID-19 prevention measures (e.g., social
distancing) in schools perpetuated the practice of keeping classes over-crowded;
• Lack of capacity to monitor the efficiency of the interventions in the field over time, namely in
schools, hindered any timely programmatic improvement.
8.3 Medium to long-term implications for vulnerable children and their communities in focal countries,
and implications for UNICEF’s strategy and action in the medium to long term
20 Based on the information collected from the interviews with the UNICEF CO senior management and staff members.
25
The evaluation found that medium to long-term implications for vulnerable children and their communities
include, not only, the new challenges that emerged during the pandemic in the education sector, such as
higher incidence of school dropout, reduced learning time, need for reducing the number of students in
each class, etc., as well as other more general negative impacts, such as increased violence against children,
sexual abuse and early pregnancy.
An in-depth evaluation (e.g., developmental) of the different response pillars impact would enable UNICEF
country office to prepare and adjust their intervention for the coming months, as well as In the medium and
long term.
8.4 (Re)focusing UNICEF’s programming to reach vulnerable children in the medium to long term [e.g.,
to include additional/new opportunities; need to act differently or transform, etc.)
In the education sector, the evaluation field data collection identified serious challenges faced by students
and teachers in the visited schools, such as lack of adequate prevention measures, showcasing the need
for increasing awareness in schools with regards to prevention measures (using masks, using handwashing
points) and creating conditions for decreasing the number of students in the classrooms. Students21 and
teachers that were interviewed stated that the distance learning classes should continue and confirmed
the need for increasing access to TV and radio for students to be able to watch/listen to the classes; and
that parents should be more involved in the supervision of their children’s classes.
In the health sector, the evaluation found that further provision of sanitation material and equipment to
health professionals at the local level is needed22, as well as close support to the health community agents
that are engaged in the communities, through further training, as they stated that they don’t feel confident
about what their role should be in supporting their communities23. Additionally, local campaigns
(interpersonal campaigns, door-to-door sensitization sessions; community radio campaigns, etc.) to
sensitize the communities for prevention measures were also identified as a need, in order to complement
mass media campaigns at the national level.
Finally, the community members consulted in the focus groups discussions stated that the UNICEF CO’s
engagement with communities was not sufficient in order to better identify and respond to their needs, and
emphasised the need to receive further financial and public sanitation support, especially for vulnerable
families. They also suggested that the UNICEF CO identifies and establishes new partnerships with civil
society organizations in the different districts so as to increase the coverage and reach of the response
interventions.
21 Using the body mapping tool.
22 Interviews with staff members at the health units, conducted by the evaluation team in November 2020.
23 Interviews with health community agents, conducted by the evaluation team in November 2020.
26
9 Gender Equality and Women’s Empowerment
Although gender equality was not one of the retained evaluation criteria, a specific effort was made to
include some considerations on the gender responsiveness of the COVID-19 strategies and interventions in
the report.
This is all the more necessary in light of the fact that the COVID-19 pandemic had different repercussions
on the lives of men and women in Sao Tome, due not only to their different socio-economic roles but also,
and foremost, to the already existing gender inequalities, which risked being aggravated since the first
COVID outbreak. In particular, the groups of women whose living conditions deteriorated the most,
included the workers in the informal sector, the day laborers, the women domestic workers, the victims of
gender-based violence, the girls living in households living in food insecure households, the women and
insecure households, the elderly women and the women and women workers in the health sector.
There are three main reasons explaining the worsening of women’s living conditions in Sao Tome during
the pandemic. First, social distancing measures, and in particular the confinement, worsened the situation
of victims of domestic of domestic violence, who found themselves locked up with their abusers in
conditions of stress. Second, the erosion of household livelihoods in the short term (see the Figure below)
pushed women to adopt coping strategies involving transactional sex. Third, the crisis also affected services
for victims of gender-based violence. Access to reporting and immediate support services was also more
difficult due to mobility restrictions, and mobility, and essential services, including life-saving care such as
clinical rape management mental health, psychosocial support, were disrupted for short period of time,
especially when health and social service providers were overburdened and focused on managing COVID-
19.
Figure 10. Population of women falling under the poverty line (all ages) in Sao Tome and Principe
Source: UNWomen, 2021 (https://data.unwomen.org/features/covid-19-driving-women-and-girls-deeper-poverty
In response to such needs, several activities were implemented specifically to fulfill the rights of women
affected by the pandemic. In this vein, the National Institute for the Promotion of Gender Equality and
Equity set-up with the Ministry of Labor, solidarity, Family and Professional Formation, played an important
role in rolling out such initiatives, as mentioned in an official press release dated June 19, 202024, in which
their respective limitations were also recognized.
24 file:///C:/Users/mtarsilla/Downloads/STP_Info-Reuniao-Virtual-Pontos-Focais-CPLP-IG.pdf
27
For instance, one of the first initiatives rolled out in the response to the pandemic was the Waka Project
aimed at the women heads of household in the fishing communities of São Tomé: women were trained
by an NGO to make 14,300 reusable masks so as to be able to generate income at a time when the fishing
activities were stalled, and the market activities suspended. Likewise, many female vendors were
transferred to another new market with better conditions and under the system of alternating days per
group. Furthermore, the national support program aimed at the most vulnerable families during the
COVID, and consisting in the provision of four monthly payments, benefited 2,624 families, of which 48
are male-headed and 2,576 are female-headed (98% of the expected beneficiaries). Despite such focus
on women, the Government of Sao Tome candidly recognized that such support, although important, was
still insufficient given the magnitude of needs.
In reality, the condition of women’s rights in Sao Tome and Principe has improved over the last few years.
As of 2019 (before COVID), 57.7% of women of reproductive age (15-49 years) had their need for family
planning satisfied with modern methods. However, 28% of women aged 20–24 years old were married or
in a union before age 18; the adolescent birth rate was 86 per 1,000 women aged 15-19 as of 2017, down
from 92 per 1,000 in 2014; and, as of February 2021, only 23.6% of seats in parliament were held by women.
Moreover, in 2018, 18.1% of women aged 15-49 years reported that they had been subject to physical
and/or sexual violence by a current or former intimate partner in the previous 12 months. In addition, as of
December 2020, only 34.4% of indicators needed to monitor the SDGs from a gender perspective were
available, with gaps in some key areas, such as: a) unpaid care and domestic work; b) key labour market
indicators, such as the unemployment rate and gender pay gaps; and c) information and communications
technology skills. In addition, many areas – such as gender and poverty, physical and sexual harassment,
women’s access to assets (including land), and gender and the environment – lack comparable
methodologies for regular monitoring25.
Overall, the COVID-19 response in Sao Tome placed a special emphasis on reducing gender inequalities,
both during the design and implementation phases. The inclusion of a specific gender-responsive indicator
in the response results framework (the Continuity of health care for women and children) attests to the
ambition of the response to enhance women’s empowerment, especially amongst the most vulnerable.
That notwithstanding and despite the specific government budget allocations to gender-responsive
activities, the response could not address all the existing needs, such as in the case of the provision of
essential services whose continuity could not be ensure at all times.
25 Source: UNWomen 2021 (https://data.unwomen.org/country/sao-tome-and-principe)
28
10 Lessons Learned
The main lessons learned from the UNICEF CO COVID-19 response include the following:
• Having a UNICEF contingency plan developed and ready-to-be used proves to be essential for
mounting a timely and effective response;
• Disposing of resources to monitor the progress of the response against its envisaged targets ,
also with the support from the UNICEF Regional Office, is critical to track the progress and
impact of the response and, if needed, to adapt some of these interventions while they are
still underway ;
• Good relationships and constant dialogue with the national partners facilitate the process of
planification and implementation of an emergency response;
• Prepositioning critical supplies allows a more effective and timely response to emergency and
yet predictable needs (e.g. vaccination stocks);
• Diversification of partners, namely civil society organizations, can hugely affect the timeliness
of an emergency response, taking pressure off national government partners’ shoulders;
• Evaluating the communication strategy and its reach is relevant to combat misinformation
and its harmful effects, and promote behaviour change, in order to encourage prevention
within the communities
• Promoting ongoing data collection and digitization of information (such as data on social
protection and education per district) in collaboration with national government partners is
very important to be able to take informed decisions for the planning of the different phases
of an emergency response.
• Close field monitoring of response interventions ensure that prevention measures are being
implemented and correctly enforced at the local level, namely in schools.
29
11 Recommendations
A few recommendations were developed as a result of this evaluation and discussed with both the
UNICEF CO staff in Sao Tome and their relevant in-country partners before finalization. Such
recommendation, developed in a participatory manner, will serve as the basis for the development of
the management response, during which the suggestions actions (included below) will be further
refined and operationalized.
11.1. Recommendations aimed at the UNICEF Country Office in Sao Tome and Principe
STRATEGIC RECOMMENDATIONS PRIORITY
1. Improving data collection in the different health, education and social H
protection sectors to inform response.
2. Scaling up the prevention measures and sensitization already put in place
in the education sector, especially in schools in the most remote districts
where serious health and safety challenges are being faced. Priority level: M
High
3. Introducing emergency preparedness and a contingency plan into CDP and
workplans.
4. Strengthening the CO’s and partners’ internal capacity in emergency M
management.
OPERATIONAL RECOMMENDATIONS PRIORITY
5. Strengthening social protection work, through better identification of the M
most vulnerable children, that are especially affected during the pandemic.
6. Conduct more rapid evaluations of each sectoral program (with a focus on M
results and process) in order to better understand what the next steps of
the response should be. For example, evaluating the communication
strategy; the distance learning approach; etc.
7. Finding alternatives for supplies that come from abroad, through the L
procurement of local goods and the recruitment of in-country
consultants/resource persons.
10.2. Recommendations aimed at the UNICEF Country Office and Regional Office
STRATEGIC RECOMMENDATIONS PRIORITY
8. Increase CO capacity for the monitoring of COVID indicators in each one of
the response sectors through the provision of further tools and training H
9. Support the UNICEF CO in identifying viable and efficient mechanisms for
prepositioning supplies to facilitate the emergency response. M
30
12 Annexes
12.1. Evaluation Terms of Reference
TITLE/PURPOSE TOR template for use by CO in contracting an international
consultant as part of the Real-Time Evaluation (RTE) of the
UNICEF ongoing response to COVID-19 in Sao Tome
RECRUITING OFFICER
CONTRACT MODALITY Individual contractor (international)
LOCATION OF ASSIGNMENT Sao Tome. Remote work will be combined with field work
LANGUAGE(S) REQUIRED Portuguese and English
DURATION OF CONTRACT October 2020 - March 2021 (most of the work will be concentrated
in October-first half of November)
1. Background
Since the start of the outbreak in December 2019, the new coronavirus disease (COVID-19) has spread
to over 215 countries and territories. As of 16 August 2020, there has been an estimated 21.294.845
confirmed cases of COVID-19, including children, and nearly 761.779 deaths reported.26 As noted by
the UNICEF Executive Director, children are “the hidden victims of the COVID-19 pandemic.”27 During
the second and third quarter of 2020, lockdowns and school closures, in particular, have been affecting
children’s education, mental health and access to basic health services and raising the risks of
exploitation and abuse. In order respond to such dire scenario, UNICEF has recently revised its
Humanitarian Action for Children (HAC) appeal to US$1,620,132,26728. Such renewed effort is aimed
to fulfil three key objectives: (i) to meet the needs of the affected children, communities, health
systems and health structures; (ii) protect the affected populations and environment against the
disease; and (iii) address the pandemic immediate health and socio-economic impacts.
The COVID-19 Response across the West and Central African Region (WCAR)
Since the COVID-19 outbreak in early 2020, national governments and development partners in the
West and Central Africa Region (WCAR) have worked closely to roll out an adequate response to the
pandemic. Confronted with a host of unprecedented health threats and socio-economic challenges,
those managing the COVID-19 response in the region have tried to launch innovative and relevant
programs that could: (i) rapidly adapt to the continuously evolving context; (ii) respond to both the
emerging needs observed on the ground and those ones that have long existed before the COVID-19
emergency started (e.g. human, financial, technical needs) and, finally, (iii) meet the envisaged
beneficiaries’ expectations.
As part of its engagement to hall the COVID-19 pandemic, UNICEF has developed a series of strategic
response plans at multiples levels (global, regional, national). All such plans have a common feature:
26 WHO Situation Report 16 August 2020: https://covid19.who.int/
27 https://www.unicef.org/press-releases/un-launches-global-humanitarian-response-plan-covid-19-pandemic
28 UNICEF Coronavirus (COVID-19) Global Response, https://www.unicef.org/appeals/covid-2019.html
31
they are equally aimed to reduce the (i) health and (ii) socio-economic impacts of the crisis, as spelled
out in the COVID-19 Response Theory of Change, developed by the Evaluation Unit of the UNICEF
Regional Office for West and Central Africa (WCARO). More specifically, the responses rolled out on
the ground by UNICEF and its global, regional and in-country partners seek not only to reduce
morbidity and mortality and limit transmission and protect individual from the exposure to virus, but
also to curb the deterioration of human capital, human rights, social cohesion and livelihoods.
In order to do attain such ambitious goals and ensure, as much as possible, the continuity of essential
social services for children, women and vulnerable populations during the pandemic, UNICEF and other
in-country partners across the region have translated all these strategic plan into a panoply of
interventions in multiple areas, namely:
▪ Health system strengthening (provision of personal protection equipment and other materials,
training, etc.);
▪ Infection Prevention and Control (IPC);
▪ Monitoring and research (including epidemiological investigations;
▪ Rapid response;
▪ Risk communication and community engagement;
▪ Social protection activities and other actions to limit the socio-economic impact of the
epidemic;
▪ Support to maintaining basic social services (health, education, etc.);
▪ Strengthening UNICEF's humanitarian response capacity;
▪ Strengthening coordination;
▪ WASH.
Context in Sao Tome
In Sao Tome and Principe, from Apr 6 to 20 September 2020, there have been 908 confirmed cases of
COVID-19 with 15 deaths. (source: https://covid19.who.int/region/afro/country/st)
Not long after the COVID-19 outbreak in the region, the Sao Tome government prepared an action plan
aimed to (i) reduce the transmission, mortality, and socio-economic impact of COVID-19 nationwide;
and (ii) ensure adequate protection of both the country’s population and environment.
As part of the national response, Sao Tome also established a government-level committee tasked with
the supervision and monitoring of the execution of the Plan e in a variety of sectors. This committee
(the National Council for Preparation and Responses to Disasters or CONPREC) is coordinated by the
Prime Minister and Head of the Government, assisted by the Minister of Health (serving as the
executive secretary) and is made up of the representatives of the key line ministries with a more vested
interest and participation in the COVID prevention, preparation, response and recovery (Education,
Planning and Finance, Infrastructure, Natural Resources and Environment, Defense and Internal Order,
Agriculture Fisheries and Rural Development, Labor and Social Affairs and State Secretariat for Social
Communication and Regional Secretariat for Social Affairs and Communication).
UNICEF has made an effort, too, to contribute to the national response to COVID-19. In particular, it
aligned its strategy with the UN joint multi-sectoral COVID-19 response strategy which, in turn, rests
on (i) the national COVID-19 contingency plan developed under the leadership of the national Ministry
of Health; and (ii) the package of socio-economic measures identified by the intersectoral task force of
the Government.
The UN joint multi-sectoral COVID-19 strategy specifically aims at mobilising financial resources and
promoting concerted and coordinated UN support to the country's response, in order to prevent and
contain the COVID-19 outbreak in Sao Tome and Principe.
32
The UN intervention strategy is focused on the following areas of intervention:
▪ In the immediate term, the strategy aims to answer the country’s existing needs in term of
health surveillance, health care, risk communication and access to water, hygiene and
sanitation (WASH) services;
▪ In the medium and long term, interventions will help to prevent and address the socio-
economic impacts of the epidemic on the public and private sectors, including education,
nutrition, maintaining access to routine health services, food security, child and women's
protection and social protection, tourism, and agriculture.
The overall strategy goal is to minimise the humanitarian consequences of the epidemic on the
country’s population, also in line with the country commitment to "Leaving no one behind", as spelled
out in the Agenda 2030.
Furthermore, the UNICEF response is aligned with the 2020 WHO global Strategic Response Plan (SRP)
and the 2020 UNICEF COVID-2019 Humanitarian Action for Children (HAC) appeal. Overall, UNICEF is
aiming to reach a total 50,000 people with preparedness and/or response activities in the
following pillars29:
▪ Limit human-to-human transmission and protect individuals from exposure to COVID-19;
▪ Minimize morbidity and mortality due to COVID-19;
▪ Prevent and address the secondary impact of the outbreak – minimize the human
consequences of the outbreak; and
▪ Enhance risk reduction and in-country preparedness including coordination.
Geographical prioritization – UNICEF STP has prioritised its interventions in the Agua Grande District
and the capital area, which are home to 67% of the country’s population. The two areas were
prioritised in light of their high risk of transmission: their territory includes large commercial cities with
an airport and seaport and feature intense human travel with significant number of travellers from
within and outside, including tourists. The population living in the targeted areas is estimated to be of
nearly 50,000 people.
29 The activities included in each pillar are consistent with the WHO Country Guidance and the National
Preparedness and Response Plan developed by the Government of Sao Tome and Principe with support from
the various Development Partners.
33
The following list of activities and implementation sites provides an overview of the geographical and
thematic scope of the UNICEF response to the COVID-19 in Sao Tome and Principe. This list is not
exhaustive and will need to be completed after discussion with the UNICEF CO at the beginning of the
assignment.
Box 1: List of UNICEF response interventions in Sao Tome and Principe
• Support to the Ministry of Education in building the capacity of primary schools and
kindergartens to contain the spread of the pandemic, by installing handwashing facilities in 25
schools and with the prospect of extending it to 55 more.
• In case management, UNICEF provided the Ministry of Health with MPP kits, including laser
thermometers, for the protection of 52 health professionals and 28 oxygen concentrators for
the management of severe cases of COVID-19.
• Production and dissemination of various audiovisual materials (videos, songs, billboards, radio
and television spots) through which it has been possible to reach all families and communities
with key messages focused on Covid 19, ensuring the universality of people's knowledge about
the new coronavirus.
• Door-to-door sensitization sessions by community health workers in all districts of the country,
enabling more than 90% of them to access credible information on how to prevent COVID 19.
• Technical and financial support for the reactivation of four community radio stations (Rádio
Farol in Santa Catarina, Rádio Tlachá in Neves, Rádio Lobata and Yogo in Porto Alegre),
extending access to information to populations in the most peripheral areas of the country.
• In conjunction with the Social Inclusion Programme, technical and financial assistance to the
process of signalling and support for adolescents and young people in street situations, carried
out in the 5 districts of the Island of Sao Tome.
• In partnership with the Social Inclusion Programme, acquisition of computer equipment (12
laptops) and internet access (15 routers and unlimited internet for a period of three months)
for the staff of the central and local services of the Ministry of Labour, Solidarity, Family and
Vocational Training.
• The development of messages/advice transmitted to children and those in their care via radio
and a television programme for psychosocial support and child protection ;
• In conjunction with the Child Protection Programme, the acquisition of computer equipment,
technical and financial assistance to the signalling and support process for adolescents and
young people in street situations, carried out in the 5 districts of the Island of Sao Tome.
2. Need for Learning and adaptation during COVID-19 response
The HQ UNICEF Evaluation Office issued 2 technical notes in March and April 2020 to guide evaluative
initiatives aimed at responding to the organization’s evidence generation needs as the response
evolves. The Evaluation Office (EO) in New York UNICEF HQ and the COVID-19 Secretariat have since
launched the continuous learning evaluation of the global response (including the Fly of the Wall), and
some regional and country offices have embarked on other initiatives to inform their response.
Almost five months into the pandemic, overseeing the quality of the UNICEF response on the ground
is being consistently recognized by the Emergency Management Team (EMT) as a challenge that
Country Office (COs) face, due especially to the unusual remote working modalities. In an operating
environment that is further rapidly changing and calls for continuous adaptation, there is an urgent
need for an in-depth understanding of the ways in which countries are actually responding to this crisis
through means which go beyond current reporting efforts in order to inform leadership decision
making.
34
In this context, a Real-Time Evaluation (RTE) of the UNICEF ongoing response to COVID-19 at the
country level is scheduled to take place in various countries in all UNICEF regions. This TOR covers the
evaluation of the COVID-19 response in Sao Tome. The other 5 CO involved in this exercise include:
Chad, Cote d’Ivoire, DRC, Gabon and Mauritania.
At a time when countries across the world are further grappling with the socio-economic consequences
and secondary costs of what started as a public health crisis, this evaluation provide a precious
opportunity to pause, take stock and reflect on how to adapt further as the crisis unfolds, while
preparing for both the next round of HAC and next generation of workplans. Therefore, the evaluation
is particularly timely and relevant for UNICEF CO across the region.
The RTE should be also seen as a means to support the UNICEF Regional Office for West and Central
Africa (WCARO) in its oversight role vis-à-vis the implementation of the CO response to COVID-19. This
evaluation will be managed by the Regional Office with contractual support from the CO and overall
coordination support from EO, also in collaboration with the COVID-19 Secretariat
3. Purpose and objectives
Purpose
The purpose of the RTE is to inform a forward-looking reflection on the current implementation of the
country offices (COs) response to COVID-19. Through the generation of timely and relevant evidence
on how to best enhance the UNICEF response to COVID-19 in the region (on both the strategic and
operational fronts), this evaluation aims to inform the planning of UNICEF work in this areas within
and beyond the 6 priority countries which this exercise will focus on.
Objectives
This RTE will include a critical and yet rapid estimation of:
• The effects that the COVID-19 pandemic had on basic services, particularly for the most
vulnerable population and of activity initiated as a response to COVID-19;
• The implications of the COVID-19 response on UNICEF’s regular/pre-COVID programme
delivery (e.g. the extent of their repurposing for responding to COVID-19);
• The quality of the related delivery;
• while also providing early insights on the outcomes achieved.
Findings generated through this RTE will be further consolidated across countries and regions, with a
view to identify trends and generate cross-country learning and timely actions to strengthen the
ongoing response beyond each individual country’s borders.
35
4. Overarching questions
The RTE will be guided by the following 4 overarching questions (more detailed questions will be
included in the different data collection instruments aimed to some of the COVID-19 response key
stakeholders):
1. How effectively is the CO implementing the response to COVID-19 so far?30 How is the quality of the
response to COVID-19 being affected by remote working modalities and the generally constrained
operating environment?
2. How well is the CO adapting to the needs of the population, including the socio-economic impact of
the pandemic?31 How have these needs been determined in each country? (will include gauging:
target setting, required capacity, early insights on results achieved so far and where most value is
added);
3. What are the early lessons (for CO/RO/HQ) that are emerging from the implementation of the
response? What are the emerging positives from the response? and what have been the greatest
challenges in responding to COVID-19 so far? Are there discernable trends that are applicable to
different settings (i.e. urban/rural; low-resource/high-resource settings etc.)?
4. What more should be done? What should be done differently to enhance COVID-19 response
programming for children and their communities?
Although this evaluation will not be formally guided by the OECD-DAC criteria, as other evaluations
conducted in the past, the content of the evaluations will – de facto- refer to some OECD-DAC criteria,
such as efficiency, effectiveness, relevant and equity.
5. Approach and methods
Overall approach
This evaluation builds upon and expands further an Operational Reviews format. It is a real-time
exercise, featuring ‘live learning processes’ whose objective is to help UNICEF CO teams and leaders (
as well as their partners) understand ‘for themselves’ through fruitful discussions and exchange of
ideas, ‘what happened’, ‘why it happened’, and ways to sustain strengths and improve on
weaknesses.32
While adopting a similar ‘shared learning’ approach as the one characterizing an Operational Review,
the proposed RTE will gather information (remotely) from UNICEF staff as well as partners, other
frontline workers, and the target population, to the extent possible. This way the RTE will not only be
informed by internal/UNICEF sources but external ones as well.
The RTE will be a ‘light-touch’ exercise that will employ a mixed-methods approach including
qualitative and quantitative data collection. Given the unfolding COVID-19 pandemic, related travel
risks and the significant disruption experienced by countries, virtual data collection including online
30 Due to the fluid operating context, the use of COVID-19 response Country Plans as the ‘unit of analysis’/reference point in
the RTE was not deemed appropriate. Following discussions, the focus of the question therefore shifted from the implementation
of COVID-19 plans to the implementation of the response to COVID-19. This question will entail gauging the adaptation of
the response over time, including vis-a’-vis pre-COVID programme delivery
31 This question will include an assessment of the effects of COVID-19 on access to basic services, including for the most
vulnerable segments, to the extent possible.
32 https://www.alnap.org/help-library/after-action-review-technical-guidance
36
surveys and remote interviews will be preferred. However, intra-community data collection (including
through the use of Photo Voice and other child-focused evaluation methods) will be envisaged when
and where possible in most of the countries involved in this exercise.
The presence of other ongoing/planned initiatives, at regional and country level, to generate
information on the UNICEF response to COVID-19 will also be carefully mapped out to ensure alignment
and minimize overlap with the RTE.
Data collection
Data collection will take place at three different levels:
▪ National: at least 10 KIIs will need to be conducted with cluster/sector leads, Partners NGOs,
Government (mainly Ministry of Education and Ministry of health) and private sector (ex:
community radio stations);
▪ Sub National: (selection of 1 or 2 sub national level sites). For each one of the communities included
in the sample, at least of 2 schools (primary, secondary) and 2 health centers will need to be visited.
At each site, direct observation along with KII and focus groups discussion will be held with front
lines workers, such as health workers, community health workers and teachers/head of school.
Other infrastructures supported by UNICEF will also need to be the object of the field visits. (ex:
mainly WASH in schools/health centers)
▪ Community level: Photo Voice work sessions as well as participatory videos will be realized by
UNICEF Implementing Partners in collaboration with the national consultants (Note: community
level can also be urban and peri-urban areas of the Capital). UNICEF will provide telephones
mounted with cameras to different groups in the same community (each group would be made up
of 5-6 individuals) during a given week and the results of their work (pictures and films showring the
impact of the COVID-19 on their daily lives as well their coping strategies) will be shared with the
rest of the community for a more exhaustive discussion on some of the issues depicted by the
groups. Photos and videos produced will be analysed by the consultants with support from the
UNICEF WCARO Evaluation Unit.
Instruments
The following are examples of instruments that can be used for data collection:
- Short Survey Monkey questionnaire aimed at all all UNICEF Cos in WCAR: to ensure a widely
consultative process at the level of each CO, the instrument will be sent to UNICEF CO
Representatives for the Country Management Team (CMT) to respond;
- Short survey monkey questionnaire aimed at the implementing partners’ staff based in the country
‘s capital (Govt, CSOs, private sector);
- Phone surveys and phone calls with implementing partners and frontline workers;
- Collaborative and participative discussion with various stakeholders through digital whiteboard33;
- Follow-up in-depth remote Key Informant Interviews (KII) with UNICEF Staff, implementing partners
(Govt and CSOs) at CO levels, etc.
- Oher innovative methods to capture, from an equity perspective, the ‘voice of the community’ will
be explored to the extent possible. This would include a glimpse of what is happening within
communities affected by the COVID-19, including their level engagement in response (the
possibility exists for a short survey to be administered through U-report in districts where UNICEF)
- Photovoice, participatory videos, focus groups discussions, participatory activities with youth in
affected communities
33 Exemple : https://en.linoit.com/
37
Data Analysis
As this real-time evaluation will rest on a mixed method approach, it expected that the data be analyzed
both quantitatively (e.g. frequency tables and other descriptive statistics) and qualitatively (e.g.
through coding and content analysis)
Sampling:
In light of the real-time nature of this exercise and given the concrete learning needs amongst UNICEF
staff and its partners, the suggested sampling is mostly purposive. In particular, the Selection of sub-
national level locations where to conduct fieldwork will be based on accessibility, level of services
supported by UNICEF and availability of stakeholders (including availability of IPs to support the
conduct of community participatory activities, with a special focus on youth and children).
To help build on the external stream of evidence and avoid the risk of duplication, information
pertaining to the response that is already available at the country level (e.g. U-reporters, phone banks
at community level, 3rd party monitoring data, KAP studies/other assessments such as needs
assessments, sitreps, response plans from UNICEF and from the Governments, etc.) will be explored.
That would eventually inform the final choice of methods and data collection tools.
To ensure the soundness of findings generated, attention will be given to the validation of information
gathered to reduce potential biases.
To enrich learning, EO is proposing to conduct 2 rounds of assessments, with the first round (R1)
planned to yield findings in early Q4 2020, and the second round (R2) in 2021.
6. Scope
Initially the intention was to sample a number of UNICEF-supported countries based on their ability to
illustrate a diversity of profiles against a range of criteria. In line with the principles of following ROs
lead and attempting to minimize duplication of effort, it was instead agreed in August 2020 that ROs
would select countries based on regionalized rationales and upon where relevant activities were
already taking place34.
In WCARO, the following Countries Office were selected to take part in this first phase of the RTE: Chad,
Cote d’Ivoire, DRC, Gabon, Mauritania, and Sao Tome and Principe.
Thematically, the assessment will focus on the UNICEF public health response and the early stages of
the socio-economic response. The sampling approach adopted in each region may ultimately further
determine the thematic focus of the assessment.
The focus and approach for the 2nd round of the RTE (R2) including the countries to select in R2, will be
determined on the basis of the 1st round (R1).
34 The EO will produce a retrospective framework of these RO-selected countries in early September 2020 using criteria such
as i) geography (region); ii) CO size; ii) government capacity and systems to respond to outbreak; iv) outbreak size/level of
disruption of basic services; v) focus of UNICEF CO’s programmatic response (e.g. social protection; child protection; education
etc.), or a combination of any of these criteria. This framework will a) support reporting at the global level and b) allow the
EO and the RTE Task Team to identify if the RO-selections will support a global representative analysis or additional selections
will be required. Given that a number of ROs would like to apply the CO survey to all Countries in their regions, then sample
a number of countries for in-depth data collection, this is expected to supply much of the comparative data required for Phase
1.
38
7. Evaluation Users and Uses
This exercise has the potential to offer timely insights on different levels. Primary users will be the
UNICEF management at the country level who would harness the RTE’s findings to improve ongoing
implementation of the response to COVID-19. Findings from the RTE will, more specifically, inform
potential adjustments to the 2021 appeals and the next round of CO planning.
The wealth of information generated from an extensive sample of countries can also represent a
valuable asset for the oversight role of regional offices, and to HQ, with a view to informing broader
forward-looking strategic decision-making across typologies of countries and responses. If completed
as planned, the evidence generated will inform RMT discussions on the response in the Fall of 2020.
Making a timely report to inform the RMT discussion will be deemed critical and must be prioritized.
The findings of the assessment are also expected to plug into the global continuous learning initiative
around the COVID-19 response that EO is currently implementing with the COVID-19 Secretariat, and
importantly, will be used as one of several information/evidence streams which will feed into the
eventual L3 summative evaluation of the response to COVID-19 (that EO plans to conduct in 2021).
Information gathered will be analyzed and trends identified and presented in a digital interactive
report. The RO in collaboration with the different consultants working in each one of the 6 countries,
will produce a regional report on the RTE. The RTE’s findings will be presented and discussed as
appropriate, with findings from Round 1 expected to inform the fall RMT.
8. Management and Resources
Besides informing the CO planning of the COVID-19 response, this RTE is intended to support the
oversight role of Regional Directors. It will therefore be managed by ROs, through the Regional
Evaluation Advisors (REvAs), who will work closely with the Regional Emergency Advisors and the
Deputy Regional Directors. To expedite the delivery of the RTE. The Humanitarian Evaluation Portfolio
(HEP) in EO and the COVID-19 Secretariat will support the RTE and ensure a coordinated approach.
Specifically, the following are envisioned as the key roles and responsibilities:
- REvAs will confirm the selection of countries involved in the RTE in each round, and will work with
the EO to ensure a suitably diverse range of countries;
- A small taskforce, comprising REvAs and HE, will co-develop the tools that will drive the exercise.
While this ‘toolkit’ with templates will be available to collect, analyze and use data from COs, each
region will plan for the execution of the RTE, with the understanding that specific regional
adaptations in such tools and approaches may take place, as needed;
- REvAs and their evaluation teams will be responsible for consolidating findings at the level of their
respective region, the UNICEF Evaluation Office (EO) will, in turn, be responsible for consolidating
findings, identifying trends and generating learning across regions;
- EO will keep all informed, provide cross-region insights and advice, when needed, with a view to
ensure the RTE’s continuous relevance and utility.
9. Timeline
A tentative timeline for Round 1 of the RTE is presented below:
Expected deliverables
Deliverables Deadlines
Contribution to the Analysis of the quantitative survey launched by October 16
the Regional Office on Survey Monkey
Transcripts of all KIIs conducted at national and Sub national level October 26
and observation sites check list filled
Analysis of U reports if used October 26
Country-level report following the template provided by UNICEF October 26
39
Results of the Photo voice work and participatory videos November 30
10. Required Competencies and Qualifications
The UNICEF Regional Office will be supported by a at least one external consultant in each one of the
CO involved. In Sao Tome, the external consultant will be international consultant and he/she will with
help with the research and data collection tasks at the country level, analysis and reporting.
The international consultant team is expected to execute the following tasks:
a. Work closely with the RO to design and implement the RTE;
b. Execute the RTE to respond to the questions stipulated in the terms of reference (or subsequent
revisions of the RTE questions);
c. Generate Assessment products and deliverables in accordance with contractual requirements.
The Consultant will work closely with UNICEF regional evaluation staff.
Required Qualifications of the external consultant
Senior Evaluator
i) A post-graduate or master’s degree in social science, development studies, international
relations or economics.
ii) Extensive knowledge of humanitarian, development and humanitarian-development nexus
programming, debates and ways of working.
iii) At least 7 years’ experience in conducting and managing multi-disciplinary evaluations – in
particular global, strategic evaluations and joint evaluations – UNICEF, other UN agencies
or other international partners.
iv) Extensive knowledge of and experience in current evaluation methods and approaches,
particularly formative and forward-looking approaches, participatory methods, and
supporting accountability to affected populations.
v) Extensive experience with inter-agency cooperation at headquarters and in the field.
vi) Familiarity with UNICEF’s programming.
vii) Excellent oral and written communication skills (in English); knowledge of other UN
languages a key advantage.
viii) Expertise evaluating/assessing public health emergencies is highly desirable.
ix) Extensive knowledge of qualitative and quantitative data collection methods and analytical
methods and techniques.
x) Proven experience managing an evaluation team.
xi) Experience in generating strategic, useful and action-oriented recommendations to senior
management and programming staff.
xii) Experience with the ethics of evidence generation; experience collecting data from
vulnerable groups; familiarity with ethical safeguards.
11. Application Submission Modalities
UNICEF accepts applications from International individual contractor.
40
All applications should contain the following documents:
I. Technical Proposal which would include at least the following:
▪ Candidate’s CV
▪ Example of one evaluation report produced by the consultant
▪ Methodology note (max 2 pages), which shall cover the following:
- Understanding of the evaluation purpose
- An adequate conceptual framework and evaluation methodology
- Proposed timeframes (hour/days)
- Clear definition of roles and responsibilities for the execution of the mandate
Applicants are strongly encouraged not to repeat the text from Terms of Reference but rather to
demonstrate a critical understanding of it in their methodology note. This note shall remain a technical
document and not a motivation letter.
II. Financial Proposal:
- Detailed budget breakdown (in US Dollars).
The proposed financial offer must include fees, logistics (DSA and Tickets) and indirect costs (publishing,
reprography). Fees will be negotiated and agreed upon before contract is signed.
The technical proposal shall be submitted in a separate file or envelop, clearly named/marked:
“Technical Proposal.” No financial information should be included in the Technical Proposal. The
technical offers will be noted according to the assessment grid provided in Table 3.
Table: Technical offer assessment grid
Number Assessment criteria Sub-criteria Score Total score
1 Understanding of Understanding of ToRs (according to 10 10
ToRs the value added of the technical
proposal)
2 Methodology Methodological reference framework 10 25
to address evaluation questions
(according to the relevance of the
methodological framework for
answering evaluation questions)
The quality and robustness of 10
sampling strategy (according to the
relevance and consistency of the
proposed data collection and
sampling methods for answering the
evaluation questions)
Data analysis methods (according to 5
the relevance and consistency of the
proposal for answering the
evaluation questions)
3 Organizational Evaluation Work Plan 5 10
capacity of the (according to the relevance of the
evaluation team to proposed timeline for the delivery of
execute the expected outputs)
mandate Roles and Responsibilities of the 5
Evaluation Team members (according
41
to the appropriateness of the
distribution of roles and
responsibilities for the achievement
of expected results within the
required time)
4 Expertise and Expertise of the Team Leader 5 10
experience of the (according to the conformity with the
Team Leader required profile and the expertise
evaluation in general and in equity-
focused and gender and human
rights-based evaluations)
Experience of the Team Leader 5
(according to the quality of the
evaluation report submitted as part
of the proposal, and the consultant's
experience in evaluation in general
and in the targeted thematic area in
particular and as an evaluation team
leader)
5 Expertise and Expertise of the team members 8 15
experience of the (according to the conformity with the
Evaluation team required profile, the expertise in the
members targeted thematic area, knowledge of
the national context and evaluation
and research methods)
Experience of the team members 7
(according to the experience in
evaluation in general and in the
thematic targeted area)
Total Score attributed to the technical proposal 70 points
The financial proposal shall contain the Offer with cost breakdown and must cover all expenses related
to the evaluation including the desired remuneration, accommodation costs, travel costs (economy
class), travel insurance and others. The IT and communication equipment necessary for the proper
implementation of the evaluation will be the responsibility of the consultant. It should be noted that
the costs of organizing meetings or technical workshops will be borne by UNICEF. The financial offer
shall be presented separately from the technical offer and clearly named/marked “Financial Proposal”.
It will only be examined for offers that are considered technically valid (minimum score of 50 points in
the technical assessment).
The evaluation firm can suggest a different payment schedule in their proposal. This will be considered
during the assessment of the proposal.
42
12.2. List of interviews and focus groups discussions
12.2.1.
Date Entity
UNICEF CO TEAM
UNICEF CO TEAM
19.10.2020 UNICEF CO TEAM
UNICEF CO TEAM
UNICEF CO TEAM
UNICEF CO TEAM
Ministry of Education
20.10.2020
Ministry of Education
Ministry of Education
UNICEF CO TEAM
21.10.2020 DPSSF (Ministry of Employment, Solidarity and Social Security)
CNES (Ministry of Health)
22.10.2020
TVS-Télévision Santoméens
23.10.2021
Institut de la jeunesse
28.10.2020
Secretariat of State for Social Communication
4.11.2020
Programme de santé Reproductrice (Ministry of Health)
6.11.2020
Direção dos Cuidados de Saude (Ministry of Health)
43
12.2.2. Community/Local Level
Date District Entity Interviews Focus Groups
4 interviews with teachers
School 2 Focus groups with girls
10/Nov Agua Grande 1 interview with school
Patrice Lumumba 2 Focus Groups with boys
director
5 interviews with teachers
2 Focus groups with girls
11/Nov Agua Grande Liceu Nacional 1 interview with school
2 Focus Groups with boys
director
4 interviews with staff
Health Centre in
11/Nov Agua Grande 1 interviews with health N/A
Gamboa
community agents
Social Protection
12/Nov Caué 1 interview N/A
District Coordination
4 interviews with teachers
Secondary School 2 Focus groups with girls
12/Nov Caué 1 interview with school
Porto Alegre 2 Focus Groups with boys
director
Secondary School 2 Focus groups with girls
13/Jan Caué 2 interviews with teachers
Angolares 2 Focus Groups with boys
44
3 interviews with staff
Health Center
13/Nov Caué 3 interviews with health N/A
In Angolares
community agents
Community in 1 Focus Group with 1 community leader, 2 key informants and 5
13/Nov Caué N/A
Angolares community members
Social Protection
13/Nov Agua Grande 1 interview N/A
District Coordination
Health Center 1 interview with health
16/Jan Caué N/A
Ribeira Peixe community agents
Community in Agua 1 Focus Group with 1 community leader, 2 key informants and 5
17/Nov Agua Grande N/A
Grande community members
45
12.3 Survey for Key Informant at CO level
Dear UNICEF Colleague,
Thank you for agreeing to be interviewed to support the UNICEF Real Time Assessment (RTA) of the
UNICEF ongoing response to COVID-19. Your responses will be critical to understanding how UNICEF
Country Offices (COs) have adapted to better respond to the COVID-19 pandemic, programme
implementation and reach, quality of our programme support, and identifying lessons for enhancing
our work moving forward.
Your Country Office may already have participated in a CO survey monkey questionnaire. We expect
the CO questionnaire to be completed by every UNICEF CO globally. Your CO has been selected by the
RO as a focus country. This means that we’ll undertake 3-5 Key Informant Interviews (KIIs) (including
this one!) where we hope to supplement the information provided in the CO questionnaire and get
more depth on the CO experience. Further triangulation of information will be done through desk
reviews, external stakeholder surveys or interviews, use of ongoing monitoring or other CO
mechanisms.
The RTA process is being managed by Regional Offices (ROs), with coordination and support from the
Evaluation Office (EO), and the COVID-19 Secretariat. The top-line findings and analysis will be
presented to both RMT and GMT in Q4 of 2020 and also used for the COs 2021 work planning and the
HAC review process.
Answers provided should relate to the Country Office in which the respondent officially works at the
time this interview was conducted.
1 The overall guiding question for the assessment is: How well has UNICEF responded to the
COVID-19 epidemic in *** [country] in the past six months? Following the COVID-19
response, how well placed is the CO now to respond to likely future emergencies (e.g. a
second wave of COVID-19, if applicable; cyclones, seasonal flooding, drought, population
movements etc.)?
2 In your view, how did pre-2020 country vulnerabilities and response capacities impact on
the national and the UNICEF response to COVID-19, particularly from a timeliness
perspective?
a. What change or adaptation did the CO make to enhance its COVID-19 response, taking
into account the caseload, socio-economic impact, lockdown/access?
b. What is UNICEF’s current level of knowledge on how pre-existing needs and conditions
may have changed as a result of COVID-19? Specifically, how have children been
affected and have definitions of categories of vulnerable populations changed as a
result?
3 Was the UNICEF CO COVID-19 response plan proportionate to country level needs and
informed by consultation with partners and affected communities?
a. How were needs assessed, and how were these balanced with capacity to respond?
b. As needs have been verified and evolved, in what ways have the targets originally set by
UNICEF in the COVID-19 response plans been adapted, and why?
4 How relevant were UNICEF’s preparedness planning and mechanisms (including
contingency arrangements) for the COVID-10 level response?
a. What preparedness lessons have been learnt and applied at CO level?
46
b. How [if at all] have preparedness planning and mechanisms at CO level been enhanced to
be ready for the next COVID-19 outbreak and/or to respond to other potential
emergencies?
5 Is there a standout moment in this response where UNICEF’s advocacy/influencing/leverage
with other actors was demonstrated to be successful?
a. What were the critical factors that led to the outcome? Or
How would you describe UNICEF’s particular contribution if this was a
sectoral/cluster/joint advocacy success?
6 What support has the CO received from RO and HQ? [e.g. L3 SSOP; COVID-19 guidance
documents; additional funding/support to re-programme existing funds; technical
support…etc.]
a. How timely and useful was the support provided?
b. What recommendations/feedback can you provide to UNICEF RO and HQ in relation to
support going forward (for COVID-19 and more generally)?
7 COVID-19 has placed significant additional demands on COs given the restricted movements
and lockdown situations, resulting in some challenging management decisions:
a. Has the CO significantly increased coverage and/or reach and, if so, in which sectors?
b. Is your view that UNICEF was able to extend (or sustain) reach in the most essential
services?
c. Have difficult decisions had to be made given needs/ increased coverage and reach
leading to an inability to focus on quality?
8 How [if at all] has UNICEF ensured quality of its response especially with remote
management?35
a. What methods have been used to verify this?
b. How would you assess the overall quality of the UNICEF CO response to COVID-19 so far?
In your answer to these questions please use some of the following as prompts to
defining quality36:
i. Timeliness;
ii. Meeting programme standards [for both supplies and services] – there are
standards even in non-humanitarian programming;
iii. Integrated programme approaches that increase coherence, value, engagement,
and protection; that are risk informed, take into account LHD; consideration of
the political/economic analysis, etc.;
iv. addressing equity and exclusion;
v. cost effectiveness;
vi. adaptation and flexibility where this led to change of approach;
35 UNICEF defines remote programming as programming without the presence of staff due to unacceptable security risks or
denial of access by authorities. Remote Programming Humanitarian Action, Final Report, Programme Guidance, UNICEF,
New York, 2012.
36 In the Evaluation of the Coverage and Quality of the UNICEF Humanitarian Response in Complex Humanitarian
Emergencies, UNICEF defines quality as ‘the extent to which UNICEF is adhering to the benchmarks of its CCCs, plus its
supplementary commitments to 1) the Core Humanitarian Standard (including related commitments to Accountability to
Affected Populations), 2 technical standards for humanitarian programming (primarily SPHERE, Inter-Agency Network for
Education in Emergencies, and the Child Protection Minimum Standards), and 3) the high level common themes of the World
Humanitarian Summit and accompanying Grand Bargain commitments, as reflected in the UNICEF Strategic Plan 2018-21.
As this definition uses mainly ‘emergency’ programming quality criteria and some COs may not be entirely familiar
with them, , responding to this definition is not directly within the body of the KII question no 8; however, the
interviewer can use it to prompt if required or if challenged by the interviewer with regard to UNICEF definition of
quality.
47
vii. innovative approaches and methods adopted no matter how apparently small
viii. etc
9 How [if at all] has the CO ensured /continued community engagement (AAP) and with what
frequency has this been undertaken?
a. How has the CO used this information from communities to adapt programming? Please
provide examples.
Alternative Question [9] (with supplementary questions)
if the interviewee is the AAP Focal Point or Head of C4D (also responsible for AAP)
(attempts to secure this interview should be made by the RO and an additional time
allocation should be requested)
9b. Six months into this response, how successful has UNICEF been in maintaining or
increasing C4D/AAP activity?
9c. What adaptations or innovations have been required at local or community level to
continue delivering key information and messages at community level?
9d. What actions have been taken either on the part of your team or on the part of senior
management to ensure that AAP data and recommendations are being factored into
programme design and adaptation in a timely and meaningful way?
9e. Aside from COVID-19 related lockdown or other movement restrictions impeding access,
what other constraints are you experiencing to effective C4D/AAP work and what more can
UNICEF do to support your work?
9f. Based on your knowledge of communications at community level, or in your perception,
(please state which) have there been any implications for UNICEF’s ability to communicate
effectively on PSEA or other Code of Conduct imperatives at community level?
10 Should the CO work differently as it continues to respond to the impact of COVID-19 in this
country to ensure children and their communities are not left behind?
a. What should UNICEF do more of/prioritise? Please elaborate: _________________
b. Where should UNICEF do less/deprioritise? Please elaborate: _________________
c. How should UNICEF work differently? Please elaborate: _________________
d. What are the possible new areas of activity that UNICEF should consider responding to new
or increased needs? Please elaborate: _________________
48
12.4 Interview Guide for Affected Communities
Introductory Message Text
Dear X
I am X and I am working for UNICEF to undertake this assessment. Thank you for agreeing to support
UNICEF by taking the time to participate in this (telephone) interview. UNICEF is conducting a real
time assessment to better understand the needs in Covid-19 affected-communities, your perspective
on the quality of the response so far, and advice on what UNICEF and other partners should do in the
coming months. This real time evaluation is being conducted in countries across the world. This
conversation should not take longer than X time/minutes. All responses are anonymous, and names
and job titles will not be stated in the report. Do you have any questions before we begin?
2. What are your must urgent needs at this time of COVID?
3. On a scale of 1 to 10 [1 being low and 10 being high], to what extent has the support received by
you over the last few months matched.responded your most urgent needs (see response
above)? Tell more about the support you received
4. What other support (if any) have you received but that did not so much response to your needs>
so far to deal with the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic? 37
5. On a scale of 1 to 10 [1 being low and 10 being high], to what extent have the most vulnerable
populations in your community been given special attention during the response so far? [Please
provide additional details] ______________
6. In what ways was your community engaged by UNICEF and its partners throughout the response
so far: [please select all that apply]38
a. No/very limited engagement
b. We were asked what our needs were at the onset of the crisis. Please indicate by which
method: _________
c. We were asked what our needs were at key points in time in the past few months. Please
indicate by which method: _________
d. We received clear information about the response (i.e. what to expect, when and who was
eligible for specific programmes). Please indicate by which method: _________
e. We received information about the ways to provide feedback/complaints on the response.
Please indicate by which method: _________
f. We were involved in key decisions about the response that affected us. Please indicate by
which method: _________
g. We know that our feedback/advice has been used to inform the response
7. Did you/your community receive what you needed the most in time for it to be useful? (please
tell us about the t for each one of the areas where the response has focused (we should provide
respondents with the list)
a. Yes
37 If this is a telephone survey, then propose beginning with a drop down menu of what support had been
received.
38 This question may be applicable only when communities are aware of UNICEF and would need to be
adapted to national/local awareness levels. Judgement call required/rewording required.
49
b. Somewhat
c. No
d. Don’t know/not sure
8. Health
9. Education
10. Nutrition
11. Water and Sanitation
12. Child Protection
13. Social Protection
14. Other [please specify]
15. How easy is it for you to contact UNICEF or UNICEF partners to make suggestions, to complain,
or to provide feedback? [Please provide additional details] _______________
a. Very easy
b. Easy
c. Somewhat easy
d. Not easy
e. Don’t know/not sure
16. What should UNICEF do more of/less of/differently in order for their reponse to better meet
your community most urgent needs? [open ended]
50
12.5. Interview Guide for National Government and INGO Implementing Partners
Introductory Message Text
Dear X
I am X and I work for UNICEF/am an independent consultant. Thank you for agreeing to support
UNICEF by taking the time to participate in this (telephone) interview. UNICEF is conducting a real
time assessment to better understand needs in COVID-19 affected-communities, your perspective on
the quality of the response so far, and advice on what UNICEF should do in the coming months. This
real time assessment is being conducted in countries across the world. This conversation should not
take longer than X time/minutes. All responses are anonymous, and names and job titles will not be
stated in the report. Do you have any questions before we begin?
A. Adaptation
17. What kind of support have you received from UNICEF in the past 6 months for the COVID-19
response? 39 [please select all that apply]
a. Supplies
b. Logistics
c. Funding
d. Technical and Advisory support
e. Human Resources (Surge)
f. Training
g. Other____________
18. To what extent do you consider UNICEF support received during COVID-19 relevant to the
Government response and Government priorities? [please select 1 answer from the following]
a. Very relevant
b. Relevant
c. Somehow Relevant
d. Irrelevant
e. Don’t know/not sure
19. For Government only: How supportive has UNICEF been to considerations of new programmes,
approaches or initiatives made by the Government? [please select 1 answer from the following]
a. Very supportive
b. Supportive
c. Somehow supportive
d. Not supportive
e. Don’t know/not sure
f. Does not apply as the Government did not consider new programmes/approaches/initiatives
20. For Government only: On a scale of 1 (low) to 10 (high), to what extent has UNICEF been able to
scale up coverage and response as required?
21. For IPS only: Is your organization working differently or in a new sector to respond to COVID?
[open ended]
39 This question should only be asked if the information is not already available to the interviewer. It is expected that when
the key informants are selected by COs/RO this information would form part of the brief.
51
22. For IPs only: How flexible has your partnership with UNICEF been in order for you to implement
the activities you wanted to put in place in time to meet new or different community needs?
[please select 1 answer from the following]
a. Very flexible
b. Flexible
c. Somehow flexible
d. Not flexible
e. Don’t know/not sure
f. Does not apply as we did not implement activities for new/different community needs
B. Implementation
23. On a scale of 1 (low) to 10 (high), to what extent has UNICEF contributed to Government
response ability to identify, target and reach the most vulnerable and excluded populations?
24. On a scale of 1 (low) to 10 (high), how have the needs of the most vulnerable been met in the
response?
25. What were the main implementation challenges for UNICEF in the response at the beginning?
[open ended]
26. What are the main implementation challenges for UNICEF in the response now? [open ended]
27. On a scale of 1 (low) to 10 (high), how has UNICEF successfully addressed these challenges40?
28. What role have preparedness and contingency planning had in the response to COVID-19? [open
ended]
29. On a scale of 1 (low) to 10 (high), have supplies reached intended beneficiaries?41 [If question
does not apply, please select N/A]
30. On a scale of 1 (low) to 10 (high), have communication messages reached intended
beneficiaries? [If question does not apply, please select N/A]
31. On a scale of 1 (low) to 10 (high), has cash assistance reached intended beneficiaries? [If
question does not apply, please select N/A]
32. On a scale of 1 (low) to 10 (high), has training been received where it is necessary? [If question
does not apply, please select N/A]
33. What initiatives or innovations have been effective with regard to remote programming and
monitoring? [open ended]
C. Quality
34. On a scale from 1 (low) to 10 (high), how timely has UNICEF support been to the response?
35. On a scale from 1 (low) to 10 (high), how impactful do you judge UNICEF-supported
interventions to be?
36. How has equity been ensured especially if there have been access challenges?
37. On a scale from 1 (low) to 10 (high), to what extent has UNICEF and its partners been able to
verify successful delivery of activities?
38. Which groups are in most danger of being ‘left behind’ or are the most vulnerable being served?
(e.g. segments of populations, geographical areas, urban/rural, economic groups?) [open ended]
D. Lessons learnt/forward thinking – open ended questions
39. What conclusions can be drawn on UNICEF’s particular added value to the COVID-19 response in
the country? [open ended]
40 This question is intended to clarify the extent to which UNICEF has been a key player and has showed
leadership in addressing these challenges
41 Questions 12 to 15 should be selected depending on the individual response being discussed.
52
Given your current needs to improve the national response to the COVID-19 response as well as other
priorities what should UNICEF CO do more of? less of? differently? possible new areas? in order to
enhance programming for children and their communities? [open ended)
53
12.6 Interview Guide for Frontline Workers, Local Government and Local CSOs
Introductory Message Text
Dear X
I am X and I work for UNICEF/am an independent consultant. Thank you for agreeing to support
UNICEF by taking the time to participate in this (telephone) interview. UNICEF is conducting a real
time assessment to better understand needs in COVID-19 affected-communities, your perspective on
the quality of the response so far; programme implementation, and advice on what UNICEF should
do in the coming months. This real time assessment is being conducted in countries across the world.
This conversation should not take longer than X time/minutes. All responses are anonymous, and
names and job titles will not be stated in the report. Do you have any questions before we begin?
40. What are the new and emerging needs in your communities (if any) at this time of COVId-19?
41. What have been the most critical changes required in the delivery of basic services in ordert to
meet the new and emerging COVID-19 needs indicated in your earlier answer? [open ended]
42. Were you aware of any COVId-19 preparedness and contingency plan ? [open ended]
43. On a scale of 1 [being low] to 10 [being high], to what extent have the most vulnerable
populations received support in your community during the response to COVID-19 so far? [Note
to interviewer: please also ask which groups are now the most vulnerable]
44. On a scale of 1 [being low] to 10 [being high], to what extent has UNICEF support reached the
intended beneficiaries in the response to COVID-19? [N.B. UNICEF support may include the
following: supplies like PPE, communication messages, cash assistance, training, support for
specific programmes e.g. primary health care, nutrition, education, child protection, etc.]
45. On a scale of 1 [being low] to 10 [being high], how critical has UNICEF and its partners’ support
been in meeting the needs of the most vulnerable?
46. On a scale from 1 [being low] to 10 [being high], how timely has the UNICEF response been so
far in the following areas/
Health
Education
Nutrition
Water and Sanitation
Child Protection
Social Protection
47. Other [please specify]
48. In what ways have UNICEF and its partners ensured that implementation of the COVID-19
response is of f good quality? [e.g. timely response, support going to the intended populations,
taking place in ways/formats agreed upon; meeting programme standards, etc.] [open-ended]
49. How easy is it for you and your colleagues to contact UNICEF or UNICEF Implementing partners
(note to the evaluator: be very specific to list the IP to make suggestions/requests, to complain,
or to provide feedback? [Please provide additional details]
a. Very easy
b. Easy
c. Somewhat easy
d. Not easy
e. Don’t know/not sure
50. What are the new/emerging vulnerable groups that UNICEF and other partners should consider
focusing on? [open ended]
54
51. What are the nes ew emerging needs) induced by COVID-19 at the community level and that
UNICEF and its partners will need to address in the future (next few months ang longer term)
longer term f [open ended]
55