EVALUATION OF THE INCLUSIVE
AND SPECIAL EDUCATION
PROGRAMME IN BHUTAN
2010-2020
Published in 2022 by Ministry of Educaiton and UNICEF Bhutan
Permission is required to reproduce any part of this publication. For more
information on usage rights, please contact thimphu@unicef.org
©️ Text & Photos 2022 UNICEF
All rights reserved
Evaluation of the Inclusive and
Special Education Programme in
Bhutan (2010-2020)
2
5
9
7
1
T
C
O
N
U
©
Acknowledgements
The evaluation team would like to express their gratitude to all those who supported and participated
in this evaluation study:
This evaluation report would not have been possible without the UNICEF Bhutan Country Office
team's dedicated resources, time, and energy. Special thanks to Ms Dechen Zangmo, Monitoring and
Evaluation Officer, Mr Bishnu Bhakta Mishra, Education Officer and Ms Pema Tshomo, Education
Officer for their technical support throughout the evaluation. We are also grateful for the support from
the UNICEF Regional Office for South Asia, Ms Marie-Consolee Mukangendo, Deputy Representative
Bhutan and Mr Geert Poorteman, Chief Education Officer.
The evaluation team would like to thank the Ministry of Education for their technical inputs and
logistical support to the evaluation team. Special thanks to Karma Galay, Director General of the
Department of School Education, Mr Sherab Phuntshok, Chief of ECCD and SEN Division, Mr Karma
Gayleg, Programme Analyst of ECCD, and Mr Pema Norbu, Mr Karma Norbu, and Ms Pema Choden,
Programme Officers at ECCD & SEN Division.
Appreciations to Mr. Pema Chhogyel, the Deputy Chief Program Officer, ECCD & SEN Division who
has involved throughout in review, coordination and finalization of the study. He has been the core
member of both the technical and reference group for the evaluation.
Acknowledgement is also due to the members of the Evaluation Reference Group for their time,
expertise, and invaluable input to this study. Special thanks to the valuable inputs from Mr Phuntsho
Wangyel, Ms Tshering Yangtsho, and Ms Ugyen Zangmo of the Gross National Happiness
Commission; Ms Kinley Wangmo of the Ministry of Health, Mr Norbu Wangchuk, Mr Sangay Dorji,
and M. Tshering Lhamo from the Ministry of Labour and Human Resources; Ms Yeshi Lham from the
National Commission on Women and Children; Mr Shriman Gurung and Mr Arjun Gurung of BCSEA;
Mr Wangchuk and Mr Dorji Tshewang of Royal Education Council, Mr Namgay Dorji of Ability Bhutan
Society, and Mr Sonam Gyamtsho and Mr Dorji Phuntsho of Disabled People’s Organization of Bhutan,
and Ms Tempa Ragbay from Phensum Parents Support Group.
The evaluation team is grateful to the government, civil society partners, development partners,
organizations of persons with disabilities, school heads, SEN coordinators, teachers, parents and
caregivers, and children with and without disabilities, who shared their knowledge, experience,
reflections, and resources for this evaluation, as well as for their valuable time during a challenging
period in the middle of the COVID-19 pandemic.
This evaluation study was led by Dr Peter Grimes, Dr Kishore Chhetri, Arlene dela Cruz, Jan Erron
Celebrado, and Rosalynn Estor from Beyond Education Consultancy.
i
Foreword
To ensure inclusion and education for all learners, Inclusive Education has been a priority for the
Ministry of Education for more than four decades. The first special school for children with vision
impairment was established in 1973. In 2001, a pilot-based programme on the integration of learners
with disabilities into the mainstream system was started at the Changangkha Lower Secondary
School, Thimphu. A school for children with deafness and Hard of Hearing was established in Drukgyel
Lower Secondary School in 2003. With the evolvement of education for children with disabilities from
special education models to inclusive approaches globally, Bhutan commits to valuing, accepting and
supporting diversity in schools and ensuring that every child (including children with disabilities) has
an equal opportunity to learn as per the Standard for Inclusive Education developed by the Ministry of
Education in 2017. The Ministry of Education has taken concerted efforts to get over 900 children with
disabilities into 26 inclusive schools (including in two specialized institutes) as of 2022. Major
investments have been made in areas of expansion of access to quality inclusive education by the
Ministry of Education. UNICEF has contributed towards the Ministry’s commitments to leave no child
behind supporting in the identification and establishment of new schools for inclusive and special
education programmes; strengthen teacher capacity to deliver quality inclusive education; and
advocate for rights-based approach to inclusive and special education in Bhutan.
This evaluation of Inclusive and Special Education programme in Bhutan was conducted by
independent external consultants. The evaluation report points out several success stories of
improving the lives of children with disabilities through education, protection, and empowerment,
thereby justifying the relevance of the programme. The report also highlights lessons learnt in terms
of quality as well as sustainability of the programme. The report recommends strategic shifts to focus
on quality education, greater access and involvement of wider stakeholders including parents, Civil
Society Organizations and policymakers to anchor future interventions on the Convention on Rights
of Persons with Disabilities (UNCRPD). With findings of the evaluation, the relevant agencies will be
better prepared to confront the misconceptions and develop positive attitudes and services for
children with disabilities. In particular, the Ministry of Education will be in a stronger position to build
support for inclusive education within the schools and across the communities.
The Ministry of Education and UNICEF would like to congratulate the ECCD and Special Education
Division, MoE, the evaluation team and Planning Monitoring and Evaluation Division, and the Education
Section, UNICEF for successfully undertaking a comprehensive evaluation of Special and Inclusive
Education in Bhutan.
Karma Galay Dr Will Parks
Ministry of Education UNICEF Bhutan
ii
Executive Summary
Introduction
This is the evaluation of the Inclusive and Special Education Programme in Bhutan, commissioned by
the Ministry of Education and UNICEF Bhutan and led by Beyond Education Consultancy. Education
for children with disabilities has long been a priority of the Royal Government of Bhutan. Although the
concept and practice of inclusive education are relatively new (Bhutan MoE, 2017) and the government
is yet to ratify the CRPD and establish a national education law, significant strides in legislative and policy
reforms have been made in recent years toward providing equitable learning opportunities for all children,
including those with disabilities. Education for children with disabilities has been consistently prioritised in
national development plans. Bhutan’s focus on the education of children with disabilities has been
strengthened since the 9th Five-Year Plan which resulted in the establishment of a Special Education Unit
within the Ministry of Education (MoE) (Bhutan Planning Commission, 2002; Gross National Happiness
Commission, 2009; Schuelka, 2012). The main strategy of the government was to integrate children with
disabilities into regular classrooms (Bhutan Planning Commission, 2002).
Object of Evaluation
The Inclusive and Special Education Programme was the object of this evaluation. It is a programme
of the Ministry of Education supported by various development partners, aiming to ensure every
Bhutanese child learn in an inclusive education system that enables participation and supports all
children to meet their potential. The Programme is being implemented through a three-pronged
strategy, reflected in the Programme’s reconstructed Theory of Change:
a) creating an enabling environment (policy)
b) service delivery (capacity development and supply)
c) demand creation (awareness and advocacy)
Purpose, Objectives and Scope
The evaluation aimed to establish whether there have been significant changes in the education of
children with disabilities within the ten years of Programme implementation. The evaluation also
aimed to provide baseline data on the Programme which could be used as a basis for monitoring
progress, setting targets, and evaluating results. It outlines a set of actionable recommendations to
improve the delivery of inclusive education in the country. The scope covers the implementation
period 2010 to 2020 in 23 schools1 and 2 Draktsho vocational training centres offering the IE/SEN
Programme. Sixteen general schools that do not implement the programme were included in the
sample to generate a comparative analysis in terms of existing knowledge, attitudes, and practices in
relation to teaching children with disabilities.
Evaluation Design
The evaluation is a combination of formative and summative approaches. It is formative or learning
focused as it aims to identify progress, challenges, and opportunities. There is a key focus on the
1 This includes 2 specialized institutes and does not include the 3 IE/SEN schools established in 2021.
iii
processes and the likelihood of such processes to lead to the achievement of target results. The
evaluation gathered evidence-based lessons to inform the improvement of programme
implementation. At the same time, the evaluation was summative as it also assessed the achievement
of outcomes and outputs and measured the extent to which the Programme brought about changes.
A mixed-methods approach was adopted for this evaluation, combining both quantitative and
qualitative approaches. Data collection methods included a (1) systematic desk review of relevant
literature, policy documents and programme reports; (2) key informant interviews and FGDs with a
total of 1,066 individuals including representatives from key government officials, local and
international development partners; school leaders, SEN Programme Coordinators (SENCOs), school
leaders, teachers from generals schools and schools with IE/SEN Programme, parents of children with
and without disabilities and children with and without disabilities; (3) online surveys with a total of 417
teachers from general schools and schools offering IE/SEN schools; (4) classroom observation in 20
schools with IE/SEN Programme; and a case study of Draktsho Vocational Training Centre.
Aligned with the TOR, the criteria for evaluation are based on the Organization for Economic Co-
operation and Development (OECD) Development Assistance Committee's (DAC) evaluation criteria:
relevance, coherence, effectiveness, efficiency, and sustainability. To explicitly address the issues of
gender, equity and human rights, an additional criterion (cross-cutting issues) was added.
Evaluation Findings
1. Relevance
Two key evaluation questions were investigated in this criterion pertaining to (1) alignment of
programme strategies with international and national policies in meeting the needs of children with
disabilities and (2) responsiveness of activities and outputs to address national priorities and needs of
children with disabilities.
The evaluation concludes that the IE/SEN Programme is relevant to both the national priorities and the
educational needs of children with disabilities in Bhutan.
• In principle, the programme’s objectives and strategies are aligned with international and
national policies promoting equity and inclusion. Its main aim of providing equitable access to
learning for all children reinforces the goals of the CRC, CRPD, and SDG 4 and priorities
articulated in key national policies. However, there is room for improvement in terms of
bridging the gap between policy and practice. Limitations in resources and technical capacity
prevent the programme from being fully aligned with the ideals set out in policies.
• The responsiveness of the programme is mainly made evident by its success in increasing
access to education for learners with disabilities, owing to the government’s gradual
establishment of more inclusive schools in the country. Moreover, promising teaching and
learning practices and in-classroom support are emerging and have been reported to result to
positive outcomes among learners with disabilities. Although enrolment rates were seen to
increase over the years, most children with disabilities in the country remain invisible in the
school system. The government needs to accelerate its efforts to expand the programme, not
only to significantly increase access but raise the quality of education provisions in the
classrooms.
iv
• Overall, the situation of children with disabilities in Bhutan, wherein most of them remaining
marginalized in terms of access and participation, merits the continued commitment to and
implementation of the IE/SEN programme.
2. Coherence
In evaluating coherence, the focus of the study was on (1) internal and (2) external policy coherence
and (3) cross-sector collaboration for disability-inclusive education.
• Broadly speaking, Bhutan’s national policies (i.e., Draft National Policy on Special Educational
Needs 2012, Draft National Education Policy 2019, and the National Policy for Persons with
Disabilities 2019) are internally and externally coherent in terms of their fundamental aims.
Internal policy coherence is evident as the basic principles of inclusion and equity are mutually
reinforced in domestic policies. Based on the aims of the policy documents, coherence with
external policies such as the SDGs and the CRPD was found to be strong. All national policies
are synergized in safeguarding the right of all children to education, without discrimination
• A key finding of the evaluation is the continued reference to language that promotes the notion
of a specialized or segregated forms of education for children with disabilities. The evaluation
concludes and recommends replacing outdated terminology with more inclusive alternatives.
A simple shift in language has the potential to change education practitioners’ thinking around
disability inclusion. It must be noted that the special educational needs policy was drafted in
2012 and has informed the development of the education policy but will not be adopted.
• Policy reform initiatives such as the ongoing development of the education policy present an
opportunity to strongly articulate Bhutan’s commitment to gradually phasing out specialized
provisions and moving towards building more inclusive schools within the general education
system.
• The programme has provided a platform for cross-sector collaboration, but it could be
improved. Horizontal coordination among government units and development partners is
present but mechanisms to strengthen coordination are needed. For instance, the committee
for inclusive education must be activated; and CSOs, OPDs and local education offices need
to be more actively involved in joined-up planning, implementation, and monitoring.
• Community engagement could be strengthened by tapping active parent organisations on the
ground and nurturing the existing relationships between SENCOs/SEN Team with parents.
The evaluation highlighted that foundational to effective collaboration within the schools is
inclusive leadership. School leaders who have had training on inclusive education tend to hold
more positive attitudes towards inclusive education and are more open to collaboration. The
existence of organised professional learning communities is an emerging good practice that
needs to be supported further and replicated in other schools.
3. Effectiveness
To determine the extent to which the programme achieved its objectives and intended results, the
evaluation examined five dimensions: access and participation, positive and negative unintended
results, resources and implementation strategies, advocacy, and gender mainstreaming.
• Access and participation in inclusive and special education have increased significantly since
the Programme commenced in 2010. However, enrolment data showed significant gender
v
differences in access, with boys consistently outnumbering girls since 2011. Limited data,
particularly on learning outcomes and participation rate, hinder the study from assessing and
determining the extent and quality of participation of children with disabilities.
• The Programme achieved positive results and significant milestones in its ten years of
implementation. It was instrumental in formulating inclusive education policies, strategies, and
standards. Through its technical interventions and advocacy efforts, stakeholders reported
increased access to and quality of education and greater awareness of disability and inclusive
education in schools and communities. No negative results were reported but a number of
clear areas for improvement were noted.
• Although substantial inputs were provided to implement the Programme, these were not
adequate to address long-standing issues and concerns, which include: discrimination against
children with disabilities, limited understanding of disability issues and inclusive education,
limited capacity of teachers to facilitate inclusive education, lack of accessible infrastructure
and facilities, lack of appropriate instruction guides and materials, lack of assistive devices and
health services from experts, lack of alignment between planning and implementation; lack of
financial resources and development partners; and lack of EMIS data to aid in decision-making.
Classroom strategies, such as the Individual Education Plan and push-in and pull-out
approaches need to be reviewed further to determine their appropriateness and inclusivity.
• Awareness and demand for inclusive education may have increased to some extent, but
misconceptions, stereotypes, and discriminatory attitudes continue to be barriers to inclusion.
Responses highlighted the serious need to improve understanding about disability and
inclusive education to ensure that the Programme can be implemented effectively with the
full support of all stakeholders.
• Using UNICEF’s gender continuum model, the findings suggest that the Programme falls
under the gender-aware/sensitive category. While the Programme considers the principles of
gender equality in its frameworks and implementation strategies and recognizes that the ‘one-
size-fits-all’ approach contributes to the production and reproduction of gender inequalities in
education, the findings on the gender needs of girls and boys with disabilities suggest that the
Programme does not actively challenge and address them.
Overall, the Programme is moving in the right direction and has achieved significant progress in its
ten years of implementation. However, the Programme needs to address gender disparity in access
and participation, allocate adequate inputs and resources, ensure effectiveness and inclusivity of
strategies, improve understanding of disability and inclusive education, and address the different
needs of boys and girls to promote equal educational outcomes.
4. Efficiency
To determine the extent to which the Programme delivered results in an economical and timely way,
the evaluation study examined five dimensions: planning, monitoring, and evaluation; financial and
human resources; implementation strategies; cost-effectiveness; and situation analysis.
• Some mechanisms are in place to plan, monitor, and evaluate the Programme: the MoE
manages education data using the EMIS and presents relevant indicators through the AES
reports, schools track their progress through the School Performance Management System,
and teachers use the Individual Education Plan to record and review students’ academic
vi
achievement and developmental milestones. Though these mechanisms help improve
programme efficiency, the lack of standardized tools, lack of training on documentation and
reporting, and lack of dissemination of relevant information hinder stakeholders from using
data in a strategic and timely manner.
• Substantial resources—human, financial, and technical—have been invested in the
Programme. However, these are not adequate to properly implement inclusive and special
education and address the needs of children with disabilities. Among others, the lack of
teacher training and capacity building has been cited most frequently as an obstacle to the
successful implementation of the Programme.
• Working in parallel, the strategies of policy formulation, technical capacity-building, financial
support, and advocacy have facilitated improvements in the provision of inclusive and special
education. Having a set of standards for inclusive education has also supported efficiency in
achieving results, although implementation still varied across schools. On the other hand, the
limited participation of parents, caregivers, and the community may have lessened
opportunities for further awareness-raising, better service delivery, and a broader support base
for the Programme.
• There is a lack of understanding amongst stakeholders about the principles of inclusive
education and how this can be implemented to benefit all students—those with and without
disabilities. Though responses acknowledged the complex factors affecting inclusive
education, some stakeholders believe that including children with disabilities in schools with
IE/SEN programme is less cost-effective compared to enrolling them in specialized institutes.
The Programme must dispel the misconception that addressing the needs of children with
disabilities will adversely impact the learning and development of children without disabilities
and vice versa.
• Within the Programme, its strengths lie in having solid partnerships and close collaboration
with other agencies and organizations, expertise in inclusive education amongst stakeholders,
employment of a twin-track approach to disability inclusion, and institutionalisation of the
planning and review processes. On the other hand, the Programme needs to address its
weaknesses which include: insufficient data on children with disabilities and disability-
inclusive education to inform intervention, absence of a national education law, limited
government investment, limited understanding of inclusive education, limited capacity to
implement inclusive education, and limited understanding of how to organize inclusive
classrooms and plan and teach inclusively.
• As the Programme continues its next phase of implementation, it needs to consider how to
maximise existing opportunities, including the possibility of establishing more inclusive
schools (with a focus on whole school approaches to inclusion including inclusive cultures
environment and practice), improving access and participation of children with disabilities in
education, and increasing collaboration with organisations of persons with disabilities and
other agencies. The Programme also needs to mitigate the threats posed by external factors
including the delay in the ratification of CRPD, lack of development partners (funding partners),
limited awareness and understanding of the needs of children with disabilities, limited
awareness and understanding of inclusive education, inaccessible infrastructure and facilities
in communities and public spaces, and impact of COVID-19 pandemic on learning continuity
and quality of teaching and learning.
vii
Overall, the Programme has taken the initial steps—establish mechanisms, allocate resources, and
employ strategies—to deliver results efficiently. However, the Programme needs to further integrate
the planning, monitoring, evaluation mechanisms; analyse, report, and use data in a more strategic
and timely manner; increase investment in inclusive education; increase parental and community
engagement; build stakeholder capacity to understand and implement inclusive education; and
consider the results of the initial situation analysis in refining its overall design and strategy.
5. Sustainability
The three key evaluation questions in this criterion focus on (1) efforts made to establish an enabling
environment and measures implemented to sustain the delivery of services, (2) interventions adopted
to upscale the programme, and (3) strengthening of capacities of different education stakeholders at
the individual and organisational levels.
• There is evidence of significant efforts that have been made to support the sustainability of
the programme. The findings of this evaluation study have highlighted the steps that the
Bhutanese government has taken to sustain and upscale the IE/SEN programme in the
country. These include establishing an enabling environment through various rights-based and
disability-inclusive policy frameworks, increasing the financial investments on the whole
education system, and requiring the commitment of the local government to implement the
programme. However, these efforts are likely to be hampered by various challenges identified
by evaluation study participants. These include limited budget dedicated to the programme,
inadequate disability-inclusive infrastructure, gaps in transitional planning, challenges in
implementing disability-inclusive curriculum and pedagogy, assessment and learning
materials.
• There is also evidence that the RGOB has adopted different interventions to expand the
programme implementation. There is significant progress in expanding the programme to
reach more general schools to cater for the educational needs of children with mild to
moderate disabilities, and eventually, young children with disabilities through the ECCD
programme. Nevertheless, some evaluation study participants stressed the need to urgently
introduce the programme to other general schools and increase the human resources to reach
more children with disabilities. Findings also show that the government collaborates with
external partners such as development partners and national civil society organisations to
sustain the programme expansion. The government is also utilising disability data through
national surveys and studies on disability to support the case for investment in IE/SEN
programme. Moreover, findings reveal that increasing the demand for inclusive education
through raising awareness on the right to education of children with disabilities contributes to
the upscaling of the programme. However, challenges remain particularly in influencing the
parents and communities in supporting the education of children with disabilities.
• The findings of the evaluation study provide evidence that relevant education stakeholders,
particularly at the school level, were supported through capacity development activities to
implement the IE/SEN programme. Respondents shared various approaches in building the
capacity of education stakeholders. For instance, different education colleges in Bhutan offer
pre-service and in-service teacher training for school heads and teachers. Ministry of Education
and other external partners provide in-service teacher training programmes that target school
heads, SEN programme coordinators, and teachers in schools with IE/SEN programme.
However, evaluation study participants have identified gaps and challenges in this area. First,
viii
there is evidence that the focus of capacity development activities in schools with IE/SEN
programme is those teaching in classes with children with disabilities. On a similar note, there
is also evidence that these capacity development activities have not been extended to general
schools/centres/institutes that are not implementing the IE/SEN programme. There is also a
need to improve the capacity of parents of children and the whole community in supporting
the education of children with disabilities.
A key recommendation from this report would be to focus more on school development activities
which build the inclusive understanding and capacity of all teachers, leaders, parents and community
in and around the school. Teachers need to be supported through ongoing school development
activities to work with each other and other stakeholders to build an inclusive school culture based on
inclusive values. This model should be used as the basis for scaling up the IE program.
6. Equity, Gender Equality, and Human Rights-Based Approaches
• There is evidence that the IE/SEN programme is mainstreaming the principles of gender
equality in its implementation strategies. Most of the respondents noted that inclusion
principles underpin the programme's implementation. This is reflected in the disability-
inclusive policies and plans that have explicitly included principles of gender equality. Some
respondents affirmed that the programme promotes the empowerment of women and girls
with disabilities by providing them equal access to education. However, the findings also
suggest the need to address specific gender needs of children with disabilities. Gender-
responsive interventions are needed to cater to the specific needs of boys and girls with
disabilities.
• There is also adequate evidence that the programme implementation adheres to a human-
rights-based programming approach. This is reflected in the commitment of the government
to promote the rights of persons with disabilities, including women and children, in policy
development and programme implementation. Nevertheless, challenges remain, including the
limited engagement of parents and caregivers of children with disabilities in the programme
implementation and the presence of corporal punishment in schools.
Conclusions
Overall, the evaluation concludes that the Programme has been successful in bringing about changes
and progress in inclusive education for children with disabilities.
The Programme is deemed relevant with respect to the priorities of the national government and the
right of children with disabilities to realise their right to education on the same basis as others.
The development of key national policies, guidelines and standards that are aligned with international
frameworks such as the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (CRPD) is a key
achievement of the Programme. The ratification of the CRPD will strengthen the foundation that the
government has built over the last decade. Further reforms in policies must re-enforce inclusive
education and not specialised segregated education.
ix
The Programme has been successful in bringing more children with disabilities to school, albeit the
quality of learning requires further review. A focus on systems strengthening and capacity
development is needed to increase the effectiveness, efficiency, and sustainability of the Programme.
While key milestones have been achieved, findings suggest that more work is needed to bridge the
policy-practice gap and supportive mechanisms need to be put in place or strengthened.
The effectiveness, efficiency and sustainability of the Programme are often undermined by persistent
challenges across levels of the education system, including in the school communities.
The evaluation did not find evidence of gender-specific interventions, other than gender equality
principles embedded in policy documents. In a more practical sense, the Programme needs to look at
and address specific gender needs of children with disabilities that influence access and participation.
Scaling up the programme is an indispensable part of the government’s commitment to education for
all. The expansion of the inclusive and special education programme would benefit from
improvements in planning, monitoring and data collection and utilization mechanisms; improving
understanding, capacity and attitudes towards disability and inclusive education especially among
teachers; leveraging partnerships; mobilizing more resources and investing them in creating more
inclusive schools and moving away from the special education model.
Lessons Learned
1. Strategic and timely use of data is crucial for effective and efficient decision-making.
2. Future programming must focus on including children with disabilities in inclusive schools,
rather than strengthening specialized institutes.
3. Technical capacity-building is a continuous process, not a one-off event.
4. Active engagement of the local government in programme implementation presents an
opportunity to ensure ownership on the ground.
5. Programme scale up must consider the number of children with disabilities residing in the
districts to ensure adequate provisions.
Recommendations
1. Activate the Inclusive and Special Education Coordination Committee. Promote cross-
sector collaboration with relevant ministries and agencies. Convene the inter-sectoral
committee and institutionalize its formation detailing clear objectives and delineation of roles
and responsibilities. Ensure the participation of persons of disabilities or their representatives
through CSOs, NGOs, and OPDs.
2. Strengthen accountability mechanisms by ratifying the CRPD and adopting a national
education law or policy. Review the draft National Education Policy 2019, ensure its full
alignment with the CRPD, and prioritise its adoption. Ensure the policy re-enforces inclusive
education and not specialised segregated education.
3. Establish a comprehensive baseline for the programme drawing from the findings of this
evaluation study and develop a programme design document. The baseline study must
clearly outline the current needs of learners with disabilities and the barriers they experience
in accessing and participating in school. The evaluation findings should inform the
x
development of a dedicated programme design that clearly sets out a theory of change and
logical framework with baseline and targets, implementation and monitoring arrangements,
resources needed
4. Undertake a more in-depth review of policies related to disability-inclusive education
and initiate policy reforms. Replace outdated terminology such as ‘special needs’ and
‘special education’ with more inclusive language in existing policies. Changes in terminology
signal a change in the discourse and shifts in the roles of special education practitioners.
Clearly articulate the twin-track approach to inclusion wherein interventions aim to (1) improve
the overall inclusivity of the system for all learners while (2) addressing specific needs of
individual children. This approach must not be interpreted as a justification to maintaining
specialized institutes. Explicitly state the adoption of child-centred teaching and learning
approaches, the application of Universal Design for Learning, provision of reasonable
accommodation for children with disabilities in all policies and related plans.
5. Strengthen monitoring and evaluation of the IE/SEN Programme. Include a results chain
framework in the programme design document (see R3), performance indicators, data source,
and reporting mechanism, as well as conditions that may facilitate or hinder progress
(assumptions or risks). Revisit the existing EMIS module that includes disability data and add
indicators that are currently not being tracked.
6. Increase financial investment in inclusive education. Allocate a higher government budget
to facilitate progress toward quality and equity-focused results for children with disabilities.
Consider separating the SEN and ECCD units into two divisions to enable dedicated budget
allocation. Collaborate with more development partners including the private sector, CSOs,
and international development agencies to mobilize more resources. Investments must be
clearly directed towards promoting inclusive teaching approaches, instead of perpetuating
special education.
7. Conduct a more in-depth case study on the imperative for investing in inclusive
education. Undertake further studies focused on evaluating the investments allocated to
inclusive education, including the cost-effectiveness of the IE/SEN Programme, factoring in
costs and outcomes, to determine approaches that produce the most results for their inputs.
8. Expand the inclusive education programme. Ensure national coverage and support the
establishment of more inclusive schools gradually. Start building a network of schools in each
district working together as communities of practice, sharing effective practices and
collaboratively problem-solving. In parallel, there must be a strong focus on developing
leadership and expertise across the education system including actors at the central down to
the school level. Consider the size of the Dzongkhag and the population of children with
disabilities in determining the number of schools that will initially offer the IE/SEN Programme
to ensure adequate provisions. The strategy must articulate a gradual phasing out of
specialized schools. The evaluation is not suggesting closing such schools at once as that
would be problematic. Where possible, the government should aim not to enrol any more
children into specialized schools and prioritize including them in general schools and improving
inclusive practices and capacity of general schools.
9. Increase the capacity and confidence of teachers and school heads in implementing
inclusive education in general schools, including those not implementing the IE/SEN
programme yet. Collaborate with pre-service teacher training institutions that are already
supporting inclusive education and key government units in developing or strengthening
xi
existing teacher training programmes for pre-service teachers. Focus on localized
development of teachers, school leaders and local education authorities. Facilitate continuous
professional development through further education, training courses, mentoring/coaching,
and supporting professional learning communities, with a focus on inclusive principles and
practices, for all schools. Move away from a cascade approach to teacher professional
development and promote ongoing, school-based approaches to training.
10. Strengthen the capacity of local governments, in particular, Dzongkhag and Thromde
Education Officers. Provide additional capacity development programmes for Education
Officers on programme implementation to support them in their functions related to IE/SEN
and to increase ownership in their respective Dzongkhags and Thromdes. Topics could include
inclusive leadership, strategies for coaching and mentoring school leaders in inclusive
education, monitoring and evaluation.
11. Address gaps and challenges in facilitating the transition of children with disabilities to
vocational, further education, and the workplace. Work with pre-service institutions to
develop inclusive strategies in supporting children with disabilities in tertiary education. A
review of market trends and demands should inform the design and implementation of
vocational training programmes to increase the chances of learners to find gainful employment
or other livelihood opportunities.
12. Undertake an extensive review of the gaps and challenges in early identification and
intervention. Revisit the feasibility of introducing the IE/SEN programme in the ECCD centres
in the immediate future and how access to ECCD for children with disabilities could be
improved. Finalize the development of the multisectoral ECCD strategic action plan to improve
services such as early identification, referral, and intervention of developmental delays and
disabilities. Promote cross-sectoral collaboration between different ministries and agencies
related to ECCD to ensure accountability of responsibilities. Enhance the capacity of ECCD
service providers and facilitators in the screening of children and responding to their needs.
Improve the understanding and knowledge of parents and communities on functional disability
to support early screening and referral.
13. Strengthen advocacy and awareness-raising among education stakeholders.
Understanding of disability-inclusive education needs to be strengthened across all levels of
the education system including the school communities. Build on the findings from the 2017
Knowledge, Attitudes, Practice (KAP) study on children with disabilities and strategically
address misconceptions and negative attitudes towards inclusive education. Advocacy
initiatives must also aim to eliminate the use of outdated terminology such as ‘special needs’
and ‘special education’ and promote inclusive language.
14. Increase engagement of parents and the school community. Strengthen the capacity of
parents in supporting the educational needs of children with disabilities. Involve parents and
the wider community in the school’s planning and review process. Consult with parents in
planning lessons, supporting children in the classroom, and monitoring learning. Strengthen
links with and the capacity of community and parents in supporting inclusive education
through capacity building programmes for parents of children with and without disabilities on
the right to education of their children.
15. Undertake a more in-depth gender analysis of the IE/SEN programme. Further research
is recommended to identify and examine the differences in the needs, constraints, and
opportunities between girls and boys with disabilities in the programme implementation. Plan
xii
and implement strategies to address the gender disparity in access to education. Conduct
studies on the learning outcomes of children with disabilities and ensure sex-disaggregated
and disability-disaggregated data are collected.
16. Promote positive discipline and prohibit physical and non-physical forms of punishment
in schools. Improve the understanding and knowledge of relevant education stakeholders,
particularly at the school level, on the fundamental rights of children against violence, including
corporal punishment.
xiii
Contents
1 Introduction ........................................................................................................ 1
1.1 Disability-Inclusive Education ............................................................................................ 1
1.2 Country Context ................................................................................................................ 1
1.3 Objective of Evaluation: The Inclusive and Special Education Programme ....................... 3
1.4 Structure of the Report ....................................................................................................10
2 Evaluation Design ............................................................................................ 12
2.1 Purpose, Objectives and Scope.......................................................................................12
2.2 Overall Approach .............................................................................................................13
2.3 Evaluation Themes, Questions, and Criteria ...................................................................14
2.4 Methodology ...................................................................................................................17
2.5 Limitations .......................................................................................................................20
2.6 Ethical Protocols ..............................................................................................................20
3 Findings ............................................................................................................ 22
3.1 Relevance ........................................................................................................................22
3.2 Coherence .......................................................................................................................25
3.3 Effectiveness ...................................................................................................................30
3.4 Efficiency .........................................................................................................................41
3.5 Sustainability ....................................................................................................................46
3.6 Equity, Gender Equality and Human Rights-Based Approaches .....................................60
4 Conclusions ...................................................................................................... 64
4.1 Relevance ........................................................................................................................64
4.2 Coherence .......................................................................................................................64
4.3 Effectiveness ...................................................................................................................65
4.4 Efficiency .........................................................................................................................66
4.5 Sustainability ....................................................................................................................67
4.6 Equity, Gender Equality and Human Rights-Based Approaches .....................................69
5 Lessons Learned .............................................................................................. 71
6 Recommendations ........................................................................................... 73
7 Bibliography ..................................................................................................... 81
Appendices
Appendix A. Background
Appendix B. Terms of Reference
Appendix C. Theory of Change
Appendix D. Deviations from the TOR
Appendix E. Evaluation Audience, Use and Dissemination
Appendix F. Evaluation Framework
Appendix G. List of documents consulted
Appendix H. Overview of Respondents
Appendix I. List of schools visited
Appendix J. Data collection tools
Appendix K. Ethics approval letter
Appendix K1. Ethical protocols
Appendix K2. Consent forms
Appendix L. Draktsho Vocational Training Centre
xiv
Boxes
Box 1. Push-in and pull-in sessions .................................................................................................36
Box 2. Definition of human rights-based approach (UNICEF Finland, 2015) ..................................62
Figures
Figure 1. Inclusion of education of children with disabilities in Bhutan's Five-Year Plans ................ 2
Figure 2. Gender continuum ...........................................................................................................19
Figure 3. Enrolment of children with disabilities in IE/SEN programme from 2010-2020 ..............32
Figure 4. Education expenditure as % of government expenditure (2011-2020) ...........................48
Figure 5. Education expenditure as % of GDP (2011-2020) ...........................................................48
Figure 6. Number of schools and institutes with IE/SEN Programme from 2010-2020 .................51
Figure 7. Inclusion of inclusive education and disability subjects in pre-service teacher training
of teachers teaching in classes with children with disabilities .......................................................55
Figure 8. Inclusion of inclusive education and disability subjects in pre-service teacher training
of teachers teaching in general classes ..........................................................................................55
Figure 9. Inclusion of IE and disability in pre-service teacher training of teachers from sample
schools/centres/institutes without IE/SEN Programme .................................................................56
Figure 10. Inclusion of topics on inclusive education and disability in in-service teacher training
of teachers teaching classes with children with disabilities (n=165) ..............................................58
Figure 11. Inclusion of topics on inclusive education and disability in in-service teacher training
for general teachers ........................................................................................................................58
Tables
Table 1. Programme components .................................................................................................... 6
Table 2. Principal duty bearers .......................................................................................................... 7
Table 3. Programme resources .......................................................................................................10
Table 4. Key evaluation questions ..................................................................................................15
Table 5. National policies on disability and education .....................................................................46
Table 6. Distribution of teachers who received in-service training on IE and/or disability ..............59
Table 7. Inclusion of gender equality principles in education's policy environment. ......................60
xv
Acronyms and abbreviations
ABS Ability Bhutan Society
AES Annual Education Statistics
BCSEA Bhutan Council for School Examinations and Assessment
BhSL Bhutanese Sign Language
CEDAW Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women
CFM Child Functioning Module
CRC Convention on the Rights of the Child
CRPD Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities
COVID-19 Coronavirus Disease 2019
CSOs Civil Society Organizations
DEOs District Education Officers
DFAT Australia’s Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade
DPOB Disabled People’s Organisation of Bhutan
ECCD Early Childhood Care and Development
ERG Evaluation Reference Group
ERIC Ethical Research Involving Children
FGD Focus group discussions
FYP Five-Year Plan
GC4 General Comment No. 4 to Article 24 of the CRPD
GDP Gross Domestic Product
GNH Gross National Happiness
GNHC Gross National Happiness Commission
HRBAP Human Rights-Based Approaches
ICF International Classification of Functioning, Disability, and Health
IE Inclusive education
IEP Individual education plan
KII Key informant interviews
MoE Ministry of Education
MoH Ministry of Health
MoLHR Ministry of Labour and Human Resources
NBIP National-based In-service Programme
NCWC National Commission on Women and Children
NGO Non-government organisations
NORAD Norwegian Agency for Development Cooperation
NSB National Statistical Bureau
OECD-DAC Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development-Development
Assistance Committee
OPDs Organisation of Persons with Disabilities
PCE Paro College of Education
RGOB Royal Government of Bhutan
RNDA Rapid Neurodevelopmental Assessment
RCSC Royal Civil Service Commission
RUB Royal University of Bhutan
SBIP School-based In-service Programme
xvi
SCE Samtse College of Education
SDG Sustainable Development Goal
SEN Special Education Needs
SENCOs SEN Coordinators
SPMS School Performance Management System
SWOT Strengths, Weaknesses, Opportunities, and Threats
ToC Theory of Change
TOR Terms of Reference
TTIs Technical Training Institutes
TVET Technical, vocational education and training
UDHR Universal Declaration of Human Rights
UN United Nations
UNEG United Nations Evaluation Group
UNESCO United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization
UNICEF United Nations Children’s Fund
UNICEF ROSA United Nations Children’s Fund Regional Office for South Asia
WASH Water, sanitation, and hygiene
WG Washington Group on Disability Statistics
xvii
2
5
9
7
1
T
C
i O
N
U
©
1 Introduction
1.1 Disability-Inclusive Education
In education, children with disabilities are one of the most marginalized groups of learners. Equitable
access to the general school system remains to be a significant challenge for learners with disabilities.
They are less likely to access education opportunities, and those who are able to enter the school
system are more likely to drop out compared to their peers without disabilities
In recent decades, various international agreements,
Inclusive education is a process of
frameworks, and policies have established education
systemic reform embodying changes and
as a fundamental human right (UN, 2018) and
modifications in content, teaching
recognized inclusive education as a means to ensure
methods, approaches, structures, and
that all children, including those with disabilities, fulfil
strategies in education to overcome
their right to quality and equitable education
barriers with a vision serving to provide all
(UNESCO, 2018). In 2006, the United Nations
students of the relevant age range with an
Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities
equitable and participatory learning
experience and environment that best (CRPD) obligated governments to promote a rights-
corresponds to their requirements and based model of disability, including ensuring that
preferences. education systems are inclusive at all levels (UN,
2006). This was further strengthened through the
It encompasses a transformation in Sustainable Development Goal (SDG) 4 which
culture, policy, and practice in all formal explicitly targeted persons with disabilities (UN,
and informal educational environments to 2015) and commits governments to provide access
accommodate the differing requirements to lifelong learning opportunities to equip persons
and identities of individual students, with disabilities with the knowledge and skills
together with a commitment to remove
needed to seize opportunities and to participate fully
the barriers that impede that possibility.
in society (UN, 2015; UNESCO, 2020).
Source: United Nations, Convention on the Rights of
In 2016, General Comment No. 4 (GC4) to Article 24
Persons with Disabilities, 2016.
of the CRPD provided a more concrete framework for
operationalizing the right to inclusive education. It conceptualizes inclusive education as a fundamental
right of all learners, a principle that prioritises the well-being of learners, a means of realizing other
human rights and the result of the collective commitment to eliminating the barriers that hinder the
right to education (UN, 2016). The CRPD stresses that the traditional practice of segregating students
with disabilities in self-contained classes, nor integrating them into general classes without adjusting
the teaching and learning process, does not constitute inclusive education.
Country Context
Education in Bhutan is offered free up to Standard 10. Bhutan’s general school education system
consists of seven years of primary education (pre-primary to grade 6), followed by four years of lower
and middle secondary (grades 7-10), and two years of higher secondary (grades 11-2) (Bhutan MoE,
2014; Gross National Happiness Commission, 2009).
1
Education for children with disabilities has long been a priority of the Royal Government of Bhutan. In
1973, the first special school2 catering to children with visual impairments was instituted which
became the Zangley Muenselling School for the Blind, currently known as the Muenselling Institute.
A pilot programme based on an integration model in Changangkha Lower Secondary School in
Thimphu paved the way for the expansion of special education in 2001. Two years later, a school for
children with hearing impairments was established in Drukgyel Lower Secondary School, known today
as the Wangsel Institute.
Although the concept and practice of inclusive education are relatively new (Bhutan MoE, 2017) and
the government is yet to ratify the CRPD and establish a national education law, significant strides in
legislative and policy reforms have been made in recent years toward providing equitable learning
opportunities for all children, including those with disabilities. Education for children with disabilities
has been consistently prioritised in national development plans (see Figure 1). Bhutan’s focus on the
education of children with disabilities has been strengthened since the 9th Five-Year Plan which
resulted in the establishment of a Special Education Unit within the Ministry of Education (MoE)
(Bhutan Planning Commission, 2002; Gross National Happiness Commission, 2009; Schuelka, 2012).
The main strategy of the government was to integrate children with disabilities into regular classrooms
(Bhutan Planning Commission, 2002).
9th FYP 10th FYP 11th FYP 12th FYP
(2003-2008) (2008-2013) (2013-2018) (2018-2023)
Provision of Development of Improvement of
enhanced innovative and quality and
Establishment
special cost-effective inclusive education
of a special
education
measures to to ensure that no
education unit address the child is left behind,
services to
within MoE educational needs irrespective of
children with of children with circumstances
disabilities disabilities such as disabilities
Figure 1. Inclusion of education of children with disabilities in Bhutan's Five-Year Plans
Over the years, the conceptualisation of education for children with disabilities has evolved and
gradually shifted from the notion of special education towards promoting more inclusive perspectives
and approaches. Bhutan’s Standards for Inclusive Education define inclusive education as ‘the process
of valuing, accepting and supporting diversity in schools and ensuring that every child has equal
opportunity to learn’ (Bhutan MoE, 2017, p.4), including children with disabilities. While admission to
school remains conditional on the severity of a child’s disability, inclusive education aims to ‘provide
access to general education in regular schools for all children with disabilities, including those with
physical, intellectual, and other types of impairment’ (Bhutan MoE, 2020a, p. 48). Further review of
the international and national context in relation to inclusive education is provided in Appendix A.
2 The evaluation team advocates the use of more inclusive language and moving away from terminology such as
special needs, special education, special teachers, etc. In this report however, terminology used in government’s
official documentation and policy documents have been retained.
2
1.2 Objective of Evaluation: The Inclusive and Special
Education Programme
The object of this evaluation is the Inclusive and Special Education Programme (IE/SEN Programme)
of the Ministry of Education. The programme is currently being implemented as an integral part of the
broader education improvement agenda of the government, supported by various development
partners. This evaluation was jointly commissioned by Ministry of Education (MoE) and UNICEF
Bhutan.
Bhutan is divided into 20 districts or dzongkhags. Out of 606 government schools, 23 schools
(including 2 specialised institutes for children who are deaf and with vision impairment) offer the
Inclusive and Special Education Needs (IE/SEN) Programme. Two Draktsho Vocational Training
Centres are catering to children and young people with disabilities providing technical and vocational
education. Supported by the MoE and its partners, these schools accommodate learners with various
disabilities ranging from mild to severe (Bhutan MoE, 2020a).
To strategically reach children with disabilities in different parts of the country, inclusive and special
education schools are located across all regions. While only a small percentage of schools are currently
implementing the programme, the government’s long-term goal is to transform all schools into
inclusive schools. An increasing number of children with disabilities enrolling in schools IE/SEN
programmes3 and special institutes has been evident over the last decade, from 168 in 2010 to 997
students in 2020 (Bhutan MoE, 2020a).
The government follows a twin-track approach to inclusion, wherein it addresses inequalities in
education for all learners while at the same time, acknowledging and providing the specific educational
needs of children with disabilities.
1.2.1 Theory of Change
Informed by the Terms of Reference (Appendix B) and in the absence of a dedicated programme
design document that outlines the logic model and components of the programme, the evaluation
team organised the key initiatives in inclusive education undertaken within the last ten years into a
retroactive Theory of Change. The evaluation team constructed the programme’s key activities,
outputs, outcomes, and impact through a desk review of key documents including:
1. Bhutan’s 10th to 12th Five-Year Plans
2. Education Blueprint 2014-2024
3. Ten-Year Roadmap for Inclusive and Special Education 2019-2028
4. UNICEF’s Work Plan from 2010-2020
In consultation with MoE and UNICEF, the ToC was revised and feedback to the initial draft were
incorporated into further iterations. It is important to note that the ToC does not present a
comprehensive summary of every activity and output targeted and achieved over one decade of
3 Schools with IE/SEN programme refers to schools offering both inclusive and special education. The evaluation
team advocates the use of more inclusive language and moving away from terminology such as special needs,
special education, special teachers, etc. In this report however, terminology used in government’s official
documentation and policy documents have been retained.
3
implementation. Rather, it aims to give an overview of the main goals and priorities articulated by the
MoE, supported by its partners, including UNICEF, and describe the logical links between them. The
ToC is further elaborated in Appendix C.
4
Alignment with global
t c Every child in Bhutan learns in an inclusive education system that enables full participation and supports all children to meet their potential commitments and national
a p priorities
m
• SDG 4 and 10
I • GNH Domains: Education
• RGOB-UNICEF Bhutan’s
e Education Programme
m
o c Boys and girls with disabilities have increased access to equitable, inclusive, and quality education from early childhood up to the after-school phase •
2
T
0
e
1
n
9
-Y
-2
e
0
ar
2 3
R oadmap for IE
t u and SEN 2019-2028
O • National Key Results Area
7: Quality education and
skills
s t u p t
u O
1. di E s
s
a n
t
b
r
a
u
i b l
c
i l t i
t
y n
u
- g i
r
n
e
e c
s
n l
,
e
u v
a
s
s i
n
t
r iv
a
o
d
e
b
n
p
l
m p
is
a
o
h
e
r
l
t
e
n i
n
c
d
t
e
i s e
r
, s
s
i ,
h
n s
i
c
p
y l
s
u s d t
a
e i
r
n m
e
g s , 2. Se
i
r
n
v
c
ic
lu
e
s i
d
v
e
e
l i
e
ve
d
r
u
y
c a
re
ti
l
o
at
n
e
i
d
s
t
i
o
m
d
p
i
r
s
o
a
v
b
e
il
d
it y- 3. D
ed
e
u
m
ca
a
t
n
io
d
n
f o
is
r i
i
n
n
c
c
l
r
u
e
s
a
i
s
v
e
e
d
a nd quality
•
•
N
3 i N
1
n :
0
a
a e R
:
t
t q
i
i
G
o
o e u d
n
n
e
a u
a
a l
n
it
l
l c
d
y
K
K i
e
n
e
e
r
g
y
y
e
p
q
R
R o
u
e
e v
a
s
s e
l
u
u
i
r
t
t
l
l
y
t
t y
s
s a
A
A n
r
r d
e
e
a
a
Key Assumptions
• Inclusive education remains a
government priority
2.1 Strengthen early childhood
• Sufficient investments on
1.1 Develop evidence-based disability- 3.1 Strengthen advocacy for quality children with disabilities
inclusive national and school-level development and early identification inclusive education • Continuous improvement of the
s
policies
a
d
n
is
d
a b
in
il
t
it
e
ie
rv
s
e ntion for children with
3.2 Strengthen capacity of Disabled
c
o
a
th
p
e
a
r
c i
s
ty
ta
o
ke
f
h
g
o
o
l
v
d
e
e
r
r
n
s
m ent and
n 1.2 Establish disability-inclusive data 2.2 Establish schools with Inclusive and Peoples’ Organisations (DPOs) in • Legislative frameworks
o it
n e
v 1.3
c
s
S
o
y
tr
s
l
e
l
t
e
n
e
c
g
m
ti
t
o
s
h
n
e
,
n
m
th
o
e
n i
c
to
a
r
p
in
a
g
ci
,
t y
a n
o
d
f
evaluation
2.3
S
I
s
n
c
p
c
h
e
r
o
e
c
o
i
a
a
l
s
l
l
e
e
E
a
d
th
d
u
e
e
c
r
a
c
s
t
a
,
i o
p
s
n
a
u
c
p
P
i
p
t
r
y
o
o
g
r
o
t
r
f
a
s
t
m
t
e
a
a
m
f
c
f
h
e
a
e
s
n
r
d
s ,
l ocal
s
in
u
c
p
lu
p
s
o
i
r
v
t
e
in
e
g
d
a
u
n
c
d
a t
i
i
m
on
p lementing p
ar
r
e
o m
in
o
p
ti
l
n
ac
g
e
i nclusive education
r e government to implement inclusive education authorities on inclusive
c t n I e in d c u lu c s a i t v io e n f i a n n a d n c d in e g v e m lo e p c d h i a s n a i b s i m lit s y - 2.4 e E d n u h c a a n t c io e n c urriculum, pedagogy, Key Risks
ig 1.4 Enhance governance, multi-sectoral assessment • Shifts in government
e t a r t c in o c o lu rd s i i n v a e t e io d n u , c a a n t d io n pa rtnerships for 2.5 D le e a v rn e i l n o g p m an a d te p ri r a o l v s i de inclusive • p I in n r c s io l u u r f i s t f i i i e v c e i s e n ap t p in r v o e a s c t h m es e n to ts on
S 2.6 Establish disability-inclusive and educating children with
gender-sensitive infrastructure and disabilities
learning environments • Limited capacity of
2.7 Support the transition from basic government and
education to further education and/or stakeholders in inclusive
the workplace education
• Limited resources
• Negative attitudes towards
persons with disabilities
Problem Statement
Children with disabilities have limited access to inclusive and quality ECCD programmes, basic education, and specialised services; achieve poor learning outcomes, are learning in inaccessible learning environments and have limited
opportunities to transition to higher education or employment.
5
1.2.2 Programme Components
The programme’s three main components as articulated in the Terms of Reference and reflected as
outcomes identified in the Theory of Change include (1) enabling environment, (2) service delivery,
and (3) demand creation. Each component is elaborated into different dimensions reflecting the
requirements of the GC4.The principles of quality, equity, gender equality, and human rights cut across
all components.
Table 1. Programme components
Programme
Component/ Description Dimensions
Evaluation Themes
1. Enabling The enabling environment 1.1 Legislative and policy frameworks
environment includes interrelated 1.2 Data (including monitoring and evaluation)
conditions that enable or 1.3 Governance and management (including
facilitate the development inter-sectoral coordination and partnerships)
of the Inclusive and 1.4 Planning and financing
Special Education
Programme.
2. Service delivery Service delivery deals with 2.1 Early childhood development and early
the availability, access to identification and intervention
and quality of various 2.2 Establishment of schools with Inclusive
services in support of the and Special Education Programme including
Inclusive and Special specialised institutes
Education Programme. 2.3 Capacity development for teachers,
school leaders, and other support staff)
2.4 Curriculum, pedagogy, and assessment
2.5 Learning materials
2.6 Infrastructure and learning environment
2.7 Transition to vocational, further education
and the workplace
3. Demand Initiatives supporting 3.1 Awareness, attitudes, and practices
creation children with disabilities 3.2 Advocacy
and their families to 3.3 Participation of Organisations of Persons
improve knowledge of with Disabilities (OPDs)
their rights, demand
inclusive education,
encourage changes in
attitudes and behaviour
and increase participation
in education.
4. Cross-cutting Cross-cutting Quality
themes themes/issues are Equity
integrated into all aspects Gender equality
of the programme. Human rights
6
1.2.3 Programme Stakeholders
1.2.3.1 Programme Beneficiaries
1. The primary beneficiaries of the programme (i.e., rights holders) are children with
disabilities enrolled in schools with Inclusive and Special Education Programme,
including the special institutes.
2. The programme also has a benefit on other direct or indirect beneficiaries and duty
bearers including children without disabilities, national and local education authorities,
teachers, school leaders, other support staff, families, parents, or caregivers.
1.2.3.2 Principal Duty Bearers
Table 2. Principal duty bearers
Duty bearers Roles/Interests
Government Royal Government of The Royal Government of Bhutan guarantees the right
Bhutan of all citizens to free education up to Standard 10.
Gross National Leads and coordinates implementation of the national
Happiness Commission policy for persons with disabilities and its action plan
(GNHC)
Ministry of Education MoE provides overall policy guidelines for the
(MoE) development of education in the country.
Ministry of Education, Leads the implementation of the Inclusive and Special
ECCD and Special Education Programme and ensures that special
Education Needs education services are provided to children with
Division disabilities (Bhutan MoE, 2019c)
Ministry of Health Provides health services for persons with disabilities
(MoH) and ensures access to early identification and
intervention, community-based rehabilitation, and
assistive technologies.
Ministry of Labour and Responsible for introducing vocational and need-based
Human Resources training programmes for persons with disabilities,
(MoLHR) including women and girls (GNHCS, 2019)
National Commission on Implements training and awareness-raising activities
Women and Children on the rights of persons with disabilities and social
(NCWC) protection
Bhutan Council for Led the development of the National Education
School Examinations Assessment Framework in 2019 which features
and Assessment disability-inclusive learning assessment methods
(BCEA) (Bhutan Council for School Examinations and
Assessment, 2019)
Department of Develops relevant curriculum and teaching and
Curriculum and learning materials for school education and provides
Professional teacher development programmes
Development (DCPD),
Ministry of Education
7
Duty bearers Roles/Interests
(formerly Royal
Education Council)
Royal University of RUB, in coordination with MoE, is responsible for
Bhutan (RUB) improving pre-service programmes for teaching
children with diverse needs in schools (GNHCS, 2019)
Paro College of Provides pre-service and in-service training for
Education teachers
Dzongkhag Education Responsible for planning, implementing, and
Office (DEO) coordinating education programmes at the local level
Local leaders Local government leaders have a role in local decision
making, programming and service delivery
Development UNICEF Since 1974, UNICEF has been supporting the
partners Bhutanese government in ensuring the education of all
children, including children with disabilities.
Global Partnership for Since 2009, GPE has been supporting the Royal
Education (GPE) and Government of Bhutan.
Save the Children Through Save the Children, GPE’s COVID-19
accelerated fund supported the country’s COVID-19
response plan. This includes assistance to the
education sector for special education (GPE, 2021).
Bhutan Foundation Since 2008, Bhutan Foundation has been collaborating
with MoE to build the capacity of teachers in teaching
children with disabilities. The foundation provides
schools with teaching and learning materials and
resources that will enable children with disabilities to
succeed in the classroom (Bhutan Foundation, 2021).
Norwegian Agency for From 2007 to 2011, NORAD supported a development
Development project in Bhutan to improve the ICT competence of
Cooperation (NORAD) visually impaired students and adults (Media Lunde
Toleffsen, 2021).
Australia Volunteers for The Australian Volunteers Program has been highly
International engaged in improving the standards of Special
Development Education in Bhutan (DFAT, n.d.).
Australia’s Department The Government of Australia, through DFAT, continues
of Foreign Affairs and to support the Bhutanese government through the
Trade (DFAT) strengthening of the capacity of institutions in Bhutan
through Public Sector Linkages Programme (DFAT,
2014), including capacity building in inclusive
education.
CSO/OPD Ability Bhutan Society ABS is a public benefit organisation that promotes
(ABS) empowerment among persons with disabilities in
Bhutan. Their work includes providing educational and
psycho-social support to families and caregivers of
persons with disabilities (Ability Bhutan Society, 2021).
8
Duty bearers Roles/Interests
Disabled People’s DPO advocates for the empowerment of persons with
Organisation of Bhutan disabilities in all spheres of life. One of the objectives
(DPO) of the organisation is to provide support for the
education of persons with disabilities (Disabled
People’s Organisation, 2021).
Draktsho Draktsho Vocational Training Centre is an NGO that
provides technical vocational training for youth with
disabilities. Draktsho received funding support from
MoE and project-based funding support from UNICEF
and UNDP.
Schools School leaders Responsible for running an inclusive school through
the development of inclusive policies, cultivating an
inclusive culture, and ensuring inclusive practices
within the learning environment (Bhutan MoE, 2017)
Teachers General teachers are responsible for creating inclusive
classrooms for all learners while teachers in schools
with SEN programme
SEN programme coordinators (SENCOs) are
responsible for guiding and supporting general
teachers in creating inclusive learning environments
for learners with disabilities (Bhutan MoE, 2017).
Support staff Adequately and appropriately trained teacher
assistants provide learning support in classes with
students with diverse needs (Bhutan MoE, 2017).
Community Parents Parents/caregivers and the members of the local
community play a critical role in creating an inclusive
environment for children with disabilities. Schools
need to build relationships within the school
community (Bhutan MoE, 2017) to support learners
holistically.
School management Can facilitate implementation of inclusive education in
board the community
1.2.4 Programme Resources
The government is supported by various development partners in strengthening the implementation
of the programme. Table 2 outlines the estimated funding support directed towards education for
children with disabilities prior to 2010 up to 2020.
9
Table 3. Programme resources
Estimated funding
Programme
(USD)
1. NORAD: ICT programme for persons with vision impairment in 5,000,000
Bhutan (2007-2011)
2. Bhutan Foundation: C apacity building in special education for 166,000
special education teachers (2009-2012)
3. Royal Government of Bhutan: Awareness, outreach, rental, 201,6184
infrastructure development and others for inclusive and special
education (2010-2020)
4. Save the Children: Procurement of furniture, equipment, and 30,000
others (2017-2018)
5. Bhutan Foundation: Long-term capacity building for special 35,000
education teachers (2018-2019)
6. Bhutan Foundation: Technical support in special curriculum 25,000
development and implementation (2019-2020)
7. Australia Volunteers for International Development: Technical 105,844
support for inclusive education (2016-2018)
8. AusAid Public Sector Linkage Programme: Capacity building in 166,470
inclusive education (2011-2012)
9. Global Partnership for Education and Save the Children: COVID-19 170,703
accelerated fund to support Bhutan’s education sector for special
education (2020-2021)
10. UNICEF: Support to quality education (2010-2020) 4,108,277
Source: Ministry of Education
1.3 Structure of the Report
This evaluation report is divided into six sections. Section 1 provides an overall context of the
evaluation and introduces the object of the evaluation, the Inclusive and Special Education
Programme. Section 2 outlines the evaluation design and methodology. In Section 3, key evaluation
findings are presented and organized around the six evaluation criteria. Section 4 presents the
conclusions from the evaluation while Section 5 draws out key lessons learned from the ten-year
programme implementation. Finally, the main recommendations for expanding and improving the
programme are enumerated in Section 6.
4 excluding remunerations for the schools
10
2
5
9
7
1
T
C
11 O
N
U
©
2 Evaluation Design
2.1 Purpose, Objectives and Scope
The evaluation aims to establish whether there have been significant changes in the education of
children with disabilities. The evaluation also provides baseline data on the programme which can be
used as a basis for monitoring progress, setting targets, and evaluating results. It provides a set of
actionable recommendations to improve the delivery of inclusive and special education, as well as
strengthen coordination among relevant stakeholders. The evaluation process intends to raise
awareness and understanding among children with disabilities and their parents of the quality of
inclusive education services provided by the duty bearers (teachers, communities, school authorities,
central, and local governments) in realizing their rights.
2.1.1 Objectives
Specifically, the evaluation:
1. assessed the relevance, coherence, effectiveness, efficiency, and sustainability of the
Inclusive and Special Education Programme in realising the right to education of children with
disabilities;
2. ascertained the quality of services being delivered by the duty bearers to address special
educational needs;
3. documented good practices as well as challenges and created an inventory of knowledge base
for use by community practitioners;
4. assessed the changes in capacities of primary duty bearers in the provision of inclusive and
special education; and
5. assessed the extent to which equity and gender responsiveness are integrated into the
programme.
2.1.2 Scope
The evaluation assessed the programme implementation from 2010 to 2020. It focused on 235
schools (including two specialized institutes) and two Draktsho Vocational Training Centres
implementing the programme. As recommended by the Evaluation Reference Group, the evaluation
also included four ECCD centres, four monastic institutions, four technical training institutes, and four
general schools6. The evaluation covered Bhutan’s education system at the central, regional, and local
government levels.
Some adjustments were made to the scope and methodology, in consultation with the Reference
Group. Appendix D outlines the deviations from the Terms of Reference.
5 The scope covers the implementation period from 2010 to 2020. In 2021, 3 additional schools began implementing
inclusive and special education, and therefore were not included in the evaluation.
6 In this evaluation report, ‘general schools’ refer to schools not implementing the inclusive and special education
programme. Specifically, the term refers to the 16 sample schools including: 4 ECCD centres, 4 monastic institutions,
4 technical training institutes, and 4 mainstream schools.
12
2.1.3 Significance of the Evaluation
The first independent evaluation of the IE/SEN programme took place at a critical point in time, after
a decade of programme implementation since 2010. Within the last ten years, many national reforms
have been put in place to strengthen inclusive education in the country. In 2019, MoE developed a
Ten-Year Roadmap for Inclusive Education and Special Needs Education setting out the long-term
direction for the inclusion of learners with disabilities in education. Meanwhile, UNICEF, the
government’s key partner in disability inclusion is at the tail end of implementing its Strategic Plan
2018-2021 which supports the government’s priorities. The findings of the evaluation provide
evidence bases for developing a concrete implementation action plan supportive of the Ten-Year
Roadmap, inform ongoing reforms promoting equitable access to education, and provide strategic
direction to UNICEF’s future education programming.
2.1.4 Evaluation Audience, Uses, and Dissemination
The direct audience of the evaluation includes various government agencies such as the Ministry of
Education, Gross National Happiness Commission, Ministry of Health, Ministry of Labour and Human
Resources, National Statistics Bureau, National Commission for Women and Children, Dzongkhag
Education Office (DEO) /Thromde Education Office (TEO) and the Royal University of Bhutan. Primary
audience also includes local and international development partners, such as UNICEF Bhutan, CSOs
and OPDs. The evaluation findings can be utilized to inform strategic planning, policy development
and implementation, strengthening advocacy work, and identifying priority areas where investments
are most needed. Appendix E details the evaluation audience, and dissemination.
2.2 Overall Approach
The evaluation is a combination of formative and summative approaches. It is formative or learning
focused as it aims to identify progress, challenges, and opportunities. There is a key focus on the
processes and the likelihood of such processes to lead to the achievement of target results. The
evaluation will gather evidence-based lessons to inform the improvement of programme
implementation. At the same time, the evaluation is summative as it also assessed the achievement
of outcomes and outputs and measure the extent to which the Programme has brought about
changes. The evaluation is unique in the sense that it aims to measure programme results and
establish baseline information at the same time. As such, all results are to be interpreted as evaluative
findings and as baseline information.
A mixed-methods approach was adopted for this study. A mixed-methods design is a combination of
both quantitative and qualitative methods which allow the development of a more reliable
understanding of the subject (Cohen, Manion, & Morrison, 2007). In a mixed-methods study, it is
assumed that the strengths of quantitative and qualitative approaches will offset the weaknesses of
each method (Creswell, 2012). Quantitative data reveals trends among a certain group of people while
qualitative data can provide a more nuanced understanding of the meaning behind the trends.
Qualitative data collection through key informant interviews and focus group discussion is especially
important in this evaluation in ensuring that the participation and the voices of the main beneficiaries
of the programme are represented.
13
The approach was participatory and inclusive wherein principles of gender equality, equity, and human
rights were mainstreamed in all aspects of the evaluation both at the conceptual (evaluation design,
framework) and practical levels (data collection, analysis, formulating recommendations).
2.3 Evaluation Themes, Questions, and Criteria
2.3.1 Evaluation Criteria
Aligned with the TOR, the criteria for evaluation are based on the Organization for Economic Co-
operation and Development (OECD) Development Assistance Committee's (DAC) evaluation criteria:
relevance, coherence, effectiveness, efficiency, and sustainability. To explicitly address the issues of
gender, equity and human rights, an additional criterion (cross-cutting issues) was added.
The criteria are defined by OECD-DAC as follows:
Criteria Definition
1. Relevance The extent to which the objectives of an intervention are
consistent with recipients’ requirements, country needs,
global priorities, and partners’ policies.
2. Coherence The extent to which other interventions (particularly policies)
support or undermine the intervention and vice versa.
3. Effectiveness The extent to which the intervention achieved, or is expected
to achieve, its objectives and its results, including any
differential results across groups.
4. Efficiency The extent to which the intervention delivers, or is likely to
deliver, results in an economic and timely way.
5. Sustainability The extent to which the net benefits of the intervention
continue or are likely to continue.
6. Cross-Cutting Issues
6.1 Equity The basic fairness of the processes and outcomes of decision
making. This implies that all children have an opportunity to
survive, develop and reach their full potential, without being
subjected to discrimination, bias, or favouritism.
6.2 Gender Equality Gender equality is the “concept that women and men, girls
and boys have equal conditions, treatment, and opportunities
for realising their full potential, human rights and dignity, and
for contributing to (and benefitting from) economic, social,
cultural and political development.” (UNICEF ROSA, 2017, p.
3)
6.3 Human Rights-Based Five core guiding principles underpin HRBAP: normativity, non-
Approaches discrimination, participation, transparency, and accountability
(UNICEF, 2012).
2.3.2 Evaluation Themes
As mentioned under ‘Programme Components’, the programme is being implemented using a three-
pronged strategy which makes up the programme’s components and the evaluation themes: (1)
enabling environment, (2) service delivery and (3) demand creation.
14
2.3.3 Evaluation Framework
Aligned with the TOR and following the advice from the Evaluation Reference Group, the evaluation
focused on the following key evaluation questions (KEQ). The complete evaluation framework is
detailed in Appendix F.
Table 4. Key evaluation questions
Evaluation
Theme Key Evaluation Questions
criteria
1. Relevance Enabling 1.1 Alignment: To what extent are programme strategies
environment aligned with international and national rights and equity-
focused approaches, including gender equality, to meet
the needs of children with disabilities?
Enabling 1.2 Responsiveness: To what extent have the activities
environment, and outputs addressed the national priorities and needs
service delivery of children with disabilities?
2. Coherence Enabling 2.1 Internal policy coherence: To what extent are
environment domestic laws and policies governing inclusive and
special education coherent?
2.2 External policy coherence: To what extent are
domestic laws and policies aligned or not aligned with
the SDGs and GC4-CRPD?
Enabling 2.3 Cross-sector Collaboration: To what extent did the
environment programme enhance the coordination mechanisms
(horizontal and vertical; central and district levels) among
stakeholders?
3. Service delivery 3.1 Access and participation: To what extent have
Effectiveness children with disabilities been able to access and
participate in inclusive and special education? Are there
significant differences in access between boys and girls?
Enabling 3.2 Positive or negative unintended results: Were the
environment, results, intended and unintended (outputs and outcomes)
service delivery, achieved? If so, for whom, to what extent and in what
demand creation circumstances?
Service delivery 3.3 Resources and implementation strategies: Were the
inputs and strategies identified realistic, appropriate and
adequate to achieve the results?
Demand creation 3.4 Advocacy: To what extent has the programme
increased awareness and demand for inclusive
education?
Service delivery 3.5 Gender mainstreaming: Does the programme
actively contribute to promoting gender equality and
addressing gender disparities in education access and
learning outcomes? To what extent did the programme
benefit women, men, or both? Who benefited and who
did not?
15
Evaluation
Theme Key Evaluation Questions
criteria
4. Efficiency Enabling 4.1 Planning, Monitoring and Evaluation: What were the
environment planning, monitoring, evaluation, and reporting systems
in place for improving programme effectiveness and
efficiency? What were the gaps? To what extent are
these systems gender and disability-inclusive?
Enabling 4.2 Financial and Human Resources: To what extent
environment were the resources (financial and human resources)
allocated to the programme adequate to support the
implementation of the work plan to achieve quality and
equity-focused results for children with disabilities?
4.3 Implementation strategies: Was the process of
Enabling
achieving results efficient? What strategies (advocacy,
environment,
policy, technical, financial, etc.) were most efficient in
service delivery,
influencing improvements in access, quality, equity, and
demand creation
sustainability?
Service delivery 4.4 Cost-effectiveness: To what extent is mainstreaming
children with disabilities in schools with IE/SEN
programme cost-effective compared to enrolling them in
specialized institutes?
Enabling 4.5 Situation Analysis: What were the strengths,
environment, weaknesses, opportunities, and threats in the design and
service delivery, implementation process?
demand creation
5. Sustainability Enabling 5.1 Sustainability: What were the efforts made to
environment/service establish an enabling environment (necessary and
delivery appropriate policies, legislation, budgets) for the
expansion and improvement of services? What
measures were implemented to ensure the services
provided were sustainable?7
Enabling 5.2 Scalability: What interventions were adopted for the
environment, programme to be scalable?
service delivery,
demand creation
Enabling 5.3 Capacity development: How were capacities
environment, strengthened at the individual and organizational level
service delivery, (including contributing factors and constraints)? To what
demand creation extent has gender equality and equity principles been
mainstreamed in capacity development initiatives?
6. Cross- Gender equality, 6.1 Equity, gender equality, and human rights-based
Cutting equity, human approaches: In what ways and to what extent has the
Themes rights IE/SEN programme integrated a gender-responsive and
7 In the inception report, these two questions were presented separately. Analysis of the data showed that
responses pertaining to enabling environments and service delivery are intricately connected. Therefore, the
responses to the KEQs are presented together.
16
Evaluation
Theme Key Evaluation Questions
criteria
overall equity-based approach into its design and
implementation? Did the programme promote women’s
and girls’ empowerment? To what extent?
2.4 Methodology
2.4.1 Sampling strategy
The sampling strategy for the evaluation followed the Terms of Reference and advice from the ERG
during the inception phase of the study, wherein:
• All 23 schools implementing IE/SEN programme (including two specialised institutes) and two
Drakstho vocational training centres) were covered in the study.
• 16 general schools (4 ECCD centres, 4 monastic schools, 4 TTIs, and 4 general schools) were
added to the sample, as recommended by the ERG. Convenience sampling was employed in
selecting the additional schools wherein the main criterion was its proximity to an IE/SEN-
implementing school.
• All teachers in 23 IE/SEN schools and 16 general schools were targeted to respond to the
online survey. However, 50 per cent of teachers in IE schools and 51 per cent of teachers in
schools not implementing the programme responded to the survey. Upon agreement with
MoE and UNICEF, the turnout of responses was deemed reasonable to proceed with data
analysis.
2.4.2 Data collection methods
Primary and secondary data were collected through multiple data collection methods which allowed
the generation of comprehensive information, triangulation, and validation. Various research activities
were conducted at different levels of the education system.
a. Desk review. Relevant literature, policy documents, and country reports from 2010 to 2020
related to the programme were reviewed and analysed during the inception stage to collect
secondary quantitative and qualitative data deemed significant to the evaluation study. A desk
review was also carried out after the inception stage to support the analysis of data collected
through other methods. The list of documents consulted is in Appendix G.
b. Key informant interviews and focus group discussions. Relevant education
stakeholders were interviewed between September to November 2021. Semi-structured key
informant interviews (KIIs) and focus group discussions (FGDs) were conducted with a total
of 1,066 individuals including:
• key representatives from government ministries at the central (16 key informants) and
district levels (20);
• officials from Draktsho Vocational Training Centre (2)
• UNICEF staff (6);
• CSOs/OPD representatives (2);
• school leaders (20);
• SENCOs (20);
17
• teachers teaching in schools with IE/SEN programme (131);
• teachers teaching in general schools (27);
• parents of children with disabilities (105) and without disabilities (105) from schools
with IE/SEN programme
• parents of children without disabilities from general schools (42)
• children with disabilities (228) and without disabilities (211) in schools with IE/SEN
programme
• children without disabilities from general schools (131)
KIIs and FGDs with key representatives from government ministries were conducted either
online via Zoom, face-to-face, or an online questionnaire, whichever was feasible and
accessible. KIIs and FGDs at the school level were conducted face-to-face through the
assistance of trained field enumerators, supervised by the local evaluation consultant. An
overview of the KII and FGD participants is provided in Appendix H.
c. Online survey. A structured online survey was developed and administered to teachers in all
sample schools. The survey aimed to examine knowledge, attitudes among, and inclusive
classroom approaches employed by teachers. A total of 417 teachers from schools
implementing the IE/SEN programme and 97 teachers from general schools participated in
the online survey.
d. Classroom observation. Teacher-enumerators conducted a total of 20 classroom
observations in schools with the IE/SEN programme using an observation checklist to
investigate the physical accessibility of the school/classroom, school culture and learner-
centred teaching and learning approaches.
e. Case study. A semi-structured interview was conducted to support the case study on the
disability-inclusive programming in two vocational schools: Draktsho Vocational Training
Centre in Thimphu and Trashigang. The case study focused on documenting promising
practices of the centres in supporting the transition from basic education to higher/vocational
education.
The list of all schools and institutions visited is in Appendix I. All data collection tools are enclosed in
Appendix J.
2.4.3 Data analysis
All primary and secondary data collected were analysed following the evaluation framework, using a
variety of data analysis methods and tools.
Quantitative Data
1. Descriptive analysis
Quantitative data from primary and secondary sources were analysed using descriptive analysis
to present emerging trends and generate a set of baseline information. Quantitative data were
disaggregated to ensure that vulnerable groups, such as women, girls, children with disabilities,
are visible in the evaluation findings.
18
2. Trend analysis
This statistical procedure was applied to quantitative information to find patterns in data and to
determine differences in results among different populations, e.g., boys and girls, children from
different geographic settings, children of different abilities, teachers who are males and females.
Qualitative Data
1. Content analysis
Qualitative data gathered from different data collection methods and tools (i.e., key informant
interviews, focus group discussions, classroom observation, case study, and online survey) were
transcribed, translated from the local language to English (if necessary), and organised. Data was
sorted into coded categories and grouped based on the predetermined themes (i.e., evaluation
criteria and questions) and new emerging themes (using inductive coding) to develop
substantiated inferences about the programme. Data collected through qualitative methods such
as FGDs were not interpreted as quantitative data (e.g., percentages and frequencies). Qualitative
descriptions (e.g., few, some, most) were used to describe the trends in responses instead.
2. SWOT analysis
SWOT (Strengths, Weaknesses, Opportunities, and Threats) analysis is an assessment tool that
identifies the project’s existing resources (strengths), issues and challenges (weaknesses),
external aspects that may overcome weaknesses and build on strengths (opportunities), and
external aspects that may threaten the range of opportunities for change (threats) (IFAD, 2002).
SWOT analysis will be utilised to establish a general situation analysis of where the Programme
is currently operating. This method will respond to the evaluation question under Efficiency: ‘What
were the strengths, weaknesses, opportunities, and threats in the design and implementation
process?’
3. Gender scale
Using UNICEF’s gender continuum model8, the extent to which gender lens is integrated and
addressed in all aspects of the Programme will be determined. Figure 2 elaborates the gender
continuum model.
disc G ri e m n in d a e t r o ry/ Gender blind Gender aware/ Gender Gender
sensitive responsive transformative
Unequal
Favours either Ignores gender in Acknowledges Identifies and Explicitly seeks to
boys/men or programme gender addresses the redress gender
women/girls, design, inequalities but different needs of inequalities and
deepening perpetuating the does not robustly girls, boys, empower the
gender status quo or address them women and men disadvantaged
inequalities worsening to promote equal population
inequalities outcomes
Figure 2. Gender continuum
8 UNICEF adapted this scale from UNDP’s Gender Results Effectiveness Scale. See
https://erc.undp.org/evaluation/documents/download/8794, for a more comprehensive description of the Gender Results
Effectiveness Scale (GRES).
19
Triangulation and generation of evaluative findings
Organised and coded quantitative and qualitative data gathered through various sources and methods
will be triangulated to corroborate the findings. Based on these, evaluative statements per key
evaluation question will be formulated, elaborated, and refined systematically through an iterative
process.
Validation
Key findings will be validated through a series of validation interviews and consultation meetings with
key stakeholders to ensure the accuracy and credibility of the findings. The conclusions and
recommendations generated will also be validated to ensure that they are substantiated by evidence,
formulated based on Bhutan’s education and development context, and are pragmatic to increase the
likelihood of implementation.
2.5 Limitations
1. Absence of baseline data. The evaluation team acknowledged that baseline data and Theory
of Change or a logical framework were absent. As such, the team utilised available secondary
data from country documents which formed the basis for the reconstructed Theory of Change.
2. Measuring learning outcomes through primary data collection using assessment tools is not
within the scope of this evaluation.
3. Limited data received from the respondents. There were instances when the evaluation
team received limited or incomplete data from the respondents. As such, the team used the
available secondary data to complement the information gathered.
4. Turnout gap in the online survey. The aim was to cover all teachers in schools offering
IE/SEN Programme. As mentioned, only a little over 50 per cent of the total number of
teachers from schools with and without IE/SEN Programme responded. Discussions and
agreements with UNICEF/MoE resulted in the decision to move forward with data analysis.
5. The quality of the virtual training for enumerators in high-risk areas for COVID-19 was limited
by difficulties in internet connectivity. Enumerators assigned in high-risk areas had issues
understanding some sections of the questionnaires. The national consultant provided support
through phone calls.
2.6 Ethical Protocols
The design and implementation of the evaluation study adhered to the ethical principles for research
and evaluation such as the United Nations Evaluation Group (UNEG) Ethical Guidelines for Evaluation
(UNEG, 2020), the UNICEF’s Procedure for Ethical Standards in Research, Evaluation, Data Collection
and Analysis (UNICEF, 2021), and the Ethical Research Involving Children (ERIC) Guidelines (Graham
et al., 2013). An ethics review approval (Appendix K) was granted by the HML Institutional Review
Board in Washington through the assistance of the UNICEF Regional Office in South Asia. The study
operationalized the ethical principles of integrity, accountability, respect for dignity, and beneficence
as elaborated in Appendix K1-K2.
20
2
5
9
7
1
T
C
21 O
N
U
©
3 Findings
3.1 Relevance
3.1.1 Alignment: To what extent are programme strategies aligned with
international and national rights and equity-focused policies approaches,
including gender equality, to meet the needs of children with disabilities?
3.1.1.1 The majority (86 per cent) of stakeholders from government agencies (at the national and
district levels) and development partners agree that the IE/SEN Programme is attuned with
the principles promoted by international human rights frameworks, such as the CRC,
SDG4, and CRPD. Respondents who expressed disagreement (14 per cent) cited
inadequate resources such as lack of assistive devices, trained teachers, and accessible
infrastructure as hindrances to better respond to the educational needs of children with
disabilities.
The Programme does not have a dedicated programme design document that outlines a
clear results hierarchy framework (impact outcomes, outputs, activities, inputs).
Nevertheless, commitments and strategies to implement the Programme are articulated in
key government policies and strategic plans from the recent decade, summarized in the
reconstructed Theory of Change.
At the core of the Programme is the goal to provide equal learning opportunities for all
children, including children with disabilities. In Bhutan, free education is provided up to the
10th standard which aligns well with Article 28 of the CRC. Although not a State party to
the CRPD yet, the Bhutan government reinforces Article 24 and GC4 to Article 24 of the
Convention that promotes the right of persons with disabilities to inclusive education
without discrimination. The establishment of general schools offering inclusive and special
education for children with disabilities around the country has enabled more learners with
disabilities in-school to participate in general education, as opposed to learning in
segregated settings.
SDG 4’s call to ‘ensure inclusive and equitable quality education and promote lifelong
learning opportunities for all’9 is the fundamental aspiration of the IE/SEN Programme. The
Programme’s focus on empowering children with disabilities through increasing access to
and quality of learning opportunities can facilitate the fulfilment of other rights advocated
in other SDGs.
9
22
3.1.1.2 As much as the Programme’s purpose and objectives are aligned with international
frameworks, the Programme is also founded on the principles of various national laws and
policies. Respondents from government and development partners unanimously agree that
in principle, the programme is attuned to domestic legal frameworks10 in terms of
guaranteeing access to education, eliminating barriers, addressing discrimination, and
providing the necessary support services.
The same philosophy of providing education for all is echoed in the recently adopted
Standards for Inclusive Education (2017) and the Ten-Year Roadmap for Inclusive and
Special Education in Bhutan 2019-2028. The goals of the draft National Education Policy
(2019) are reinforced in the Programme’s strategy of “facilitating access and participation
in school: and “providing specialized support, appropriate educational services and
facilities, including trained personnel” (Royal Government of Bhutan, 2019, p.5).
3.1.1.3 It is difficult to establish whether the Programme had identified gender-responsive
outcomes from the outset, due to the absence of a design document. However, policies
supporting inclusive education, notably, the National Policy for Persons with Disabilities
2019 mandates the MoE to ensure girls have equal access to education at all levels. The
stakeholder interviews found that there are no significant differences in the implementation
strategies tailored to address the gender-specific needs of either boys or girls with
disabilities. Respondents highlighted however the imperative to put in place gender-
appropriate and accessible WASH facilities for girls with disabilities and that the
Programme must address this gap moving forward. Broadly speaking, providing accessible
toilets in the schools for both girls and boys with disabilities, must be a priority.
3.1.1.4 In terms of its fundamental principles, the IE/SEN Programme supports the directives of
both international and national policies. However, in practice, the situation is much more
complex. In terms of implementation, some respondents noted that there is room to
improve consistency with the ideals of normative frameworks and domestic policies.
Limitations in resources and capacity, especially among teachers, are reported as the most
persistent challenges. It is necessary to augment the resources allocated to inclusive
education to successfully carry out the promise of the policies.
“It's probably in terms of implementation that we need to improve. We have probably nailed down
the policy requirements to an adequate limit, so the policy itself is quite robust and holistic. What
we need now is probably commitments in terms of resources so that all the policy interventions
are carried out.”
– Representative from GNHC
The IE/SEN Programme’s implementation approach is therefore gradual, wherein, the government
targets to establish at least one inclusive school per district in the short to medium term, with the
10 Frameworks cited include: The Constitution of Bhutan; Draft National Policy on Special Educational Needs 2012;
National School Curriculum Framework; Education Blueprint 2014-2024; Child Care and Protection Act of Bhutan 2011;
Child Care and Protection Rules and Regulations of Bhutan 2015; Domestic Violence Prevention Act 2013 and its Rules
and Regulations of Bhutan 2015; and the National Policy for Persons with Disabilities 2019
23
long-term view to make all schools in Bhutan inclusive. There is recognition among government and
non-government government agencies that inclusion is a continuous process and that the country still
has a long way to go.
3.1.2 Responsiveness: To what extent have the activities and outputs addressed
the national priorities and needs of children with disabilities?
3.1.2.1 There is strong evidence of the Programme’s responsiveness to the diverse needs of
children with disabilities, based on the literature review and stakeholders’ perspectives. As
mentioned earlier, the IE/SEN Programme does not have a dedicated programme design
document. Nonetheless, various policy documents and national strategic plans from the
recent decade had expressly outlined national priorities related to the education of children
with disabilities, their needs, and the imperative to address such needs. In the Tenth Five
Year Plan 2008-2013, the government articulated that the most significant need is to
increase access to inclusive education. This led to subsequent initiatives that address
different aspects of inclusive education programming.
In terms of creating an enabling environment, policies and standards have been put in place
as outlined above. Development partners have supported the capacity-building of rights-
holders including children with disabilities, their parents, CSOs and OPDs to demand the
fulfilment of children’s right to education. Access has significantly increased over the years
through the expansion of the Programme to a total of 23 schools, including two specialized
institutes, as of 2020. In addition, two Draktsho vocational training centre provides
vocational education for young people with disabilities. While this increasing trend is
promising, only 1 in 4 persons with disabilities in Bhutan are literate or had attended formal
education (MoE & National Statistics Bureau, 2021). This means that majority of persons
with disabilities are not participating in educational opportunities. In terms of
responsiveness, there has been good progress in the last ten years, but the Bhutan
government needs to accelerate its efforts to reach the most marginalized learners.
The Programme’s overarching approach to inclusive education is a twin-track approach
wherein interventions are implemented to create an inclusive education system accessible
to all children; while at the same time, providing targeted support according to the individual
learning needs of a child. It should be noted however that the twin-track approach to
inclusion aims to improve the overall inclusivity of the system for all children, whilst
addressing specific needs of individual children. It does not advocate the perpetuation of
special schools.
3.1.2.2 At the classroom level, all teachers in schools with IE/SEN Programme agree that the
Programme is highly relevant in meeting the educational needs of children with disabilities.
Some of the strategies employed by teachers in responding to the individual needs of
children with disabilities include modification and adaptation of the curriculum based on the
child’s needs; allowing the child to learn at their own pace; recognizing strengths in children
and providing support where needed; preparing and following an individual education plan
(IEP); simplifying teaching and learning materials; improving accessibility of the physical
learning environment; provision of assistive devices; and focusing on teaching children with
disabilities life skills, numeracy and literacy. Access to secondary and vocational education
24
is addressed by Draktsho Vocational Training Centers which provide vocational education
for youth with disabilities (See Appendix L for a case study on Draktsho).
3.1.2.3 Teachers in schools implementing the Programme agree that inclusive education is very
important as it provides equal opportunities for quality education for children with and
without disabilities; supports children with disabilities to realise their full potential and
develops academic and life skills in children with disabilities among children that equip
them to lead an independent life. Some teachers reported that awareness and
understanding of disability have increased and discrimination and stigma toward children
with disabilities lessened resulting from the implementation of the Programme.
3.1.2.4 On the same note, all parents of children with disabilities in schools with the IE/SEN
Programme reported positive outcomes:
• Improvement in learning outcomes, behaviour, mobility, communication skills, and
socialization skills was evident among children.
• Children gained more self-confidence and have become more independent compared
to before they attended the Programme.
• Children have been provided with more resources such as assistive devices and
financial resources that support their learning.
• Some parents noted that SENCOs and other special education providers provide better
care for children.
• Some parents reported the programme has helped them understand the needs of
their children better and learned ways in which they can be supported at home.
"My child has improved her speech a lot.”
“There is more and more opportunity for children to interact with other people. Children have
learned more in the institute that they could not have learned otherwise. Children can socialize
now.”
“Before her child was very dependent. Now she has become almost fully independent.”
-Parents from a school with IE/SEN Programme
3.2 Coherence
In assessing coherence, the design of the evaluation is focused on internal and external policy
coherence and the current collaborative mechanisms among key stakeholders. The evaluation team
reviewed Bhutan’s main national policies and international commitments to find synergies and
contradictions. Although government and non-government stakeholders were consulted on their
perspectives about the current policy environment in Bhutan, the analysis of the coherence criterion
is heavily informed by explicit statements in policy documents. It is important to note that this
evaluation is not a comprehensive policy review and only key national policies related to children with
disabilities and education were selected including:
1. Draft National Policy on Special Educational Needs 2012
25
2. Draft National Education Policy 2019
3. National Policy for Persons with Disabilities 2019
Furthermore, in interpreting the evaluation findings, it must be considered that the Draft National
Policy on Special Educational Needs (2012) is envisioned to be merged with the current working draft
of the National Education Policy (2019). The findings aim to present key strengths and areas needing
further refinements in both the draft SEN policy and Education Policy as MoE finalizes the latter.
3.2.1 Internal policy coherence: To what extent are domestic laws and policies
governing inclusive and special education coherent?
3.2.1.1 The basic principles espoused in select national policies mutually reinforce rights-based
perspectives and approaches to disability-inclusive education. No contradictions in their
fundamental policy statements were found. Non-discrimination clauses, the right to free
primary education for all children and appropriate measures and accommodations for
children with disabilities are evident in all policy documents.
3.2.1.2 The review’s main finding is the need to replace outdated language (i.e., ‘special needs’,
‘Special Education Needs Coordinator and similar terms) in all the policies. There must also
be a clear and consistent articulation of the twin-track approach (especially in further
iterations of the draft National Education Policy) currently being implemented through the
IE/SEN Programme. The twin-track approach to inclusion, wherein mainstream and
targeted support are both valued, must not be viewed as a justification for maintaining
separate forms of education (e.g., in special institutes). Policies and its implementation
plans must be strengthened further by stating the ways in which the twin-track approach
can facilitate the transition from special institutes to more inclusive settings, and how it is
or could be implemented without risking further marginalization.
3.2.2 External policy coherence: To what extent are domestic laws and policies
aligned or not aligned with the SDGs and GC4-CRPD?
Articles 28 and 29 of the CRC guarantee the right of all children to education. Article 28 obliges
State parties to make primary education compulsory and available free to all (paragraph 1). It
promotes the establishment of various forms of secondary education, including general and
vocational education and furthers that the right to education must be fulfilled on the basis of
equal opportunity. Article 24 of the CRPD, operationalized by General Comment No. 4,
reinforces the right to education, specifically of persons with disabilities, and mandates
governments to develop an inclusive education system and opportunities for lifelong learning,
within the communities in which they live. Reiterated by SDG 4, persons with disabilities are
entitled to inclusive and equitable quality education.
3.2.2.1 The evaluation found the overall objectives of the Draft National Policy on Special
Educational Needs (2012), draft National Education Policy (2019) and the National Policy for
Persons with Disability (2019) to be consistent with the fundamental aims of the CRC,
CRPD and SDG 4. All three policies expressly ensure the right of all children to education,
without discrimination.
26
• “Children irrespective of abilities shall have equal access and opportunity to education
from early childhood to vocational/technical and tertiary without any form of
discrimination. – Draft National Policy on Special Educational Needs 2012, policy
statement 5.1
• “All children of school going age shall have equitable access and opportunity to free
quality and inclusive basic education as defined in the Constitution of the Kingdom of
Bhutan. – Draft National Education Policy 2019, policy statement 7.1
• The policy commits the government to enable access to education, eliminate
environmental, informational, and attitudinal barriers, institutionalize early identification
and intervention programmes, and develop and implement disability-inclusive
curriculum, assessment and examination strategies. – Summary of policy intervention
7 of the National Policy for Persons with Disabilities 2019
3.2.2.2 Draft National Policy on Special Educational Needs 2012
In terms of language, the policy remains subscribed to terminology emphasizing the
traditional notion of ‘special needs’ and ‘special education’ which reinforces the
charitable/medical model of disability. ‘Special needs’ allude to the idea that a child with a
disability requires specialized ways of teaching, usually outside the general classroom
setting, thereby reinforcing segregation in special classes or special schools. While the
policy is explicit about its anti-discrimination position, this is undermined by certain
provisions that promote separate classroom settings based on ability grouping in a ‘self-
contained class’, which is against the philosophy of the CRPD.
Moreover, strengthening the principles of inclusion and equity in the policy would require
replacing terminology and moving away from practices that encourage segregation by any
means. Using terms that reinforce inclusive principles (e.g., replacing ‘Special Educational
Needs coordinators or ‘SENCO’ with ‘Inclusive Education Coordinators’; ‘children with
special needs’ with ‘children with disabilities) and support stakeholders’ to think about
education for children with disabilities differently can help transform ongoing initiatives to
be more effective and inclusive. The policy must be reviewed and revised to apply inclusive
language and terminology to ensure inclusive principles are clearly and consistently
reflected and advocated.
3.2.2.3 Draft National Education Policy 2019
In the policy, inclusive education is conceptually aligned with the CRPD. Principles of
inclusion and equity are evident throughout the document, and it has adequate provisions
for ensuring equitable access to quality education from early childhood care and
development (policy statement 6), pre-primary, primary and secondary education (policy
statement 7), monastic education (policy statement 8), tertiary (policy statement 10) and
vocational education (policy statements 10.9, 11.2, and 11.4) for all boys and girls. This is
attuned with the CRC, CRPD and SDG 4.
There are no policy statements that contradict international frameworks. However, since
the policy is in draft form, there is an opportunity to strengthen the emphasis on inclusive
education as high-quality education for all learners. Further review and amendments to the
27
policy in the future should also consider making basic education compulsory for all learners
in alignment with the CRPD.
Similar to the observations on the Draft National Policy on Special Educational Needs,
aligning some terminology (i.e., special needs, specialized) with the language of the CRPD
would enhance the effectiveness of the policy. Notably, there is no mention of special
schools and/or self-contained classes. Policy statements for school education (no. 7) could
articulate more clearly that access to equitable and inclusive basic education means
education within the general education system.
The policy speaks broadly about the necessary support for the inclusion of children with
disabilities.
“Policy statement 7.1.3. Schools shall put in place appropriate measures for all students,
including children with special educational needs, across all grades to ensure equitable
access to and participation in school. This includes support with specialized, appropriate
educational services and facilities, including trained personnel.”
Inclusive approaches could be reinforced and stated explicitly in the policy such as the
provision of reasonable accommodation, the application of Universal Design for Learning in
curriculum, assessment, instruction and infrastructure, training teachers in inclusive,
learner-centred pedagogies not only to benefit children with disabilities but for the effective
learning of all children, and the use of technology and multiple means of communication to
facilitate learning.
3.2.2.4 National Policy for Persons with Disabilities 2019
The policy commits the government to enable equitable access to education, eliminate
environmental, informational, and attitudinal barriers, institutionalize early identification and
intervention programmes, and develop and implement disability-inclusive curriculum,
assessment, and examination strategies (policy intervention 7). The main features of
inclusive education described in the instructive guidance of the GC4 can be found
reinforced across the policy document. The emphasis on early identification and
intervention is particularly essential in the overall improvement of the development
trajectory of a child identified or at risk of having a disability or functional difficulty and
should therefore be prioritized by the government.
The policy contains suggested classroom strategies to make teaching and learning
accessible, in recognition of diversity and individual learning needs. Stakeholder interviews
also affirmed that the CRPD was the cornerstone for the development of the National Policy
for Persons with Disabilities.
The policy should aim to shift the focus, and consequently the government’s investments,
away from strengthening access to specialized institutes (policy statement 7.1.3) to
transforming education delivery in general classrooms to become more inclusive for all
learners. Strikingly, improving access for girls with disabilities is specifically stated in the
policy (policy statement 7.1.3), however, the evaluation found, as earlier stated, that no
28
gender-specific measures have been put in place to bring more girls with disabilities to
school. This warrants a review of gender-specific needs and barriers girls with disabilities
face in accessing and participating in education, and ideally, implementing more
interventions towards more equitable access for girls with disabilities.
3.2.3 Cross-sector Collaboration: To what extent did the programme enhance the
coordination mechanisms (horizontal and vertical; central and district levels)
among stakeholders?
The establishment of the Inclusive and Special Education coordination committee was initiated
in 2019, after the adoption of the Ten-Year Roadmap for Inclusive and Special Education. Due
to the COVID-19 pandemic and other competing priorities, the committee had not been able
to convene. The committee includes key actors in disability inclusion: the Ministry of
Education, Ministry of Health, National Commission for Women and Children, GNHC, Ministry
of Finance, Ministry of Labor and Human Resources, Department of Curriculum and
Professional Development11 of the MoE, Royal Education Council, Bhutan Council for School
Examinations and Assessment, Royal University of Bhutan, international development
agencies (UNICEF, UNDP, GPE, Bhutan Foundation, Australian Volunteers International
Development Office, Save the Children) CSOs/OPDs (Ability Bhutan Society, Disabled
People’s Organization of Bhutan, Draktsho), parents’ groups, and persons with disabilities
(including a Deaf adult, Bhutan Sign Language interpreters, and a person with vision
impairment).
3.2.3.1 Despite the lack of formality of the cross-sectoral committee, the Ministry of Education
described a strong collaboration among key partners with each partner with specific roles
and responsibilities in delivering inclusive and special education. For instance, MoH is
responsible for the early identification of children with disabilities and supports teacher training
on the Rapid Neurodevelopmental Assessment (RNDA). GNHC supports the MoE in
mobilizing resources and is the lead agency for coordinating plans and programmes
supporting the implementation of the National Policy for Persons with Disabilities (2019). CSOs
and DPOs implement awareness-raising activities and provide support services to children
with disabilities.
However, some stakeholders indicate the need to strengthen the involvement of CSOs and
OPDs working directly with persons with disabilities. Collaboration between the central
ministries and Dzongkhag seems to also need further improvement. DEOs could be more
involved in consultations and strategic planning, beyond their role as implementers. Some
respondents noted that to some extent, efforts from different ministries concerning
children with disabilities are fragmented and are often carried out in silos. MoE confirmed
that further actions will be taken in the immediate future to formalize the inter-sectoral
committee which has the potential to ensure joined-up planning, implementation and
monitoring moving forward.
11 Formerly the Royal Education Council
29
Community engagement, especially, among parents and families of learners with
disabilities could be improved. Government and development partners could take
advantage of the active presence of Phensem Parents Support Group, Bhutan (PSGB) in
the field of inclusion, in harnessing more support from and raising awareness in the
community.
3.2.3.2 Vertical coordination, on the other hand, appears to be well-established. Most of the 20
school heads implementing the Programme noted they directly coordinate with Dzongkhag
and Thromdes and the MoE.
Within and among schools, the role of the SENCOs and SEN team was emphasized as the
primary point of contact for Programme implementation. One school noted that
coordination for matters concerning children with disabilities is no different than when the
issue is about, or the intervention is for children without disabilities.
Four school heads stated there is an ongoing collaboration with neighbouring schools
offering the IE/SEN Programme, while the presence of a Professional Learning Community
was noted by one school. Providing further support to such school-based and/or cluster-
based learning and collaboration mechanisms would be highly important in cultivating a
more organic and sustainable development of capacities within the schools.
Most SENCOs interviewed highlighted the significance of having close working
relationships with parents/caregivers, the SEN team, other teachers, and the school head.
A common finding from the interviews is the correlation between a school leader’s
knowledge and attitudes towards the IE/SEN programme and the level of commitment and
support they provide. Some SENCOs noted that school leaders trained in inclusive
education or those who at least have a positive attitude towards children with disabilities
tend to provide more support in organizing, implementing, and mobilizing resources for the
Programme.
3.3 Effectiveness
3.3.1 Access and participation: To what extent have children with disabilities been
able to access and participate in inclusive and special education? Are there
significant differences in access between boys and girls?
3.3.1.1 Enrolment of children with disabilities in inclusive and special education has increased
significantly in a span of ten years since 2010. The Annual Education Statistics report an
increasing number of children with disabilities accessing inclusive and special education,
with enrolment at 283 in 2010, 564 in 2015, and 997 in 2020.
Respondents reported that school heads and teachers created public awareness on
inclusive education and visited homes and communities to help increase the enrolment of
children with disabilities in schools with IE/SEN Programme. Teachers also reported
implementing various strategies to ensure the participation and learning of children with
disabilities in the classroom. On the whole, school personnel considered their initiatives
and strategies as effective, very effective, or extremely effective in supporting children with
30
disabilities to enrol, stay, and learn in school. It should be noted that increased enrolment
includes placement in segregated special education settings that are not fully inclusive.
This will need to be strategically addressed in the coming years.
When children without disabilities were asked if their school is supporting children with
disabilities, almost all respondents said yes, citing equal opportunities for all students and
provision of necessary support for children with disabilities, including teachers in IE/SEN
schools, hostel and classroom, ramp and railing, and therapy. They affirmed that teachers
include children with disabilities in class and provide them with extra care and attention and
that most of their classmates are friendly, cooperative, and supportive.
The majority of children with disabilities interviewed confirmed that their parents help them
attend school by dropping them off and picking them up from school, providing financial
and material support, and giving advice and encouragement. They also shared that school
administrators and teachers guide them in school, while friends support them when they
feel unwell, deal with negative emotions, have personal problems, or have difficulties with
their studies.
However, limited data are available to determine the extent and quality of
participation of children with disabilities. As pointed out by a respondent, enrolment
does not equate to meaningful participation. Student engagement and learning outcomes,
among others, must be monitored to determine whether children with disabilities can
participate meaningfully in their education.
3.3.1.2 Enrolment data indicate a significant difference in access between boys and girls. While
some respondents stated that such is not the case and the programme provides equal
opportunities to all children with disabilities irrespective of their gender, historical data
suggest otherwise.
In 2010, more girls (59.36 per cent) than boys (40.64 per cent) were enrolled in special
institutes. Starting from 2011, boys outnumbered girls, comprising 59.04 to 61.86 per cent
of children with disabilities enrolled in general schools implementing the IE/SEN
Programme, special institutes, and vocational centres. A school head from one school with
IE/SEN Programme shared that gender disparity in enrolment of children with disabilities
could contribute to inequalities – ‘when boys’ enrolment is higher, boys get more services.’
Figure 3 shows the enrolment data from 2010 to 2020, disaggregated by sex. Note that
relevant data are not available for 2013, 2014, and 2016.
31
Female Male
700
600
500
400
300
200
100
0
2010 2011 2012 2015 2017 2018 2019 2020
Female 168 111 140 231 257 321 305 403
Male 115 180 203 333 390 477 492 594
Figure 3. Enrolment of children with disabilities in IE/SEN programme from 2010-2020
Some respondents cited that existing gender norms could be a contributing factor to the
difference in access between boys and girls. For example, parents often hesitate to send
their daughters to school due to beliefs that they are more vulnerable to harassment or
because they do not see the importance of education for girls with disabilities.
“If the girl with a disability is from a remote place and if the parents are not able to bring
the child to school, then they might not see the importance of education for their child.
We had one or two cases where parents and the community were not so aware of
education of children with disabilities and were reluctant to send the girls to school.”
- A representative from a government agency
Some respondents also shared that gender disparity in enrolment could be attributed to
the stigma towards children with disabilities. For instance, a respondent from the MoE
noted that when teachers conduct surveys or assessments in communities to identify and
encourage enrolment of children with disabilities, some parents refuse. The respondent
stated, ‘For children with disabilities, parents are worried. I can only assume it is probably
even worse when it comes to girls with disabilities.’ Another challenge is some peoples’
perception that disability might be a result of karma, based on Buddhist-Hindu beliefs on
cause and consequences.
To address the difference in access between boys and girls with disabilities, a
representative from the MoE shared that the ministry encourages girls with disabilities to
enrol in schools through awareness-raising activities. Parents are orientated on the
importance of enrolling their daughters to the IE/SEN Programme through phone calls,
personal meetings, and counselling. Another respondent from a government agency
recommended strengthening the role of religious leaders in challenging traditional beliefs
that hinder the promotion of the right to education of children with disabilities.
32
3.3.2 Positive or negative unintended results: Were the results, intended and
unintended (outputs and outcomes) achieved? If so, for whom, to what extent
and in what circumstances?
3.3.2.1 The programme has achieved significant milestones in its ten years of implementation,
particularly in policy formulation, access to education, and advocacy and awareness-raising.
Respondents shared that the Programme was instrumental in the formulation of the National Policy
for Persons with Disabilities (2019), the establishment of the Inclusive Education Standards (2017),
and the development of the Ten-Year Roadmap for Inclusive and Special Education (2018-2028).
Respondents also reported that access to and quality of education for children with disabilities has
improved over the years through the Programme’s interventions which include:
● increasing the number of inclusive schools,
● constructing accessible infrastructure,
● providing assistive devices and necessary equipment,
● promoting enrolment and participation in school,
● recruiting and capacitating teachers,
● recruiting teacher assistants,
● promoting inclusive teaching strategies, and
● providing appropriate teaching and learning materials.
In addition, colleges of education have introduced the principles of inclusive education into their
curriculum, while Paro College of Education provides opportunities for further studies through its two-
year master’s degree programme on inclusive education.
Through the Programme’s advocacy efforts, respondents reported that more people have gained
awareness of the issues encountered by children with disabilities and have become more supportive
of initiatives to increase their participation and inclusion in schools and communities. Respondents
also observed a change in people’s mindset and behaviour, thereby reducing discrimination, stigma,
and stereotype.
For teachers, the positive impact on the lives of children with disabilities has been the most significant
and rewarding aspect of the Programme. Respondents observed that many of their students have
gained a more positive outlook in life, developed academic and social skills, and became more
confident. They noticed an improvement in the students’ ability to express themselves, interact with
others, and participate in various activities. Some respondents also shared how former students are
now leading more independent lives, working in different sectors, and earning their living.
In focus group discussions with parents or caregivers of children with disabilities, majority reported
being very happy or extremely happy with the education and support that their children are receiving
in school, citing the care and attention provided by teachers and the improvement in their children’s
skills, attitudes, and behaviours. They shared that their children are interested and excited to go to
school, have improved learning and socialization, and have become more independent. For some
respondents, the experience of sending their children to school also meant having helping hands and
feeling less alone.
33
When children were asked if they like their school, the majority of children with disabilities said yes,
sharing that they enjoy being with their friends and doing different activities, including reading, writing,
drawing, playing, dancing, and praying, as well as learning how to take care of themselves, be more
disciplined, and gain more confidence. Respondents expressed appreciation for their teachers, whom
they described as kind, nice, caring, and supportive. Similarly, the majority of children without
disabilities said yes, sharing that they enjoy meeting new friends, having kind and supportive teachers,
and improving their life skills. Some respondents also appreciated their school for being inclusive of
children with disabilities.
Despite significant progress, stakeholders acknowledged that there is still a long way to go.
Respondents commented that more resources are needed to properly implement inclusive and
special education and ensure that children with disabilities can access education on an equal basis
with others. Relevant data must also be collected, analysed, and reported to inform policy formulation,
programme implementation, and service delivery.
3.3.3 Resources and implementation strategies: Were the inputs and strategies
identified realistic, appropriate and adequate to achieve the results?
3.3.3.1 The majority of schools with IE/SEN Programme were providing adequate inputs to make
the physical environment more accessible for children with disabilities. Findings from
classroom observations, using the observation tool, indicate that the majority of schools with
IE/SEN Programme have accessible facilities that consider the needs of students with
disabilities and allow them to move around the school easily and safely and access all parts of
the building, including the classroom and play area. While most schools were observed to
have separate toilets for boys, girls, and teachers/adults, accessibility is still a concern.
Classroom observations also confirm that classroom seating has been organized according
to students’ individual needs and age, with the correct size of furniture for the age group and
adapted chairs and tables where necessary. Table 8 shows the responses of observers per
question.
Table 8. Findings from classroom observations: Accessibility of physical environment
Question Yes A No No data Total
little
1.1 Does the school have facilities for 17 - 3 - 20
students to access all parts of the school
building?
1.2 Is seating organized according to
individual needs and age of students? Is
the furniture the correct size for the age 17 3 - - 20
group? Do children with physical
disabilities have adapted chairs and tables
where necessary?
1.3 Can all girls and boys, including girls
and boys with disabilities, move around 19 1 - - 20
the school easily and safely?
34
1.4 Do students have access to all parts
of school building (classroom, toilet, play 15 2 3 - 20
area) that they need access to?
1.5 Are the needs of students with partial -
sight/visual impairment considered in 14 1 5 20
making the buildings accessible?
1.6 Are the needs of students with partial
hearing/hearing impairment considered in 11 6 2 1 20
making the buildings accessible?
1.7 Are the needs of students with
physical impairments considered in 13 3 4 - 20
making the buildings accessible?
1.8 Does the school have separate toilets 18 1 1 - 20
for girls, boys, and teachers/adults?
3.3.3.2 Contrary to the findings of the classroom observations, many respondents still identified
the lack of accessible infrastructure and facilities as a barrier to implementing inclusive and
special education. Following further discussions with government representatives and
stakeholders’ consultations, it is likely that the enumerators who conducted the classroom
observations did not have adequate experience, although provided with a basic training by the
evaluation team, to make sophisticated judgments about accessibility, as may also be the case
with other stakeholders. Therefore, it is recommended that further studies on accessibility are
undertaken.
The majority of teacher-respondents from schools with IE/SEN Programme were provided
training and other forms of support to implement inclusive and special education. However,
these are not adequate to develop the necessary skills and confidence to facilitate learning
and address the needs of children with disabilities. The majority of teachers confirmed
receiving training on inclusive education, particularly on understanding disability, identifying
children with disabilities, addressing their needs, developing an Individual Education Plan
for each student, and using different teaching strategies. Other forms of support for
classroom teaching include support from peers through co-teaching or team teaching,
support from college student-volunteers, guidance from the school administration, and
provision of equipment such as laptops and LCD projectors.
Nevertheless, many of the respondents from government agencies, NGOs, and schools,
including teachers themselves, identified the lack of capacity of teachers and insufficient
training as challenges to implementation, particularly on the quality of teaching and learning.
An online survey (n=417) showed that 53.24 per cent of the teacher-respondents found the
programme helpful, very helpful, or extremely helpful in increasing their confidence in
teaching children with disabilities; however, 28.78 per cent stated that it was only
somewhat helpful (120 of 417) while 11.27 per cent said that it was not helpful at all (47 of
417).
The majority of teachers in schools with IE/SEN Programme show some indications of
implementing teaching strategies advocated in the Programme. Teachers reported
developing an Individual Education Plan for each student and monitoring progress by
35
recording their achievements and identifying areas for improvement. They also employ the
push-in and pull-out approach, described by a respondent from the MoE as follows:
Box 1. Push-in and pull-in sessions
Push-in sessions: When a teacher is teaching in the class, another support teacher teaches
alongside and supports the mainstream teacher. The support teacher helps modify questions,
delivery, instructions, among others to make the lesson accessible to children with disabilities.
Pull-out sessions: If a child is observed to have difficulties coping with the lesson, he/she will be
scheduled for remedial sessions after class or some other convenient time. A member of the
Special Education Team of the school provides one-on-one support.
The push-in and pull-out approaches have some inclusive aspects, such as the in-class
support to the teacher, but further research needs to be undertaken to evaluate their overall
inclusivity. It should be noted that ‘remedial sessions’ after class are not always helpful and
can cause additional challenges such as increasing stigmatization and affecting individuals’
self-esteem. They can also distract attention from the need to improve the overall
inclusivity of the classroom teaching and learning environment.
Peer support was also used through a buddy system where children with and without
disabilities are paired together. When working with children with hearing disabilities, some
teachers reported using Bhutanese Sign Language or visual aids to facilitate
communication.
The majority of schools with IE/SEN Programme visited provided some evidence of learner-
centered classroom practices where teachers:
• create an attractive learning environment,
• convey a sense of excitement in learning,
• use a variety of techniques and methods to present the lesson,
• provide children with equal opportunities to take part in class activities, and
• use instructional groupings to promote participation, cooperation, and learning.
In addition, the majority of classrooms observed, have enough furniture for all children to
sit and work comfortably, with a seating arrangement that allows flexibility for students to
move around and work in groups. Table 9 shows the responses of observers per question.
Table 9. Findings from classroom observations: Teaching approaches
No
Question Yes A little No Total
data
2.1 Do teachers create an attractive 19 - 1 - 20
learning environment?
2.2 Do lessons convey a sense of 13 6 1 - 20
excitement in learning?
2.3 Do teachers use a variety of
techniques and methods (auditory, 13 6 1 - 20
36
visual, kinetic teaching aids, etc.) when
presenting the lesson to the class?
2.4 Do teachers use instructional
groupings (e.g., student pairs, 13 3 4 - 20
cooperative learning, homogeneous
groups) to promote participation,
cooperation, and learning?
2.5 Do teachers try to make classrooms
attractive to motivate students to learn? 15 4 1 - 20
(Do they display children’s work and
learning resources attractively?)
2.6 Is there enough classroom furniture 18 2 - - 20
for all children to sit and work
comfortably?
2.7 Does the seating arrangement allow
flexibility for students to go around and 16 2 1 1 20
work in groups?
2.8 Do teachers provide all children with 18 1 1 - 20
equal opportunities to take part in class
activities?
The implementation of inclusive and special education continues to be very challenging,
as current resources and strategies have not been able to address long-standing issues
and concerns. Respondents reported the following challenges to implementation:
• discrimination against children with disabilities,
• limited understanding of disability issues and inclusive education,
• limited capacity of teachers to facilitate inclusive education,
• lack of accessible infrastructure and facilities,
• lack of appropriate instruction guides and materials,
• lack of assistive devices and health services from experts,
• lack of alignment between planning and implementation;
• lack of financial resources and development partners; and
• lack of EMIS data to aid in decision-making.
3.3.4 Advocacy: To what extent has the programme increased awareness and
demand for inclusive education?
3.3.4.1 Data indicate that awareness and demand for inclusive education may have increased to
some extent, but misconceptions, stereotypes, and discriminatory attitudes continue to be
barriers to inclusion.
The majority of school heads and teachers from general schools12 believe that children with
disabilities must be treated equally and provided access to education. The majority of these
12 In this evaluation, general schools refer to mainstream schools not implementing the IE/SEN Programme.
37
same school heads agreed that it is the responsibility of their school to teach children with
disabilities, in alignment with the Buddha’s philosophy and as part of their moral obligation
as educators. Respondents stated that children must be treated equally and provided
appropriate education to help them develop the necessary life skills, be prepared for the
future, have a meaningful life, and reach their full potential. Many of the teachers also noted
that providing education or training will help children with disabilities be a part of the
community, be more confident and independent, and increase their opportunities to earn a
living and support their parents—or be less of a burden to them.
3.3.4.2 Data indicate that there may be a significant misunderstanding about inclusive education
among educators in general schools where IE/SEN is not implemented. When school heads
and teachers from these schools were asked if they believe that children with disabilities should
learn together with children without disabilities, the majority of respondents answered yes,
citing the value of respect, inclusion, and acceptance, as well as the importance of children
interacting and helping one another. However, when asked if children with disabilities should
be taught in separate or special schools, the majority of respondents also said yes. Some
respondents noted that it depends on the types of disabilities. Others believe that children with
disabilities will feel more comfortable and learn better in special schools arguing that they will
be given adequate time, attention, and support and that this will also prevent disturbance in
class and extra work for teachers. These perceptions reveal a significant misunderstanding of
inclusive education among teachers which could result in the exclusion of children with
functional difficulties in the classroom. While the Programme’s current focus is on a limited
number of schools, future programming must endeavour to integrate the fundamental
principles of inclusive education in training programmes for all teachers, whether or not the
school is implementing inclusive and special education.
3.3.4.3 The majority of parents or caregivers of children with and without disabilities believe that
it is best for their children to be educated together. Parents of children with disabilities cited
its positive impact on learning and socialization. Likewise, parents of children without
disabilities confirmed that their children are learning well in school while also developing an
understanding of the difficulties faced by children with disabilities. Some respondents also
articulated that all children must be provided quality education and treated equally.
3.3.4.4 Some parents or caregivers of children without disabilities believe that having children with
and without disabilities in the same classroom would not cause any problems. Instead,
children would learn to help and support one another. However, parents also expressed
some concerns about this approach. The majority of respondents said that children with
disabilities might not be able to learn, complete their tasks on time, and catch up with the rest
of the class. Children with disabilities might also feel sad and uncomfortable, experience
discrimination and bullying, or not be able to cooperate with others. Miscommunication could
occur, resulting in fighting as children with disabilities might become aggressive. On the other
hand, respondents were concerned that children without disabilities might change their
character, copy the behaviour of children with disabilities, or become slow learners.
Respondents also commented that children without disabilities might be disturbed in their
studies and not be able to do their tasks or participate actively in class.
38
In addition, parent-respondents said that teachers might be challenged in their teaching as
they will be required to allot extra time and effort to cover the syllabus, plan and implement
the lesson, help students understand the lesson, manage the behaviour of students, and
prevent disturbance in class. Some respondents also commented that teachers may not
have a good understanding of children with disabilities and may not be able to treat all
students equally or cater to students’ individual needs.
These responses indicate the serious need to address the issue of parental understanding
about disability and inclusive education to ensure that future strategic planning for inclusion
can be implemented effectively with full parental support.
3.3.5 Gender mainstreaming: Does the program actively contribute to promoting
gender equality and addressing gender disparities in education access and
learning outcomes? To what extent did the program benefit women, men, or
both? Who benefited and who did not?
3.3.5.1 The majority of respondents at the national, district, and school levels are convinced that
the Programme promotes equal access and opportunities among children with disabilities,
regardless of their gender. However, their responses also show that the Programme does not
actively address the inequalities brought about by specific gender needs of girls and boys with
disabilities. A school head from a general school narrated, ‘All children are greatly benefitted
because services are not based on gender but the types of disabilities.’
“As all are treated equally, there is no such difference in the implementation of
programme strategies when it involves men and women, boys and girls with disabilities.”
- A representative from Disabled People’s Organisation in Bhutan
However, some respondents expressed that the ‘one-size-fits-all’ approach could
contribute to inequalities because the programme has no targeted interventions to address
the gender-specific needs of children with disabilities. To meet the gender needs of their
students, schools with IE/SEN programme utilised different measures as follows:
Table 10. Identified gender needs and strategies implemented in schools
Identified gender
needs of children Challenges Strategies implemented in schools
with disabilities
Gender disparity Starting 2011, boys To encourage children with disabilities
in enrollment outnumbered girls, to enrol in schools offering IE/SEN
comprising 59.04 to 61.86 Programme, some respondents
per cent of children with shared that parents and communities
disabilities enrolled in participate in advocacy and
general schools with awareness-raising activities. However,
IE/SEN Programme, respondents could not specify if these
39
special institutes, and approaches specifically targeted the
vocational centres.13 admission of girls with disabilities.
Inclusive and • Promoting disability- Some schools ensure that girls with
gender- inclusive toilets for disabilities have separate toilets
appropriate girls with disabilities (attached toilets) and are placed on
WASH facilities • Water shortage in the hostel's ground floor.
and both boys’ and girls’
infrastructure. hostels
Gender and Addressing gender Some respondents mentioned that
disability- inequalities in curriculum, the use of Individual Educational Plan
responsive pedagogy, and learning for each student is being practiced.
curricula and materials However, they could not specify the
teaching extent of including the gender needs
materials. of boys and girls with disabilities in
IEPs.
Self-care, • Addressing health- • Some schools conduct
hygiene, and sex related issues for girls awareness-raising for children
education of boys with disabilities, with disabilities, specifically girls,
and girls with specifically menstrual on health-related issues.
disabilities. hygiene management, • Some schools provide sanitary
sexual harassment, pads to girls with disabilities.
and pregnancy • Because of the lack of teachers
• Some respondents who can take care of children with
shared that there is a disabilities, schools’ SEN teams
need to assign male are supported by teaching
teachers to boys with assistants from the SEN division.
disabilities and female • Some respondents shared that
teachers to girls with schools have separate trained
disabilities (e.g., when male and female caregivers;
providing assistance in however, the latter are more
using the toilets, responsible for care work.
taking care of children) • Some respondents highlighted the
Inclusion of comprehensive
sexuality education in every
subject as a strategy to address
the health-related issues of girls
with disabilities.
Using UNICEF’s gender continuum model (UNICEF, 2019), the above findings suggest that
Bhutan's IE and SEN programme falls under the gender-aware/sensitive category. While
the programme considers the principles of gender equality in its frameworks and
implementation strategies and recognizes that the ‘one-size-fits-all’ approach contributes
to the production and reproduction of gender inequalities in education, the findings on the
gender needs of girls and boys with disabilities suggest that the programme does not
actively challenge and address them.
13 See Figure 3 for the enrolment data from 2010 to 2020
40
3.4 Efficiency
3.4.1 Planning, Monitoring and Evaluation: What were the planning, monitoring,
evaluation, and reporting systems in place for improving program
effectiveness and efficiency? What were the gaps? To what extent are these
systems gender and disability-inclusive?
3.4.1.1 Data show that some mechanisms are in place to plan, monitor, and evaluate the IE/SEN
Programme, specifically, access, support, and delivery of services. The MoE consolidates
and manages relevant data through the Education Management Information System and
publishes key education indicators in its Annual Education Statistics reports, including the
number of schools implementing inclusive and special education and the number of
enrolled children with disabilities disaggregated by sex, but not by functional impairment or
level of functional difficulty. Other pertinent data are not adequately tracked and reported,
such as: enrolment of children with disabilities in ECCD centres and general schools; overall
participation rate or net enrolment rate of children with disabilities.
3.4.1.2 In the field, the School Performance Management System provides schools with the
necessary tools to manage their performance, with a view to increase access to and quality
of education. All school heads from schools with IE/SEN Programme confirmed that the
education of children with disabilities is included in the school’s improvement planning
process, including modifying the school’s vision and mission, policies and practices, budget
provision and distribution, and academic and co-curricular activities. All SEN programme
coordinators and majority of teacher-respondents reported having been involved in some
phases of this process, but not the parents and other stakeholders in the school
community.
3.4.1.3 At the classroom level, teachers reported using the Individual Education Plan to record
students’ academic achievements and physical, emotional, and social development. Other
tools include lesson plans, assessments, classroom observation rubrics, and academic
performance reports. These mechanisms need to be integrated and enhanced so that data
may be used to help inform decisions of policymakers and implementers, improve the
design and implementation of interventions, and, ultimately, address the needs of children
with disabilities. Respondents recommended the development of standardized tools,
training on how to use these tools, and the provision of mandates and guidelines on the
manner and timing of documentation and reporting. Some respondents also emphasized
the importance of analysing the data and sharing the results with all stakeholders, including
DEOS, school leaders, teachers, and parents of children with disabilities.
3.4.2 Financial and Human Resources: To what extent were the resources
(financial and human resources) allocated to the program adequate to
support the implementation of the work plan to achieve quality and equity-
focused results for children with disabilities?
41
3.4.2.1 Substantial resources have been invested in the programme; however, these are not
adequate to properly implement inclusive and special education and address the needs of
children with disabilities. Respondents from government agencies and NGOs reported
investing in human, technical, material, and financial resources to implement inclusive and
special education. Respondents from schools with IE/SEN Programme confirmed receiving
support including advocacy and awareness-raising; capacity-building and professional
development opportunities; teaching and learning materials to implement the prescribed
curriculum; infrastructure, facilities, and equipment for the initial set-up; assistive devices
for learners with disabilities; and budget allocation and financial assistance.
3.4.2.2 However, there was a consensus among the respondents that the current resources are
not adequate to address the needs of children with disabilities, citing the lack of trained
and capacitated teachers as a significant obstacle to the successful implementation of the
Programme. Moreover, respondents highlighted the need for accessible infrastructure,
assistive devices, and appropriate learning materials, among others, so children with
disabilities can move more freely and independently in school, participate more actively in
class, and interact better with their peers.
3.4.3 Implementation strategies: Was the process of achieving results efficient?
What strategies (advocacy, policy, technical, and financial, etc.) were most
efficient in influencing improvements in access, quality, equity, and
sustainability?
3.4.3.1 Stakeholders affirmed that policy formulation, technical capacity-building, financial support,
and advocacy and awareness-raising have facilitated improvements in the provision of
inclusive and special education. Majority of respondents reported that these strategies,
working in parallel, have contributed to the successes of the Programme. A few
respondents said that advocacy is the most sustainable approach; a respondent identified
the training of teachers as the most efficient strategy, while another noted that financial
support contributed the most to the Programme. A respondent also asserted that policy is
the foremost strategy that led to the provision of resources and implementation of
interventions.
3.4.3.2 Having a set of standards for inclusive education has also supported efficiency in achieving
results, although implementation still varied across schools. Some respondents from
government agencies and NGOs confirmed that the same standard is applied across
schools offering the IE/SEN Programme, with consistent mandates and financial support.
In contrast, others pointed out differences in implementation due to school context,
leadership, budget, and capacity and attitude of various stakeholders.
3.4.3.3 Parents of children with and without disabilities had limited participation in the
implementation of the Programme. Many parents of children with disabilities said that the
school had not consulted them in planning lessons, supporting children i n the classroom,
and monitoring their learning. Those who were consulted shared that teachers provide
information regarding children’s behaviour, health problems, academic improvements, and
necessary support; and have created a group on social media to discuss matters about the
42
Programme. Some parents of children without disabilities reported participating in school
activities that support children with disabilities, such as paralympic events and the
International Day of Persons with Disabilities. They have been guided or requested support
to include children with disabilities.
3.4.4 Cost-effectiveness: To what extent is including children with disabilities in
schools with IE/SEN programme cost-effective compared to enrolling them
in specialized institutes?
3.4.4.1 Some stakeholders believe that including children with disabilities in schools with IE/SEN
programme is less cost-effective compared to enrolling them in specialized institutes.
When asked which strategy produces the most results for its inputs, some respondents
from government agencies and NGOs reported that both mainstreaming and targeted
strategies are cost-effective. However, most DEO-respondents (13 of 18) said that
providing targeted interventions in special schools works better than including children with
disabilities in regular classrooms. Although DEO-respondents acknowledged the benefits
of inclusive settings, they articulated that child with disabilities require specific
interventions and facilities and would cope better with focused time, attention, and support
from teachers in special schools. N.B. this is not the view of the research team and
indicates that further work needs to be undertaken to build stakeholder capacity in
understanding and applying the principles of inclusive education.
Most schools with IE/SEN Programme experienced advantages and disadvantages in
implementing the following approaches: (1) teaching children with disabilities together with
learners without disabilities in general classrooms, (2) providing individual support for
children with disabilities in general classrooms, and (3) teaching children with disabilities
separate from learners without disabilities in separate classrooms. Below is a summary of
the advantages and disadvantages identified by school heads, coordinators, and teachers.
Approach Advantages Disadvantages
Teaching ● Promotes ● Can be difficult to accommodate
children understanding, children with disabilities in
with acceptance, and general classrooms
disabilities inclusion of children ● Can cause difficulties for children
together with disabilities with disabilities to learn equally
with ● Provides equal (cannot cope with the normal
learners opportunities for flow of lessons)
without children with ● Can lower the self-esteem of
disabilities disabilities children with disabilities
in general ● Facilitates knowledge ● Does not give the required time
classrooms and skills sharing, and attention to children with
socialisation, and peer disabilities
learning and support ● Can cause distractions in class,
● Allows children to chaotic classroom, and behaviour
learn and play management issues
together, take care of
43
each other, and ● Requires more time for teachers
develop friendships and learners to complete the
● No need for additional lesson
classrooms
Providing ● Allows ● Can make children with
individual accommodations and disabilities feel isolated and
support for modifications to excluded
children address the needs of ● Does not facilitate collaborative
with children with learning and socialisation
disabilities disabilities ● Can adversely impact the
in general ● Facilitates learning of learning of children without
classrooms children with disabilities (left unattended
disabilities at their during intervention)
own pace and level ● Creates additional responsibilities
● Promotes interaction, and management issues for
participation, and teachers
socialization ● Requires more time for teachers
● Can increase the self- and learners to complete the
esteem of children lesson
with disabilities
● Less burden for
general teachers
Teaching ● Facilitates focused ● Can make children with
children teaching and learning disabilities feel isolated,
with and caters to the neglected, excluded, and
disabilities individual needs of discriminated
separate children with ● Deprives children with disabilities
from disabilities of social interaction and
learners ● Provides the opportunities to learn social skills
without necessary time, ● Requires more teachers
disabilities attention, and support ● Requires more classrooms
in separate for children with
classrooms disabilities
● Promotes better
management of
behaviour
These responses indicate an acknowledgement amongst this stakeholder group of the
complex factors affecting inclusive education. However, these also reinforce the
conclusion that there is a need to build further understanding of how inclusive education
can be implemented effectively for the benefit of all students. With global evidence
showing that inclusion is more cost-effective than segregation, the Programme must be
more strategic in its future programming and prioritize the strengthening and expansion of
inclusive education, following UNCRPD Article 24 and General Comment No.4.
44
3.4.5 Situation Analysis: What were the strengths, weaknesses, opportunities, and
threats in the design and implementation process?
Below is a summary of the strengths, weaknesses, opportunities, and threats in the
Programme’s design and implementation process, based on information reported by the
respondents. These aspects of the Programme are discussed throughout the Findings section
and therefore do not need further elaboration in this section.
Strengths Weaknesses
● Partnership and collaboration ● Insufficient data on children with
with UNICEF, CSOs, DPO, disabilities and disability-inclusive
colleges/universities, and other education to inform intervention
government agencies ● Absence of a national education law
● Expertise in inclusive education ● Lack of a theory of change to frame
within the MoE and from partner and direct its interventions
organisations ● Limited government investment
● Employment of a twin-track ● Limited understanding of inclusive
approach to disability inclusion education
● Institutionalization of planning ● Limited capacity to implement
and review processes inclusive education
● Limited understanding of how to
organize inclusive classrooms and plan
and teach inclusively
● Limited understanding of gender
inclusion
● Lack of consultation and coordination
mechanism to engage key education
stakeholders
Opportunities Threats
● Expansion of the Programme ● Delay in the ratification of CRPD
(establishing more schools ● Lack of development partners (funding
implementing the IE/SEN partners)
Programme) ● Limited awareness and understanding
● Increase access to and of the needs of children with
participation of children with disabilities
disabilities in education ● Limited awareness and understanding
● Greater collaboration with of inclusive education
organisations of persons with ● Inaccessible infrastructure and facilities
disabilities and other agencies in communities and public spaces
● Impact of COVID-19 pandemic on
learning continuity and quality of
teaching and learning
45
3.5 Sustainability
3.5.1 Sustainability: What were the efforts made to establish an enabling
environment (necessary and appropriate policies, legislation, budget) for the
expansion and improvement of services? What measures were implemented
to ensure the services provided were sustainable?
3.5.1.1 Different rights-based and disability-inclusive policy frameworks support the programme's
sustainability. The RGOB has made significant progress in establishing rights-based and
disability-inclusive policy frameworks to support the implementation of the IE/SEN
Programme. Some respondents at the national and district levels concurred that policies
are aligned with relevant international frameworks on disability and inclusive education,
therefore contributing to the programme's sustainability.
Table 5. National policies on disability and education
National polices Contribution to the sustainability of the Programme
Draft National Policy on The draft policy mandates key education stakeholders in
Special Educational Needs providing educational services to children with
(2012) disabilities (Bhutan MoE, 2012). Respondents from
Dzongkhag Education Offices and schools with IE/SEN
Programme repeatedly cited that the draft policy serves
as their guidance in delivering inclusive and special
education services to children with disabilities at the
school level.
Standards for Inclusive The Standards for Inclusive Education guides the
Education (2017) operationalisation of inclusion at the school level (Bhutan
MoE, 2017). During the focus group discussions with
respondents from schools implementing the IE/SEN
Programme, it was revealed that this document serves
as their guide in ensuring that their schools or institutes
adhere to the tenets of the inclusion agenda.
Draft National Education A national education policy has been drafted. It
Policy (2019) promotes equitable education for all children and aims to
put in place measures to ensure inclusive education
implementation.
National Policy for Persons The policy aims to improve the lives of persons with
with Disabilities (2019) disabilities in Bhutan (Gross National Happiness
Commission Secretariat, 2019). It commits the
government to promoting the right to education of
persons with disabilities, including children, as reflected
in its chapter on inclusive education (Gross National
Happiness Commission Secretariat, 2019), which some
respondents shared as relevant in the sustainability of
the programme implementation.
46
Ten-Year Roadmap for Endorsed in 2019, the ten-year roadmap is a
Inclusive and Special comprehensive strategic plan developed to provide long-
Education 2018-2028 (2019) term directions to relevant education stakeholders on
implementing the programmes (Bhutan MoE, 2019b). A
respondent cited that the goals and strategies stipulated
in the roadmap are essential to support the
implementation of the IE/SEN Programme in the
country.
Inclusive education is also institutionalised at the school level. Majority of the respondents
from schools with IE/SEN Programme reported that they adhere to the above policies and
standards by translating them into contextualised school SEN policy that is rights-based,
child-friendly, and non-discriminatory. The school SEN policy details the roles and
responsibilities of the School Principal/Vice-Principal, SEN Coordinator, SEN Core team, and
other stakeholders such as teachers, parents, and medical staff, in delivering SEN services
to children with disabilities. Furthermore, it provides guidelines on the admission, referral,
identification and screening, examination, and promotion of children with disabilities.
In addition to the school's SEN policy, some respondents also stated that children with
disabilities are considered in the school's disaster management and preparedness plan.
The National Action Plan for School Earthquake Safety explicitly noted that children with
disabilities must be provided with awareness programmes and activities on earthquake
safety and disaster preparedness (Bhutan MoE, 2020b).
Despite the established legislative and policy frameworks to strengthen the
implementation of the programme, there are remaining challenges that need to be
addressed.
a. One DEO stated the need to finalise and approve the draft National Education Policy
where inclusion is considered an overarching principle.
b. There are gaps in communicating the policies at the school level. Some teacher-
respondents from schools with IE/SEN Programme shared that these policies were not
adequately communicated to them. Hence, only the school management and SEN
committee are familiar with its provisions. When asked about the school policy on SEN,
one of them answered, "I am not very sure. Only the management and committee
know the policy.'
c. Respondents from development partners emphasized that urgent attention must be
placed on the ratification of the CRPD.
3.5.1.2 There is evidence of increased investment in the education system, but respondents
shared that inadequate resources are allocated to the IE/SEN Programme. Twenty-six per
cent (26 per cent) of DEOs interviewed have attributed the inclusion of the IE/SEN
Programme in the education department's annual budget as a contributing factor to the
sustainability of its implementation.
At the time of the evaluation, it was noted that there is limited data on the education
expenditure dedicated to IE and SEN implementation. However, to examine the RGOB's
commitment to increase the investment in education, Figures 4 and 5 below show
47
Bhutan’s historical data on the education expenditure vis-à-vis the percentage of
government expenditure and the percentage of gross domestic product (GDP),
respectively. While there is a downward trend in government expenditures in education
from 2015 to 2020, the country still made significant progress in meeting the international
benchmarks of 15-20 per cent of public spending on education and 4-6 per cent of GDP,
set by the Incheon Declaration and Framework for Action (UNESCO, 2017).
Education Expenditure as % of government expenditure
30
25 25.5 24.6
23.5
21.9
20 20.4
17.5 17
15 15.6 15.8
13.1
10
5
0
2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020
Figure 4. Education expenditure as % of government expenditure (2011-2020)
Education Expenditure as % of GDP
8
7.6
7 7 7.2 6.9
6 6
5.7
5
4.8
4
3
2
1
0
2011 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018
Figure 5. Education expenditure as % of GDP (2011-2020)
No available data for 2012, 2019, and 2020
Source: UNESCO Institute for Statistics (n.d.)
Despite the country's commitment to increase overall financial investment in the education
system, some respondents from key government offices and development partners shared
that RGOB allocates inadequate financial resources to implement the IE/SEN programme.
Three out of 19 (16 per cent) DEOs noted that establishing SEN as a separate division from
ECCD would further improve the delivery of services to children with disabilities,
considering that the bifurcation may result in a dedicated budget for the division. It should
be noted that a key recommendation from this evaluation would also be that the
terminology associated with Special Needs or Special Educational Need should be
48
removed, as per General Comment 4 to the CRPD and reference should instead be made
to inclusive education.
On a similar note, respondents from schools with IE/SEN Programme also cited the same
challenges. With a limited budget to financially sustain the programme implementation,
schools with IE/SEN Programme have employed various strategies such as (1) utilisation
of the general budget to fund teaching and learning materials of children with disabilities,
(2) conduct of school-initiated fund generation activities, and (3) strengthening the school’s
partnership with external organisations and stakeholders such as parents, CSOs, and
private donors to mobilize funding.
"External support and funding are needed. Schools cannot sustain without depending on
external support."
School Head from one of the schools with IE/SEN Programme
3.5.1.3 The sustainability of the IE/SEN Programme requires commitment from the local
government. Another contributing factor to sustainability is the critical role of the local
government in implementing the IE/SEN Programme at the Dzongkhags and Thromdes
levels. This was highlighted in the response of an MoE official who mentioned that the local
government’s role in implementing the IE/SEN Programme is critical. The draft National
Policy on Special Educational Needs (2012) provides the functions of Dzongkhags and
Thromdes in implementing long- and short-term strategies in relation to the education of
children with disabilities (Bhutan MoE, 2012). Moreover, the draft National Education Policy
details their responsibilities, focusing on supporting MoE in implementing educational
plans, programmes, and services (Bhutan MoE, 2019a).
3.5.1.4 There are initiatives to build inclusive infrastructure and child-friendly learning environments
for children with disabilities; however, challenges remain. A DEO noted that the MoE has
included the construction of inclusive infrastructure in schools such as ramps and inclusive
toilets in the annual budget. However, some respondents from schools with IE/SEN
Programme expressed the need to improve the existing facilities because infrastructure
development in the schools is still of poor standards and not friendly to children with
disabilities.
3.5.1.5 There are existing gaps and challenges in the transition of children with disabilities to
vocational, further education, and the workplace that need to be addressed. The draft
National Policy on Special Educational Needs states that "children irrespective of abilities
shall have equal access and opportunity to education from early childhood to
vocational/technical and tertiary without any form of discrimination." (Bhutan MoE, 2012, p.
8). The policy also mandates the MoE to collaborate with other ministries and agencies,
including the MoLHR, Royal Civil Service Commission (RCSC), and the RUB, to promote
admission and employment of persons with disabilities to tertiary and training institutes
(Bhutan MoE, 2012). This mandate is also reiterated in the National Policy for Persons with
Disabilities, which promotes increased access of children with disabilities to vocational,
tertiary, and lifelong education (Gross National Happiness Commission Secretariat, 2019)
49
and in the Ten-Year Roadmap for IE and SEN, which outlines the targets of the government
in supporting equitable access of students with disabilities to further education, non-formal
education programmes, and transition into workplaces (Bhutan MoE, 2019b).
Draktsho Vocational Training Centres provide basic education and vocational skills training
for children with disabilities. In addition, the RGOB is presently collaborating with the UN
Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific (UN-ESCAP) to ensure
mainstreaming disability inclusion into the country’s technical and vocational education and
training (TVET) system, policies, and programmes. There are also some evidence of
admission of children with disabilities to higher education. For instance, an interview with
a representative from RUB revealed that since the enrolment of students is conducted
online through the university’s website, the university has no mechanisms in determining
if the applicants have disabilities and will only be identified during the registration process.
Nevertheless, qualified applicants with disabilities will be provided with the necessary
accommodations.
Despite these mandates, some respondents from the government, pre-service institutions,
teachers, and parents of children with disabilities expressed the need to urgently address
the gaps and challenges in supporting children with disabilities to transition to vocational,
further education and employment.
"Inclusive schools go up only to a certain level. The Special Institute for the Deaf in Paro
goes only until the 10th standard, and from the 11th standard, they have vocational
education. For higher-level learning, the government should be able to provide 11th and
12th standards for them. We are still negotiating with the Royal University of Bhutan on
having a special admission criterion for students with disabilities who finished high
school. The progression is something we have not thought through. Some projects from
the Ministry of Education on how many children with disabilities will [be] moving into
high school and where they can be accommodated need to be studied and looked at
immediately."
A representative from a key government agency
"There is no continuation of SEN services at higher school level. Children with disabilities
do not have the same service in higher levels."
School Head from one of the schools with IE/SEN Programme
"We want full support from (the) government to help our children in getting employed
after class XII."
"Introduce vocational programmes."
Parents of children with disabilities in schools with IE/SEN Programme
3.5.1.6 Initiatives to design and implement inclusive curriculum, pedagogy, assessment, and
learning materials support the Programme's sustainability. The Standards for Inclusive
Education provides guidelines to the school heads, SENCOs and teachers in schools with
IE/SEN Programme on designing and implementing accommodations and modifications to
remove the barriers to student learning and meet their diverse and individual learning needs
(Bhutan MoE, 2017). Some SENCOs confirmed that they make modifications in the
50
curriculum, assessment methods, and medium of instruction for children with disabilities in
their schools. The same strategies were echoed in the responses of some teachers in schools
implementing the IE/SEN Programme who, despite the limited funding and inadequate
resources, continued to do their best to improve their teaching and learning materials to cater
to students' individual needs. An IEP for students requiring additional support is also
implemented and monitored, although it should be noted that the use of IEPs needs to be
carefully monitored and quality assured to ensure that this approach does not reinforce a
medical model approach to inclusion. All children have the right to access the same curriculum
and to be educated alongside their peers. In many settings globally, the IEP does not enable
this approach but rather encourages an individualized and, at times, segregatory approach
which is not fully inclusive.
3.5.2 Scalability: What interventions were adopted for the programme to be
scalable?
3.5.2.1 The gradual establishment of schools with IE/SEN Programme, including specialised
institutes, indicate the programme’s expansion. Bhutan's commitment to providing access
to education for all children with disabilities has been consistently stated in the country's five-
year plans. Since the establishment of the Special Education Unit within the Department of
School Education during the 9th Five-Year Plan (2002-2007) (Bhutan Planning Commission,
2002), the RGOB has shown significant progress in expanding the programme to more
general schools to provide access to education for children with disabilities. The SEN
programme was first introduced in 2002 in Changangkha Middle Secondary School and as of
June 2020, the country has established 23 schools with IE/SEN Programme, including two
specialised institutes, and two Draktsho Vocational Training Centres (Bhutan MoE, 2020a).
Figure 6 shows the number of schools and institutes catering to the educational needs of
children with disabilities from 2010 to 2020. Relevant data are not available for 2013, 2014,
and 2016.
30
25
20
15
10
5
0
2010 2011 2012 2015 2017 2018 2019 2020
Number of schools/institutes catering to children with disabilities
Figure 6. Number of schools and institutes with IE/SEN Programme from 2010-2020
With the increase in the number of general schools catering to children with mild to
moderate disabilities, the enrolment of children with disabilities has increased significantly,
with enrolment at 283 in 2010 (Bhutan MoE, 2010) to 997 in 2020 (Bhutan MoE, 2020a).
51
3.5.2.2 However, some respondents at the national, district, and school levels agreed that much
work needs to be done to scale up the Programme. Some of the key points they
recommended are as follows:
a. There is a need to urgently introduce the IE/SEN Programme to other general
schools, ensure national coverage and reach more children with disabilities. A key
official from MoE noted that the selection of general schools to implement the
IE/SEN programme undergoes a thorough process and requires collaboration with
the local government, particularly with DEOs. Once a school is identified based on
the country’s 5-year plan, MoE conducts a feasibility study to ensure that the school
has the capacity to accommodate mild to moderate children with disabilities within
or beyond their district. MoE also provides orientation programmes to parents and
teachers on inclusive education. After the consultation process, the school principal
facilitates the admission of children with disabilities in school.
However, it is reflected in some of the responses of participants that the size of
Dzongkhag and the number of children with disabilities are not considered in the
selection process. A school principal from a school implementing the Programme
noted, 'The government has just identified one school in each dzongkhag, but
according to the data, ours have more children with disabilities. We need to
institutionalise the programmes in all schools.' This was echoed in the response of
a representative from a DEO who stated, 'Expansion should be based on the size
of Dzongkhag and (the) number of children with disabilities.
b. As the implementation of the IE/SEN Programme expanded to other general
schools, some respondents urged the government to look at the situation of human
resources at the district and school levels. This includes engaging specialised
professionals (e.g., occupational therapists, speech therapists), and hiring additional
SEN teachers, and teacher assistants to accommodate the educational needs of
children with disabilities effectively.
c. Building strong collaboration with external partners contributes to the
expansion of the programme. Some respondents from the national, district, and
school levels acknowledged the roles of external partners in upscaling the
implementation of the programme. According to the respondents, support provided
by the external partners includes capacity development activities, support to raising
awareness on the educational needs of children with disabilities, and additional
funding. These include UNICEF Bhutan, Save the Children Bhutan, Bhutan
Foundation, and the Australian Volunteers for International Development. They also
cited national CSOs such as Ability Bhutan Society, Disabled People's Organisation
of Bhutan who also contribute to the upscaling of the programme.
d. Data on children with disabilities support the case for investment in IE/SEN
Programme. The two-stage disability study in 2010 revealed that 30 per cent of
11,370 children aged 2-9 years old were living with a disability (Bhutan National
Statistics Bureau, 2012), while the Population and Housing Census conducted in
2017 reported a disability prevalence rate of 2.1 per cent (Bhutan National Statistics
52
Bureau, 2018). Data collected from these national surveys and studies on disability
informed the decision makers in the government to expand the programme
implementation.
e. Raising awareness on the right of children with disabilities to education
contributes to the upscaling of the programme. Majority of respondents in the
national government and schools with IE/SEN Programme agreed that increasing
the awareness of education stakeholders on disability and inclusive education
contributes to the increased in the enrolment of children with disabilities therefore,
supporting the expansion of the programme implementation. For instance, some
respondents shared that the Disabled People's Organisation in Bhutan advocates
for inclusive education. At the same time, UNICEF Bhutan supports the country in
raising awareness and delivering services to children with disabilities.
"International organisations like UNICEF play a big role in terms of raising awareness and
in terms of support(ing) the education system in Bhutan. They have ensured that we
deliver the right service to children with disabilities."
A representative from a pre-service teacher training institution
Despite the advocacy and awareness-raising activities conducted, respondents agreed that
challenges remain, particularly in influencing parents and communities to actively support
the education of children with disabilities. Results of the FGDs with parents and caregivers
of children with and without disabilities revealed that the majority of them have not
provided any support to children with disabilities in schools with IE/SEN programme. This
is echoed in the responses of parents and caregivers of children without disabilities from
the sample ECCD centres and general schools included in this evaluation study.
"[The] greatest barrier to disability is attitudinal. Creating awareness and increasing the
understanding of people on the issues and needs of persons with disabilities is the key
to promoting the rights and enabling persons with disabilities to enjoy their lives like any
other persons without disabilities."
A representative from a key government agency
"People of Bhutan still require advocacy on stigmatization and its impact on the
enrolment of children with disabilities in SEN schools."
A representative from Dzongkhag Education Office
3.5.2.3 There are plans in place to expand the IE/SEN Programme to reach young children with
disabilities through the ECCD programme. A respondent from MoE confirmed that the
country is presently working on a multisectoral ECCD strategic action plan, which includes
services for children with disabilities such as enhanced early identification, referral and
intervention of developmental delays and disabilities (Bhutan MoE, 2021).
53
3.5.3 Capacity Development: How were capacities strengthened at the individual
and organisational level (including contributing factors and constraints)? To
what extent has gender equality and equity principles been mainstreamed in
capacity development initiatives?
3.5.3.1 Sustainability requires building the capacity of different education stakeholders at the
school level (i.e., school heads, SENCOs, teachers, parents, and caregivers) on inclusive
and special education. As noted in the findings under the Effectiveness criterion, challenges
remain in terms of misconceptions, stereotypes, and discriminatory attitudes towards
disabilities and inclusive education, including the need to improve skills and confidence of
teachers to facilitate learning and address the educational needs of children with
disabilities. To address these challenges, some respondents confirmed that the
government continuously conducts capacity development programmes at various
institutional levels, particularly for relevant actors in schools. Initiatives related to this
include the following:
a. Education colleges in Bhutan are committed to supporting the government's initiatives
in preparing student teachers and building the capacity of school heads and teachers
through its pre-service and in-service programmes. Positive signs of capacity
development include the commitment of pre-service institutions to incorporate
principles of inclusive education into their academic programmes. Respondents from
pre-service institutions detailed the role of the colleges in providing pre-service and in-
service teacher training.
Table 12. Pre-service institutions in Bhutan
Pre-service institutions Contributions to pre-service and in-service teacher training
Paro College of • PCE offers a Master of Education in Inclusive Education that
Education (PCE) aims to provide teachers and professionals with a formal training
on special and inclusive education (Paro College of Education,
2020). The college also offers a Master of Arts in Leadership and
Management for school heads, which includes modules on
inclusive education.
• PCE offers a special education module for final-year students of
Bachelor of Education.
• The college also entered a Memorandum of Understanding
(MOU) with MoE to support in-service teacher training of
teachers in schools with IE/SEN programme through a
scholarship programme.
Samtse College of • SCE offers an introductory module on inclusive education for
Education students of Bachelor of Education.
• SCE trains in-service and pre-service secondary teachers on
inclusive education through credited and non-credited courses.
Because the pre-service academic programmes are relatively new, more than half of the teacher-
respondents in schools with IE/SEN Programme reported that inclusive education and disability are
not included in their pre-service teacher training. In the online survey among teachers in schools with
54
IE/SEN programme, the results found that the majority of teachers teaching in classes with children
with disabilities (n=165) and teachers teaching in general classes (n=235) do not have subjects on
inclusive education and disability during their pre-service teacher training.
70%
61.82%
59.39%
60%
50%
40%
37.58%
40%
30%
20%
10%
0.61% 0.61%
0%
Yes No Skipped
Were subjects on inclusive education included in your pre-service (tertiary education) teacher
training?
Were subjects on disability included in your pre-service (tertiary education) teacher training?
Figure 7. Inclusion of inclusive education and disability subjects in pre-service teacher training of teachers
teaching in classes with children with disabilities
80%
74.04%
70.64%
70%
60%
50%
40%
30% 26%
22.55%
20%
10%
2.98% 3.40%
0%
Yes No Skipped
Were subjects on inclusive education included in your pre-service (tertiary education) teacher
training?
Were subjects on disability included in your pre-service (tertiary education) teacher training?
Figure 8. Inclusion of inclusive education and disability subjects in pre-service teacher training of teachers
teaching in general classes
55
The results of the same online survey revealed that 88 or 53 per cent (n=165) of teachers teaching in
classes with children with disabilities found that their pre-service training was either not helpful or
somewhat helpful in teaching children with disabilities.
Meanwhile, the online survey for teachers in general schools yielded similar responses. The online
survey (n=97) revealed that 81.44 per cent of teachers did not have inclusive education and disability
subjects in their pre-service teacher training.
90.00%
81.44% 81.44%
80.00%
70.00%
60.00%
50.00%
40.00%
30.00%
17.53%
20.00% 13.40%
10.00% 5.15%
1.03%
0.00%
Yes No No response
Were subjects on IE included in your pre-service teacher training?
Were subjects on disability included in your pre-service teacher training?
Figure 9. Inclusion of IE and disability in pre-service teacher training of teachers from sample
schools/centres/institutes without IE/SEN Programme
3.5.3.2 There are capacity development programmes and activities that target School Heads from
schools with IE/SEN Programme. The IE/SEN Programme supports the capacity
development of School Heads to advocate the right to education of children with
disabilities. Out of the 20 School Heads in schools with IE/SEN Programme, only ten
reported receiving training on disability and inclusive and special education which were
provided by the Ministry of Education, UNICEF Bhutan, other non-government
organisations and civil society organisations. Almost all of them affirmed that they need
further support in strengthening their knowledge and skills on disability and inclusive
education. Areas identified are (1) IE and SEN concepts and models (2) implementing and
managing SEN programmes in schools, (3) early identification and intervention, and (4)
disability-inclusive pedagogies, including targeted interventions for children with low vision
and hearing impairment.
Limited professional development interventions are provided to school heads in sample
general schools. Since the programme implementation is currently at the initial stage and
expanding the services to other schools is still ongoing, almost all of the school heads from
the sample general schools reported that they had not received any form of training on
disability and/or inclusive and special education. While they are not implementing the
programme yet, most school heads agreed that they need support in building their capacity
56
to accommodate the educational needs of children with disabilities and prepare for disability
inclusion in the future.
"We need the training to handle children with disabilities. We cannot do trial and error
method.”
A school head from a general school
3.5.3.3 There are capacity development programmes that target SEN programme coordinators;
however, further support is still needed. Out of the 20 SENCOs interviewed, 19 have
confirmed that they have received disability and inclusive education training. Together with
the school’s SEN team, SENCOs are nominated by their respective schools to participate
in various ex-country and in-country capacity building activities (e.g., MoE's National-based
In-Service Programme (NBIP), exchange programmes). Upon return, the nominated
representative/s shall conduct a School-based In-Service Programme (SBIP) to share their
learning during trainings or workshops with other teachers.
All SENCOs interviewed highlighted the need to further strengthen their knowledge in
inclusive and special education. Areas to be supported include (1) early identification and
intervention services, (2) disability-inclusive pedagogy, including modifications in curriculum
and improvement of their teaching and learning materials, (3) understanding the IE/SEN
Programme and diverse educational needs of children with disabilities; and (4) targeted
interventions such as speech therapy, braille, and Bhutanese sign language (BhSL).
3.5.3.4 Capacity development programmes for teachers are primarily focused on schools with
IE/SEN Programme, more specifically for teachers teaching in classes with children with
disabilities. The majority of the teacher-respondents from schools with or implementing
the IE/SEN Programme confirmed that they had received various disability and/or inclusive
and special education training. They stated that IE and SEN are addressed in regular school
professional development activities such as: (1) inclusion of IE and SEN in orientation
programmes for newly hired teachers; (2) training of teachers teaching in general
classrooms; (3) professional development activities delivered by external professionals and
volunteers from other countries, and (4) informal discussions such as in weekly sharing of
best practices.
"It [capacity development activities] helped us a lot. We do not have knowledge of the
SEN programme before. It helped us change our mindset.”
Teachers from a school with IE/SEN Programme
However, results of the same online survey among teachers from schools with IE/SEN
Programme suggest that these capacity development programmes mainly target those
who are teaching in SEN classes and not those teaching in general classes. This could be
an indication that the former is given more attention in terms of capacity building compared
to the latter.
57
60.00%
52.12% 52.12%
50.00% 46.67% 46.67%
40.00%
30.00%
20.00%
10.00%
1.21% 1.21%
0.00%
Yes No No response
Were subjects on inclusive education included in any in-service teacher training you
have received?
Were subjects on disability included in any in-service teacher training you have
received?
Figure 10. Inclusion of topics on inclusive education and disability in in-service teacher training of
teachers teaching classes with children with disabilities (n=165)
70.00%
58.30%
60.00% 55.32%
50.00%
40.43%
37.45%
40.00%
30.00%
20.00%
10.00%
4.26% 4.26%
0.00%
YES NO SKIPPED
Were subjects on inclusive education included in any in-service teacher training you
have received?
Were subjects on disability included in any in-service teacher training you have
received?
Figure 11. Inclusion of topics on inclusive education and disability in in-service teacher training
for general teachers
Inclusion of topics on inclusive education and disability in in-service teacher training for general
teachers
58
Table 6 shows the breakdown per school of the 85 (52.12%, n=165) teachers teaching classes with
children with disabilities who confirmed that subjects on disability and IE were included in their in-
service teacher training.
Table 6. Distribution of teachers who received in-service training on IE and/or disability
Region Schools Number of teachers
Western Changangkha MSS, Thimphu 3
Yangchen Gatshel MSS, Thimphu 4
Drukgyel LSS, Paro 0
Wangsel Institute Drukgyel, Paro 6
Gesarling CS, Dagana 2
Samtengang CS, Wangdue Phodrang 6
Kamji CS, Chukha 4
Tendruk CS, Samtse 5
Phuentsholing MSS, Chukha 5
Central Damphu MSS, Tsirang 4
Zhemgang LSS, Zhemgang 3
Tsangkha CS, Trongsa 3
Tang CS, Bumthang 6
Gelephu LSS, Sarpang 2
Eastern Mongar MSS, Mongar 15
Autsho CS, Lhuntse 3
Tsenkharla CS, Trashi Yangtse 3
Khaling LSS, Trashigang 4
Muenselling Institute, Trashigang 2
Gonpasingma LSS, Pema gatshel 4
No response 1
Total 85
Because the IE/SEN Programme is not yet implemented in the sample general schools included in the
evaluation study, teacher-respondents reported that they had not received any form of training on
disability and/or inclusive and special education. However, they expressed interest to be involved in
various capacity development programmes related to the educational needs of children with
disabilities to be able to effectively include children with mild to moderate disabilities in their
schools/centres/institutes.
3.5.3.5 There is a need to include the parents of children and the whole community in capacity
development programmes on IE and SEN. It was mentioned in KEQ 4.2 (Scalability) that
the majority of parents and caregivers of children with disabilities enrolled in schools with
the IE/SEN Programme provide various forms of support to the schools. Despite their
critical roles in their children's education, most of them reported that they had not received
any formal training on disability and inclusive education except for some informal and short
discussions with teachers on targeted interventions such as counselling and simple
physiotherapy activities. Most of them agreed that they need to be capacitated to better
guide and support their children outside the schools.
59
"If we get the training, we can be their second teachers. We need to learn how to guide
our children, as well as other children. We have the right to get this training.
Parents of children with disabilities in a school with IE/SEN Programme
Parents and caregivers of children without disabilities in schools with the IE/SEN
Programme also confirmed that they had not received training on disability and/or inclusive
and special education from the schools where their children are enrolled. Some parents
and caregivers mentioned that they do not need such training, while some said it could
guide them in taking care of their children.
On a similar note, the responses of parents and caregivers of children without disabilities
in sample general schools and ECCD centres expressed the same sentiment. Almost all of
the respondents shared that they have not received any form of training on inclusive
education and disability.
3.6 Equity, Gender Equality and Human Rights-Based
Approaches
3.6.1 Equity, gender equality, and human rights-based approach: In what ways and
to what extent has the IE/SEN Programme integrated a gender-responsive
and overall equity-based approach into its design and implementation? Did
the programme promote women and girls' empowerment? To what extent?
3.6.1.1 To some extent, the programme has mainstreamed principles of gender equality in its
implementation strategies and promoted empowerment among women and girls with
disabilities. However, there is still a need to initiate gender-responsive interventions to
address challenges. The majority of the respondents from the national, district, and school
levels shared that inclusion underpins the implementation of the Programme to ensure that
no Bhutanese child is left behind. For instance, RGOB has integrated principles of gender
equality in their policies surrounding the implementation of the IE/SEN Programme. Some
respondents shared that disability policies, programmes, and plans are gender-inclusive and
have a gender component (see Table 4).
Table 7. Inclusion of gender equality principles in education's policy environment.
Policies Inclusion of principles of gender equality
Draft National While the draft policy promotes the inclusion of all children with
Policy on Special disabilities, it does not explicitly mention any implementation
Educational Needs strategy to address the gender needs of girls and boys with
(2012) disabilities.
National Policy for Particularly in its provisions related to the education of persons
Persons with with disabilities, the policy stated MoE’s mandate to ensure
Disabilities (2019) access to education of girls with disabilities and the
advancement of the rights of children and women with
60
disabilities in all education policies, plans, and programmes
related to persons with disabilities (Gross National Happiness
Commission Secretariat, 2019).
Draft National Principles of gender equality are included in the policy
Education Policy statements of the draft policy. It mandates the education
(2019) system to implement strategies that are gender-responsive and
disability-inclusive (Bhutan MoE, 2019).
Standards for The Standards for Inclusive Education has specific indicators for
Inclusive Education gender equality under the ‘Inclusive Culture’ domain (Bhutan
(2017) MoE, 2017). Principles of gender equality are also integrated in
the ‘Inclusive Policy’ domain, particularly on school policy on
admission
(Bhutan MoE, 2017).
In terms of the programme’s overall implementation strategies, some respondents cited
that it is able to provide equal opportunities for children with disabilities to access
education, regardless of their gender. In addition, several respondents from both national
and school levels affirmed that the programme promotes the empowerment of women
and girls with disabilities as it provides the opportunity for them to learn and be productive
in their schools and communities.
"Girls are discriminated, and if you have a disability, it doubles the discrimination.
Inclusive and Special Education has empowered girls with disabilities because they are
able to receive education, an opportunity to address discrimination. It empowers girls
and women with disabilities because they can explore opportunities without having to
rely on others.”
A representative from a key government agency
However, as previously mentioned in the KEQ for gender mainstreaming,14 the programme
falls under the category of gender-aware/sensitive mark using UNICEF’s gender continuum
model as it does not actively address the gender needs of children with disabilities. Hence,
there is a need to provide gender-responsive interventions that target the specific gender
needs of boys and girls with disabilities mentioned in the previous criteria.
3.6.1.2 The human rights-based approach to programming guides the implementation of the
programme. Central to the responses of respondents is the role of the IE/SEN programmes
in promoting the inalienable right to education of all children, including children with
disabilities. The human rights principles of equality, non-discrimination, participation, and
inclusion (UNICEF & UNESCO, 2007) are inherent to the programme implementation.
14 See Effectiveness: Gender Mainstreaming.
61
Box 2. Definition of human rights-based approach (UNICEF Finland, 2015)
A human rights-based approach is focused on conscious and systematic enhancement
of human rights in all aspects of project and program development and implementation.
The human rights-based approach has a twofold objective: (1) to empower people (rights-
holders) to claim and exercise their rights and (2) to strengthen the capacity of the actors
(duty-bearers) who have a particular obligation or responsibility to respect, protect and
fulfil the rights of the poorest, weakest, most marginalised, and vulnerable and to comply
with these obligations and duties.
Findings of this evaluation study show that the Bhutanese government, as the primary
duty-bearers, is committed to ensuring that the rights of children are considered at the
policy and programme levels. For instance, a respondent from a pre-service institution
noted that the establishment of the National Commission on Women and Children (NCWC)
in 2004 was a significant step to ensure the promotion and protection of the rights of
Bhutanese women and children. A respondent from NCWC further confirmed that the
Commission is always consulted in stakeholder discussions relevant to the rights of women
and children, including children with disabilities. In addition, a respondent from a key
government agency noted that the RGOB’s commitment to ensure that all children can
exercise their fundamental right to access and participate in high-quality education is
reflected in the concerted and proactive approach of different ministries and agencies
relevant to the country’s education sector.
However, some challenges remain. For instance, there is limited engagement of parents,
including mothers, and caregivers of children with disabilities in the programme
implementation. The findings also revealed that government stakeholders have limited
initiatives to increase the engagement of parents and caregivers of children with disabilities.
“There should be greater ownership from the government and other duty bearers. Oblige
the duty bearers and hold them accountable if services are not delivered.”
A representative from a civil society organisation
In addition, the focus group discussions among children in schools with IE/SEN programme revealed
experiences of corporal punishment, particularly involving children without disabilities. Majority of
them agreed that they dislike being punished by their teachers which happens in various forms such
as being scolded for no reason, being humiliated in front of their classmates, and being beaten inside
the school.
62
2
5
9
7
1
T
C
63 O
N
UNO CT17952 U
©
4 Conclusion
4.1 Relevance
Two key evaluation questions were investigated in this criterion pertaining to (1) alignment of
programme strategies with international and national policies in meeting the needs of children with
disabilities and (2) responsiveness of activities and outputs to address national priorities and needs of
children with disabilities.
The evaluation concludes that the IE/SEN Programme is relevant to both the national priorities and the
educational needs of children with disabilities in Bhutan.
In principle, the programme’s objectives and strategies are aligned with international and national
policies promoting equity and inclusion. Its main aim of providing equitable access to learning for all
children reinforces the goals of the CRC, CRPD, and SDG 4 and priorities articulated in key national
policies. However, there is room for improvement in terms of bridging the gap between policy and
practice. Limitations in resources and technical capacity prevent the programme from being fully
aligned with the ideals set out in policies.
The responsiveness of the programme is mainly made evident by its success in increasing access to
education for learners with disabilities, owing to the government’s gradual establishment of more
inclusive schools in the country. Moreover, promising teaching and learning practices and in-classroom
support are emerging and have been reported to result to positive outcomes among learners with
disabilities. Although enrolment rates were seen to increase over the years, most children with
disabilities in the country remain invisible in the school system. The government needs to accelerate
its efforts to expand the programme, not only to significantly increase access but raise the quality of
education provisions in the classrooms.
Overall, the situation of children with disabilities in Bhutan, with the majority of them remaining
marginalized in terms of access and participation, merits the continued commitment to and
implementation of the IE/SEN programme.
4.2 Coherence
In evaluating coherence, the focus of the study was on (1) internal and (2) external policy coherence
and (3) cross-sector collaboration for disability-inclusive education.
Broadly speaking, Bhutan’s national policies (i.e., Draft National Policy on Special Educational Needs
2012, Draft National Education Policy 2019, and the National Policy for Persons with Disabilities 2019)
are internally and externally coherent in terms of their fundamental aims. Internal policy coherence is
evident as the basic principles of inclusion and equity are mutually reinforced in domestic policies.
Coherence with external policies such as the SDGs and the CRPD was found to be strong. All national
policies are synergized in safeguarding the right of all children to education, without discrimination
A key finding of the evaluation is the continued reference to language that promotes the notion of a
specialized, segregated form of education for children with disabilities. The evaluation concludes and
64
recommends replacing outdated terminology with more inclusive alternatives. A simple shift in
language has the potential to change education practitioners’ thinking around disability inclusion. It
must be noted that the special educational needs policy was drafted in 2012 and has informed the
development of the education policy but will not be adopted.
Policy reform initiatives such as the ongoing development of the education policy present an
opportunity to strongly articulate Bhutan’s commitment to gradually phasing out specialized provisions
and moving towards building more inclusive schools within the general education system.
The programme has provided a platform for cross-sector collaboration, but it could be improved.
Horizontal coordination among government units and development partners is present but
mechanisms to strengthen coordination are needed. For instance, the committee for inclusive
education must be activated; and CSOs, OPDs and local education offices need to be more actively
involved in joined-up planning, implementation, and monitoring.
Community engagement could be strengthened by tapping active parent organisations on the ground
and nurturing the existing relationships between SENCOs/SEN Team with parents. The evaluation
highlighted that foundational to effective collaboration within the schools is inclusive leadership.
School leaders who have had training on inclusive education tend to hold more positive attitudes
towards inclusive education and are more open to collaboration. The existence of organised
professional learning communities is an emerging good practice that needs to be supported further
and replicated in other schools.
4.3 Effectiveness
To determine the extent to which the Programme achieved its objectives and intended results, the
evaluation study examined five dimensions: access and participation, positive and negative
unintended results, resources and implementation strategies, advocacy, and gender mainstreaming.
• Access and participation in inclusive and special education have increased significantly since
the Programme commenced in 2010. However, enrolment data show significant gender
differences in access, with boys consistently outnumbering girls since 2011. Limited data,
particularly on learning outcomes and participation rate, hinder the study from assessing and
determining the extent and quality of participation of children with disabilities.
• The Programme achieved positive results and significant milestones in its ten years of
implementation. It was instrumental in formulating inclusive education policies, strategies, and
standards. Through its technical interventions and advocacy efforts, stakeholders reported
increased access to and quality of education and greater awareness of disability and inclusive
education in schools and communities. No negative results were reported but a number of
clear areas for improvement were noted, see below.
• Although substantial inputs were provided to implement the Programme, these were not
adequate to address long-standing issues and concerns, which include: discrimination against
children with disabilities, limited understanding of disability issues and inclusive education,
limited capacity of teachers to facilitate inclusive education, lack of accessible infrastructure
and facilities, lack of appropriate instruction guides and materials, lack of assistive devices and
health services from experts, lack of alignment between planning and implementation; lack of
65
financial resources and development partners; and lack of EMIS data to aid in decision-making.
Classroom strategies, such as the Individual Education Plan and push-in and pull-out
approaches need to be reviewed further to determine their appropriateness and inclusivity.
• Awareness and demand for inclusive education may have increased to some extent, but
misconceptions, stereotypes, and discriminatory attitudes continue to be barriers to inclusion.
Responses highlight the serious need to improve understanding about disability and inclusive
education to ensure that the Programme can be implemented effectively with the full support
of all stakeholders.
• Using UNICEF’s gender continuum model, the findings suggest that the Programme falls under
the gender-aware/sensitive category. While the Programme considers the principles of gender
equality in its frameworks and implementation strategies and recognizes that the ‘one-size-fits-
all’ approach contributes to the production and reproduction of gender inequalities in education,
the findings on the gender needs of girls and boys with disabilities suggest that the Programme
does not actively challenge and address them.
Overall, the Programme is moving in the right direction and has achieved significant progress in its
ten years of implementation. However, the Programme needs to address gender disparity in access
and participation, allocate adequate inputs and resources, ensure effectiveness and inclusivity of
strategies, improve understanding of disability and inclusive education, and address the different
needs of boys and girls to promote equal educational outcomes.
4.4 Efficiency
To determine the extent to which the Programme delivered results in an economical and timely way,
the evaluation study examined five dimensions: planning, monitoring, and evaluation; financial and
human resources; implementation strategies; cost-effectiveness; and situation analysis.
• Some mechanisms are in place to plan, monitor, and evaluate the Programme: the MoE
manages education data using the EMIS and presents relevant indicators through the AES
reports, schools track their progress through the School Performance Management System,
and teachers use the Individual Education Plan to record and review students’ academic
achievement and developmental milestones. Though these mechanisms help improve
programme efficiency, the lack of standardized tools, lack of training on documentation and
reporting, and lack of dissemination of relevant information hinder stakeholders from using data
in a strategic and timely manner.
• Substantial resources—human, financial, and technical—have been invested in the
Programme. However, these are not adequate to properly implement inclusive and special
education and address the needs of children with disabilities. Among others, the lack of teacher
training and capacity building has been cited most frequently as an obstacle to the successful
implementation of the Programme.
• Working in parallel, the strategies of policy formulation, technical capacity-building, financial
support, and advocacy have facilitated improvements in the provision of inclusive and special
education. Having a set of standards for inclusive education has also supported efficiency in
achieving results, although implementation still varied across schools. On the other hand, the
limited participation of parents, caregivers, and the community may have lessened
66
opportunities for further awareness-raising, better service delivery, and a broader support base
for the Programme.
• There is a lack of understanding amongst stakeholders about the principles of inclusive
education and how this can be implemented to benefit all students—those with and without
disabilities. Though responses acknowledged the complex factors affecting inclusive
education, some stakeholders believe that including children with disabilities in schools with
IE/SEN programme is less cost-effective compared to enroling them in specialized institutes.
The Programme must dispel the misconception that addressing the needs of children with
disabilities will adversely impact the learning and development of children without disabilities
and vice versa.
• Within the Programme, its strengths lie in having solid partnerships and close collaboration
with other agencies and organizations, expertise in inclusive education amongst stakeholders,
employment of a twin-track approach to disability inclusion, and institutionalisation of the
planning and review processes. On the other hand, the Programme needs to address its
weaknesses which include: insufficient data on children with disabilities and disability-inclusive
education to inform intervention, absence of a national education law, limited government
investment, limited understanding of inclusive education, limited capacity to implement
inclusive education, and limited understanding of how to organize inclusive classrooms and
plan and teach inclusively.
As the P rogramme continues its next phase of implementation, it needs to consider how to maximise
existing opportunities, including the possibility of establishing more inclusive schools (with a focus on
whole school approaches to inclusion including inclusive cultures environment and practice),
improving access and participation of children with disabilities in education, and increasing
collaboration with organisations of persons with disabilities and other agencies. The Programme also
needs to mitigate the threats posed by external factors including the delay in the ratification of CRPD,
lack of development partners (funding partners), limited awareness and understanding of the needs
of children with disabilities, limited awareness and understanding of inclusive education, inaccessible
infrastructure and facilities in communities and public spaces, and impact of COVID-19 pandemic on
learning continuity and quality of teaching and learning.
Overall, the Programme has taken the initial steps—establish mechanisms, allocate resources, and
employ strategies—to deliver results efficiently. However, the Programme needs to further integrate
the planning, monitoring, evaluation mechanisms; analyse, report, and use data in a more strategic
and timely manner; increase investment in inclusive education; increase parental and community
engagement; build stakeholder capacity to understand and implement inclusive education; and
consider the results of the initial situation analysis in refining its overall design and strategy.
4.5 Sustainability
The three key evaluation questions in this criterion focus on (1) efforts made to establish an enabling
environment and measures implemented to sustain the delivery of services, (2) interventions adopted
to upscale the programme, and (3) strengthening of capacities of different education stakeholders at
the individual and organisational levels.
• There is evidence of significant efforts that have been made to support the sustainability of the
programme. The findings of this evaluation study have highlighted the steps that the Bhutanese
67
government has taken to sustain and upscale the IE/SEN programme in the country. These
include establishing an enabling environment through various rights-based and disability-
inclusive policy frameworks, increasing the financial investments on the whole education
system, and requiring the commitment of the local government to implement the programme.
However, these efforts are likely to be hampered by various challenges identified by evaluation
study participants. These include limited budget dedicated to the programme, inadequate
disability-inclusive infrastructure, gaps in transitional planning, challenges in implementing
disability-inclusive curriculum and pedagogy, assessment and learning materials.
• There is also evidence that the RGOB has adopted different interventions to expand the
programme implementation. There is significant progress in expanding the programme to reach
more general schools to cater for the educational needs of children with mild to moderate
disabilities, and eventually, young children with disabilities through the ECCD programme.
Nevertheless, some evaluation study participants stressed the need to urgently introduce the
programme to other general schools and increase the human resources to reach more children
with disabilities. Findings also show that the government collaborates with external partners
such as development partners and national civil society organisations to sustain the programme
expansion. The government is also utilising disability data through national surveys and studies
on disability to support the case for investment in IE/SEN programme. Moreover, findings
reveal that increasing the demand for inclusive education through raising awareness on the
right to education of children with disabilities contributes to the upscaling of the programme.
However, challenges remain particularly in influencing the parents and communities in
supporting the education of children with disabilities.
• The findings of the evaluation study provide evidence that relevant education stakeholders,
particularly at the school level, were supported through capacity development activities to
implement the IE/SEN programme. Respondents shared various approaches in building the
capacity of education stakeholders. For instance, different education colleges in Bhutan offer
pre-service and in-service teacher training for school heads and teachers. Ministry of Education
and other external partners provide in-service teacher training programmes that target school
heads, SEN programme coordinators, and teachers in schools with IE/SEN programme.
However, evaluation study participants have identified gaps and challenges in this area. First,
there is evidence that the focus of capacity development activities in schools with IE/SEN
programme is those teaching in classes with children with disabilities. On a similar note, there
is also evidence that these capacity development activities have not been extended to general
schools/centres/institutes that are not implementing the IE/SEN programme. There is also a
need to improve the capacity of parents of children and the whole community in supporting
the education of children with disabilities.
A key recommendation from this report would be to focus more on school development activities
which build the inclusive understanding and capacity of all teachers, leaders, parents and community
in and around the school. Teachers need to be supported through ongoing school development
activities to work with each other and other stakeholders to build an inclusive school culture based on
inclusive values. This model should be used as the basis for scaling up the IE program.
68
4.6 Equity, Gender Equality and Human Rights-Based
Approaches
The key evaluation question in this criterion concerns the extent of integrating a gender-responsive
and overall equity-based approach into the design and implementation of the IE/SEN programme.
• There is evidence that the IE/SEN programme is mainstreaming the principles of gender
equality in its implementation strategies. The majority of the respondents noted that inclusion
principles underpin the programme's implementation. This is reflected in the disability-inclusive
policies and plans that have explicitly included principles of gender equality. Some respondents
affirmed that the programme promotes the empowerment of women and girls with disabilities
by providing them equal access to education. However, the findings also suggest the need to
address specific gender needs of children with disabilities. Gender-responsive interventions
are needed to cater to the specific needs of boys and girls with disabilities.
• There is also adequate evidence that the programme implementation adheres to a human-
rights-based programming approach. This is reflected in the commitment of the government
to promote the rights of persons with disabilities, including women and children, in policy
development and programme implementation. Nevertheless, challenges remain, including the
limited engagement of parents and caregivers of children with disabilities in the programme
implementation and the presence of corporal punishment in schools.
69
2
5
9
7
1
T
C
70 O
N
U
©
5 Lessons Learned
1 Strategic and timely use of data is crucial for effective and efficient decision-making. In
the absence of an integrated mechanism for planning, (i.e., presence of a programme design
document with a clear logical framework), review and an active platform for information
dissemination, the programme has not been able to optimize the use of data to inform
programme implementation, apply corrective measures when needed, and facilitate
continuous learning and improvement.
2 Future programming must focus on including with disabilities in inclusive schools, rather than
strengthening specialized institutes. Although targeted interventions in specialized institutes
have contributed to increased access to education, a stronger focus on strengthening inclusive
schools, including building the understanding and capacity of stakeholders to implement
inclusive education is imperative.
3 Technical capacity-building is a continuous process, not a one-off event. To improve
confidence and competence in implementing inclusive education, stakeholders must allocate
resources and commit to the continuous and school-based professional development of
teachers and school heads. In preparation for expanding the programme to other general
schools, the delivery of professional development activities should also extend to general
schools/centres/institutes which are not presently accommodating children with mild to
moderate disabilities.
4 Active engagement of the local government in programme implementation presents an
opportunity to ensure ownership on the ground. Education Officers in different Dzongkhags
and Thromdes are in a strategic position to support the implementation of the IE/SEN
programme. The programme would benefit in investing on the capacity building of local
education officials to effectively decentralize some of the functions of the central MoE, e.g.,
overseeing programme implementation at the local level, periodic monitoring, managing
professional development activities, among others.
5 Programme scale up must consider the number of children with disabilities residing in the
districts to ensure adequate provisions. By design, the government only targeted establishing
at least one inclusive school per district. In scaling up the programme implementation, more
populous areas must be established in more populous areas to cater to a larger number of
children with disabilities.
71
2
5
9
7
1
T
C
O
72 N
U
©
6 Recommendations
Guided by the key findings of the evaluation, the following are recommended to improve disability-
inclusive education in Bhutan. The recommendations are structured around the programme
components: (1) enabling environment, (2) service delivery, (3) demand creation, and (4) cross-cutting
themes. Principles of gender equality, equity and human rights-based approaches are embedded
where relevant. In terms of prioritization, the evaluation team suggested an indicative timeline but
MOE and its partners from government and development agencies need to strategically discuss the
feasibility, alignment with current plans, and the resources required for implementation.
Guide for prioritization and timeline:
• Immediate: 2022-2023
• Medium-term: 2023-2026
• Long-term: 2026-2030
Suggested
Programme
No. Recommendation Priority responsible
component
agencies
Enabling R1 Activate the Inclusive and Special Education Immediate MoE,
environment Coordination Committee. development
Promote cross-sector collaboration with relevant partners
ministries and agencies. Convene the inter-
sectoral committee and institutionalize its
formation detailing clear objectives and
delineation of roles and responsibilities. Ensure
the participation of persons of disabilities or their
representatives through CSOs, NGOs, and
OPDs. Establish concrete and periodic
mechanisms for joined-up strategic planning,
implementation and monitoring and evaluation of
efforts related to disability-inclusive education.
Review the ways in which district education
offices are currently involved in consultations
and decision-making and harness their
contextual knowledge of the local situation in
inclusive education for strategic planning.
Consider taking out ‘special education; in the
name of the committee and replacing it with
‘Inclusive Education Coordination Committee’.
R2 Strengthen accountability mechanisms by Immediate to GNHC, MoE,
ratifying the CRPD and adopting a national medium-term development
education law or policy. Although the partners
government has a strong commitment to
implementing the CRPD made evident by
ongoing programmes, the ratification of the
convention will make the treaty legally binding,
and the government obligated to abide by the
73
Suggested
Programme
No. Recommendation Priority responsible
component
agencies
stipulations of the convention and institute
enforcement mechanisms. It is also
recommended to review the draft National
Education Policy 2019, ensure its full alignment
with the CRPD, and prioritise its adoption.
Ensure the policy re-enforces inclusive education
and not specialised segregated education.
R3 Establish a comprehensive baseline for the Immediate MoE,
programme drawing from the findings of this development
evaluation study and develop a programme partners
design document. The baseline study must
clearly outline the current needs of learners with
disabilities and the barriers they experience in
accessing and participating in school. The
evaluation findings should inform the
development of a dedicated programme design
that clearly sets out a theory of change and
logical framework with baseline and targets,
implementation and monitoring arrangements,
resources needed, among other aspects of
programme implementation. Establishing a
programme based on results-based
management will enable more rigorous
monitoring and evaluations in the future.
R4 Undertake a more in-depth review of policies Immediate to MoE, GNHC
related to disability-inclusive education and long-term
initiate policy reforms. Replace outdated
terminology such as ‘special needs’ and ‘special
education’ with more inclusive language in
existing policies, especially the draft National
Education Policy (2019). For instance, Special
Education Needs Coordinators or SENCOs can
be called Inclusion Coordinators instead.
Changes in terminology signal a change in the
discourse and shifts in the roles of special
education practitioners.
• The current developments in the
National Education Policy (2019) provide
an opportunity to clearly articulate the
direction in which the government
wants to take inclusive education –
which must be fully aligned with the
CRPD. In the absence of the CRPD
ratification, existing policies can provide
a strong enabling policy environment for
inclusive approaches to develop. The
74
Suggested
Programme
No. Recommendation Priority responsible
component
agencies
policy should then be supported with a
concrete road map for the next ten years
or alternatively, revisit the Ten-Year
Roadmap and make improvements to
the strategic plan.
• Clearly articulate the twin-track approach
to inclusion and concrete
implementation strategies. The twin-
track approach encourages key actors to
take the inclusive education agenda
forward by (1) improving the overall
inclusivity of the system for all learners
and (2) addressing specific needs of
individual children. This should be made
clear in legislative frameworks and must
not be interpreted as a justification to
maintaining specialized institutes.
• Explicitly state the adoption of child-
centred teaching and learning
approaches, the application of Universal
Design for Learning, provision of
reasonable accommodation for children
with disabilities in all policies and related
plans. Initiate reforms to make basic
education compulsory for all children,
including those with disabilities. Shift the
focus on strengthening specialized
institutes and gradually transition into
more inclusive provisions within general
schools.
R5 Strengthen monitoring and evaluation of the Immediate to MoE,
IE/SEN Programme. Include a results chain medium term development
framework in the programme design document partners
(see R3), performance indicators, data source,
and reporting mechanism, as well as conditions
that may facilitate or hinder progress
(assumptions or risks). Revisit the existing EMIS
module that includes disability data and add
indicators that are currently not being tracked,
such as enrolment data disaggregated by
functional difficulty, net enrolment rate of
children with disabilities, student learning
outcomes, barriers in access and participation,
and availability and access to support services.
Involve key stakeholders in the monitoring and
75
Suggested
Programme
No. Recommendation Priority responsible
component
agencies
evaluation process, including parents, children,
and OPD/CSOs, where appropriate. Ensure that
monitoring results are disseminated to
stakeholders to inform policy formulation,
budget allocation, programme management, and
service delivery.
R6 Increase financial investment in inclusive Immediate to MoE, MoF and
education. Allocate a higher government budget long-term development
to achieve quality and equity-focused results for partners
children with disabilities. Consider separating the
SEN and ECCD units into two divisions to enable
dedicated budget allocation. Collaborate with
more development partners including the private
sector, CSOs, and international development
agencies. Utilize the Inclusive and Special
Education Coordination Committee to mobilize
additional resources and support. Investments
must be clearly directed towards promoting
inclusive teaching approaches, instead of
perpetuating special education.
• Allocate higher government budget to
achieve quality and equity-focused
results for children with disabilities.
Consider separating the SEN division
from the ECCD division to enable
dedicated budget allocation. Promote
transparency in the resources allocated
to implementing IE in financial plans, and
where applicable, articulate which line
items will benefit children with
disabilities.
• Investments must be clearly directed
towards promoting inclusive teaching
approaches instead of perpetuating
special education. Collaborate with other
government units and development
partners including the private sector,
CSOs, and international development
agencies and clearly define budget
sharing. Utilize the Inclusive and Special
Education Coordination Committee to
mobilize additional resources and
support.
R7 Conduct a more in-depth case study on the Medium to MoE, MoF
imperative for investing in inclusive long-term
76
Suggested
Programme
No. Recommendation Priority responsible
component
agencies
education. Undertake further studies focused
on evaluating the investments allocated to
inclusive education, including the cost-
effectiveness of the IE/SEN Programme,
factoring in costs and outcomes, to determine
approaches that produce the most results for
their inputs.
Service R8 Expand the inclusive education programme. Immediate to MoE, GNHC,
delivery • Ensure national coverage and continue long-term Dzongkhags,
the establishment of at least one development
inclusive school per district, supporting partners
more schools gradually. Start building a
network of schools in each district
working together as communities of
practice, sharing effective practices and
collaboratively problem-solving. In
parallel, there must be a strong focus on
developing leadership and expertise
across the education system including
actors at the central down to the school
level.
• In selecting schools, include a focus on
strengths in the selection process,
looking into, for example, teachers and
school leaders demonstrating inclusive
values and commitment to fulfilling the
right of all learners to education.
Consider the size of the Dzongkhag and
the population of children with
disabilities in determining the number of
schools that will initially offer the IE/SEN
Programme to ensure adequate
provisions.
• The strategy must articulate a gradual
phasing out of specialized schools. The
evaluation is not suggesting closing
down such schools at once as that
would be problematic. Where possible,
the government should aim not to enrol
any more children into specialized
schools and prioritize including them in
general schools and improving inclusive
practices and capacity of general
schools.
R9 Increase the capacity and confidence of Immediate to MoE, Royal
teachers and school heads in implementing medium-term University of
77
Suggested
Programme
No. Recommendation Priority responsible
component
agencies
inclusive education in general schools, Bhutan,
including those not implementing the IE/SEN Colleges of
programme yet. education,
• Collaborate with pre-service teacher development
training institutions that are already partners
supporting inclusive education and key
government units in developing or
strengthening existing teacher training
programmes for pre-service teachers.
• Conduct an inventory of beliefs and
practices and learning needs
assessment of in-service educators.
Focus on localized development of
teachers and school leaders. Facilitate
continuous professional development
through further education, training
courses, mentoring/coaching, and
supporting professional learning
communities, with a focus on inclusive
principles and practices, for all schools.
Move away from a cascade approach to
teacher professional development and
promote ongoing, school-based
approaches to training.
• General schools that are not offering
inclusive or special education included in
this study all have learners with
functional difficulties in their classrooms.
Therefore, they must also be equipped
with knowledge, skills and values to
implement inclusive education, including
facilitators in ECCD centres. Provide
opportunities for peer observation,
reflection and collaborative learning
focusing on promising classroom
practices and approaches that support
inclusion. Incentivize or at least establish
a mechanism for recognizing innovative
and low-cost approaches to including
children with disabilities in schools.
• Strengthen pre-service and in-service
training by aligning the professional
development activities against relevant
frameworks, such as the Standards for
Inclusive Education.
78
Suggested
Programme
No. Recommendation Priority responsible
component
agencies
R10 Strengthen the capacity of local Immediate MoE
governments, in particular, Dzongkhag and
Thromde Education Officers. Provide additional
capacity development programmes for
Education Officers on programme
implementation to support them in their
functions related to IE/SEN and to increase
ownership in their respective Dzongkhags and
Thromdes. Topics could include inclusive
leadership, strategies for coaching and
mentoring school leaders in inclusive education,
monitoring and evaluation.
R11 Address gaps and challenges in facilitating Immediate to MoE, MoLHR,
the transition of children with disabilities to medium-term pre-service
vocational, further education, and the institutions,
workplace. Establish plans and strategies that TTIs, Draktsho
will facilitate the successful transition of children vocational
with disabilities to vocational, tertiary, and the training
workplace. Work with pre-service institutions to centres, CSOs,
develop inclusive strategies in supporting OPDs, Royal
children with disabilities in tertiary education. A University of
review of market trends and demands should Bhutan
inform the design and implementation of
vocational training programmes to increase the
chances of learners to find gainful employment
or other livelihood opportunities.
R12 Undertake an extensive review of the gaps Immediate to MoE, MoH
and challenges in early identification and medium-term
intervention. Based on this, draw up a strategic
plan, involving education, health, and social
welfare line ministries. Revisit the feasibility of
introducing the programme in the ECCD centres
in the immediate future and how access to
ECCD for children with disabilities could be
improved. Finalize the development of the
multisectoral ECCD strategic action plan to
improve services such as early identification,
referral, and intervention of developmental
delays and disabilities. Promote cross-sectoral
collaboration between different ministries and
agencies related to ECCD to ensure
accountability of responsibilities. Enhance the
capacity of ECCD service providers and
facilitators in the screening of children and
responding to their needs. Improve the
understanding and knowledge of parents and
79
Suggested
Programme
No. Recommendation Priority responsible
component
agencies
communities on functional disability to support
early screening and referral.
Demand R13 Strengthen advocacy and awareness-raising Immediate to MoE, DEOs,
creation among education stakeholders. Understanding medium-term CSOs, OPD,
of disability-inclusive education needs to be development
strengthened across all levels of the education partners
system including the school communities. Build
on the findings from the 2017 Knowledge,
Attitudes, Practice (KAP) study on children with
disabilities and strategically address
misconceptions and negative attitudes towards
inclusive education. Advocacy initiatives must
also aim to eliminate the use of outdated
terminology such as ‘special needs’ and ‘special
education’ and promote inclusive language.
R14 Increase engagement of parents and the Immediate MoE, school
school community. Strengthen the capacity of leaders,
parents in supporting the educational needs of teachers,
children with disabilities. Involve parents and the DEOs, School
wider community in the school’s planning and Management
review process. Consult with parents in planning Board
lessons, supporting children in the classroom,
and monitoring learning. Strengthen links with
and the capacity of community and parents in
supporting inclusive education through capacity
building programmes for parents of children with
and without disabilities on the right to education
of their children.
Cross- R15 Undertake a more in-depth gender analysis of Immediate to MoE, NCWC,
cutting the IE/SEN programme. Further research is medium term DPO, CSOs
themes recommended to identify and examine the
differences in the needs, constraints, and
opportunities between girls and boys with
disabilities in the programme implementation.
Plan and implement strategies to address the
gender disparity in access to education. Conduct
studies on the learning outcomes of children
with disabilities and ensure sex-disaggregated
and disability-disaggregated data are collected.
R16 Promote positive discipline and prohibit Immediate to MoE, NCWC,
physical and non-physical forms of medium term CSOs
punishment in schools. Improve the
understanding and knowledge of relevant
education stakeholders, particularly at the school
level, on the fundamental rights of children
against violence, including corporal punishment.
80
7 Bibliography
Ability Bhutan Society. (2021). Overview. https://absbhutan.org/about-us/overview/
Bhutan Council for School Examinations and Assessment. (2019). National Education Assessment
Framework.
Bhutan Foundation. (2021). Special Education. https://www.bhutanfound.org/our_work/special-
education/
Bhutan MoE, & UNICEF. (2020). An Evaluation of the Early Childhood Care and Development in
Bhutan.
Bhutan MoE. (2003). Education Sector Strategy: Realizing Vision 2020 Policy and Strategy.
Bhutan MoE. (2010). Educating for GNH Guideline.
http://www.education.gov.bt/gnh/guidebook/gnhguide(final).pdf
Bhutan MoE. (2012). Draft National Policy on Special Educational Needs.
http://www.unesco.org/education/edurights/media/docs/0a353e9f7c0b7c815aa7d6290668ef
7b4468f270.pdf
Bhutan MoE. (2014). Bhutan Education Blueprint 2014-2024: Rethinking Education.
Bhutan MoE. (2017). Standards for Inclusive Education. ECCD & SEN Division MoE.
Bhutan MoE. (2019a). Annual Education Statistics 2019.
Bhutan MoE. (2019b). Draft National Education Policy.
Bhutan MoE. (2019c). Ten-Year Roadmap for Inclusive and Special Education in Bhutan. ECCD &
SEN Division MoE.
Bhutan MoE. (2020). National Action Plan for School Earthquake Safety.
http://www.education.gov.bt/wp-
content/downloads/publications/publication/Bhutan_National_Action_Plan_School_Earthquak
e_Safety.pdf
Bhutan MoE. (2020a). Annual Education Statistics 2020.
Bhutan MoE. (2020b). Education in Emergency Programme for Students with Disabilities during
COVID-19 Pandemic. ECCD & SEN Division MoE. http://www.education.gov.bt/wp-
content/uploads/2020/06/School-with-SEN-programmeme-1-1.pdf
Bhutan MoE. (2021). The National Multi-Sectoral Early Childhood Care and Development (ECCD)
Strategic Action Plan for Bhutan: A Roadmap to 2030 (Draft).
Bhutan National Statistics Bureau. (2012). Two-Stage Child Disability Study Among Children 2-9
Years: Bhutan 2010-2011.
Bhutan National Statistics Bureau. (2018). 2017 Population & Housing Census of Bhutan: National
Report. N. S. Bureau.
Bhutan Planning Commission. (1999). Bhutan 2020: A Vision for Peace, Prosperity and Happiness.
Bhutan Planning Commission. (2002). Ninth Plan Main Document 2002-2007.
http://www.apfanews.com/media/upload/9th%20Five%20Year%20Plan.pdf
Cambridge Education. (2020). Formative Evaluation of Multi-Level Child-Centred Approach in Sri
Lanka Inception Report.
Chhetri, K. K. (2015). Investigating teachers’ concerns and experiences in teaching children with
special educational needs in Bhutan. (Master of Education – Research thesis).
http://eprints.qut.edu.au/84747/1/Kishore%20Kumar_Chhetri_Thesis.pdf
Chhetri, K. K. (2019). Preparing teachers for inclusive education in Bhutan. (Doctoral Thesis). The
Queensland University of Technology, Brisbane, Australia.
81
Cohen, L., Manion, L., & Morrison, K. (2007). Research methods in education 6th edition. London
and New York: Routledge Taylor and Francis Group
Creswell, J. W. (2012). Educational Research. Planning, Conducting, and Evaluating Quantitative and
Qualitative Research. Fourth Edition. Boston: Pearson.
Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade. (2014). Aid Program Performance Report 2012-13: Bhutan,
India, and the Maldives. https://www.dfat.gov.au/sites/default/files/bhutan-india-maldives-
appr-2012-13.pdf
Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade. (n.d.). Reflections on a volunteer experience in Bhutan.
https://www.dfat.gov.au/people-to-people/volunteers/avid-news-events/Pages/reflections-on-
a-volunteer-experience-in-bhutan
Disabled People’s Organization. (2021). Education Support. https://www.dpab.org.bt/education-
support/
Draktsho Vocational Training Center for Special Children and Youth. (2020): http://www.draktsho-
bhutan.org/draktsho-east/
Draktsho Vocational Training Centre for Special Children and Youth. (2020). Beneficiaries and
Approach. https://www.draktsho-bhutan.org/beneficiaries-and-approach/
Drukpa, U. (2021, July 24). MoE provides 748 tablets for students with disabilities in the country.
The Bhutanese. 10(29).
Drupka, K., & Brien, K. (2013). Educating for Gross National Happiness: A New Paradigm for
Education in Bhutan. Antistasis, 3(2).
https://journals.lib.unb.ca/index.php/antistasis/article/view/21119
Dukpa, D., & Kamenopoulou, L. (2018). The Conceptualisation of Inclusion and Disability in Bhutan.
In Inclusive education and disability in the global south: Lessons learned and ways forward
(pp. 56-79). https://doi.org/doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-72829-2_3.
Global Partnership for Education. (2018). Education Sector Programme Implementation Grant
Proposal for 2018-2021. https://www.globalpartnership.org/sites/default/files/c1-btn-
programme_document_1.pdf
Global Partnership for Education. (2021). Bhutan. https://www.globalpartnership.org/where-we-
work/bhutan
Graham, A., Powell, M., Taylor, N., Anderson, D., & Fitzgerald, R. (2013). Ethical Research Involving
Children. Florence: UNICEF Office of Research-Innocenti.
Grimes, P., Chhetri, K. K., Dela Cruz, A., & Celebrado, J. E. (2021). Evaluation of the Inclusive and
Special Education Programme in Bhutan (2010-2020): Inception Report.
Grimes, P., et.al. (2021). Mapping of Disability-Inclusive Education Practices in South Asia.
Gross National Happiness Commission Secretariat. (2019). National Policy for Persons with
Disabilities 2019.
Gross National Happiness Commission. (2009). Tenth Five-Year Plan 2008-2013. G. N. H.
Commission. https://www.globalpartnership.org/sites/default/files/2009-01-National-
Happiness-Comission-Bhutan-Five-Year-Plan_processed.pdf
Gross National Happiness Commission. (2013). Eleventh Five-Year Plan 2013-2018. Gross National
Happiness Commission. https://www.gnhc.gov.bt/en/wp-content/uploads/2017/05/Eleventh-
Five-Year-Plan.pdf
Gross National Happiness Commission. (2015) Evaluation Protocol and Guidelines 2015 (Fifth Draft).
Gross National Happiness Commission. (2018): Population and Development Situation Analysis
Bhutan
Gyeltshen, K., & Zangmo, S. (2020). School Education in Bhutan: Policy, Current Status, and
Challenges. In Handbook of Higher Education System in South Asia. Springer.
82
International Fund for Agricultural Development. (2002). Annex D: Methods for Monitoring and
Evaluation. https://www.ifad.org/documents/38714182/39724495/Annex_D-
3DEF.pdf/401d829e-fa9e-4f74-9c88-49a7605f5994
Lamsang, T. (2020). Bhutan one of the last 10 countries yet to ratify UN Convention on the Rights of
Persons with Disabilities. https://thebhutanese.bt/bhutan-one-of-the-last-10-countries-yet-to-
ratify-un-convention-on-the-rights-of-persons-with-disabilities/
Media Lunde Toleffsen. (2021). Training the trainers: International Project in Bhutan.
https://www.medialt.no/en-US/international-project-in-bhutan/204.aspx
National Statistics Bureau. (2018). 2017 Population and Housing Census of Bhutan: National Report,
Thimphu Bhutan.
OECD. (2021). Applying Evaluation Criteria Thoughtfully. OECD Publishing, Paris,
https://doi.org/10.1787/543e84ed-en.
Paro College of Education. (2020). Academics: Master of Education in Inclusive Education.
https://www.pce.edu.bt/index.php/m-ed-inclusive-education-2/
Pokhrel, S., & Chhetri, R. (2021). A Literature Review on Impact of COVID-19 Pandemic on Teaching
and Learning. Higher Education for the Future, 131-141.
https://doi.org/10.1177/23476311209839481
Rinzin, Y. (2019). Cut off point for Class X is off. Kuensel. https://kuenselonline.com/cut-off-point-for-
class-x-is-off/
Sakurai, R. (2017). Challenges in Implementing Inclusive Education in Bhutan. Journal of
International Cooperation in Education, 19, 71-81.
Schuelka, M. (2012). Inclusive Education in Bhutan: A Small State with Alternative Priorities. Current
Issues in Comparative Education (15(1)), 145-156.
Sherab, K., Maxwell, T.W. & Cooksey, R. W. (2016). Teacher understanding of the educating for
Gross National Happiness initiative. In M.J. Schuelka., & T.W. Maxwell (Eds.), Education in
Bhutan, Education in the Asia-Pacific Region: Issues, Concerns and Prospects 36, DOI
10.1007/978-981-10-1649-3_10
The Bhutanese (2020, October 10). ECCD Evaluation Report has important findings.
https://thebhutanese.bt/eccd-evaluation-report-has-important-findings/
The World Bank. (2019a). Every learner matters: Unpacking the learning crisis for children with
disabilities.
The World Bank. (2019b). The World Bank in Bhutan.
https://www.worldbank.org/en/country/bhutan/overview
UN. (1989). Convention on the Rights of the Child.
UN. (1990). World Declaration on Education for All: Meeting Basic Learning Needs.
UN. (2006). United Nations Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities.
UN. (2015). Transforming our World: The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. UN.
UN. (2016). CRPD General Comment No. 4 to Article 24.
UN. (2018). Disability and development report. U. N. Publications.
UNEG. (2020). UNEG Ethical Guidelines for Evaluation.
UNESCO Institute for Statistics. (n.d.). Bhutan: Education Expenditures.
http://uis.unesco.org/en/country/bt?theme=education-and-literacy
UNESCO. (1994). The Salamanca Statement and Framework for Action on Special Needs Education.
UNESCO. (2017). Unpacking Sustainable Development Goal 4 Education 2030.
UNESCO. (2018). Education and Disability: Analysis of Data from 49 Countries.
83
UNESCO. (2020). Global Education Monitoring Report 2020: Inclusion and education: All means all.
UNESCO.
UNICEF Bhutan. (2017). Child protection programme strategy and action plan for Dratshang
Lhentshog July 2017-June 2022.
UNICEF. (2010). Working for an Equal Future, UNICEF Policy on Gender Equality and the
Empowerment of Girls and Women. UNICEF, New York.
UNICEF. (2012). Global Evaluation of the Application of the Human Rights-based Approach to
UNICEF Programming, Final Report – Volume I. UNICEF, New York, 2012.
UNICEF. (2014). Disabilities: Guiding Conventions.
https://sites.unicef.org/disabilities/index_70271.html
UNICEF. (2016). Module on Child Functioning: Questionnaires.
https://data.unicef.org/resources/module-child-functioning/
UNICEF. (2017). UNICEF-Adapted UNEG Evaluation Reports Standards.
https://www.unicef.org/evaluation/media/1421/file/UNICEF-
Adapted%20UNEG%20Standards.pdf
UNICEF. (2019). UNICEF Guidance on Gender Integration in Evaluation.
https://www.unicef.org/evaluation/media/1221/file/UNICEF%20Guidance%20on%20Gender.
pdf
UNICEF. (2020a). Annual Report 2020: Accelerating Results for Every Child in Bhutan.
UNICEF. (2020b). When the Schools Closed: A Family Copes with E-learning for a Child with
Disability during COVID-19. https://www.unicef.org/bhutan/stories/when-schools-closed
UNICEF. (2021). UNICEF Procedure on Ethical Standards in Research, Evaluation, Data Collection
and Analysis. https://gdc.unicef.org/resource/unicef-procedure-ethical-standards-research-
evaluation-data-collection-and-analysis
UNICEF Finland (2015). Introduction to the Human Rights-Based Approach: A guide to Finnish NGOs
and their partners.
https://unicef.studio.crasman.fi/pub/public/pdf/HRBA_manuaali_FINAL_pdf_small2.pdf
UNICEF ROSA. (2017). Gender equality: Glossary of Terms and Concepts.
https://www.unicef.org/rosa/media/1761/file/Gender%20glossary%20of%20terms%20and
%20concepts%20.pdf
UNICEF & UNESCO. (2007). A Human Rights-Based Approach to Education. https://www.right-to-
education.org/sites/right-to-education.org/files/resource-
attachments/A%20Human%20Rights-
based%20Approach%20to%20Education%20for%20All_0.pdf
United Nations Evaluation Group (2014). Integrating Human Rights and Gender Equality in
Evaluations. New York: UNEG.
United Nations Evaluation Group (2016). Norms and Standards for Evaluation. New York: UNEG.
United Nations. (1948). Universal Declaration of Human Rights.
Washington Group on Disability Statistics. (2020). An Introduction to the Washington Group on
Disability Statistics Question Sets. https://www.washingtongroup-
disability.com/fileadmin/uploads/wg/Documents/primer.pdf
WHO & World Bank. (2011). World Report on Disability.
84
EVALUATION OF THE INCLUSIVE
AND SPECIAL EDUCATION
PROGRAMME IN BHUTAN
2010-2020