EVALUATION OF THE
UNICEF RESPONSE TO
THE LEVEL 2 HUMANITARIAN
CRISIS IN MYANMAR
EVALUATION REPORT
EVALUATION OF THE UNICEF RESPONSE TO THE LEVEL 2 HUMANITARIAN CRISIS IN MYANMAR
Final Report
© United Nations Children’s Fund, EAPRO, 2023
Final version produced in May 2023
The purpose of publishing evaluation reports produced by the UNICEF Evaluation Office is to fulfil a corporate
commitment to transparency through the publication of all completed evaluations. The reports are designed to
stimulate a free exchange of ideas among those interested in the topic and to assure those supporting the work
of UNICEF that it rigorously examines its strategies, results, and overall effectiveness.
The contents of the report do not necessarily reflect the policies or views of UNICEF.
The text has not been edited to official publication standards and UNICEF accepts no responsibility for error.
The designations in this publication do not imply an opinion on the legal status of any country or territory, or of its
authorities, or the delimitation of frontiers.
The copyright for this report is held by the United Nations Children’s Fund. Permission is required to reprint/reproduce/
photocopy or in any other way to cite or quote from this report in written form. UNICEF has a formal permission
policy that requires a written request to be submitted. For non-commercial uses, the permission will normally be
granted free of charge. Please email the Evaluation Office at the address below to request permission.
Please cite the work as follows: United Nations Children’s Fund. 2023. Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the
Level 2 Humanitarian Crisis in Myanmar. UNICEF Evaluation Office, New York.
For further information, please contact:
UNICEF East Asia and Pacific Regional Office
19 Phra Atit Road Bangkok 10200 Thailand
E-mail: eapro@unicef.org or asia.pacific.evaluate@unicef.org
www.unicef.org/eapro
Cover photo: © UNICEF/UN0697912/Oo
EVALUATION OF THE
UNICEF RESPONSE TO
THE LEVEL 2 HUMANITARIAN
CRISIS IN MYANMAR
EVALUATION REPORT
May 2023
©
Matteo
Massimi
on
Unsplash
CONTENTS
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS v
ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS vi
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 1
1. INTRODUCTION 11
2. COUNTRY AND OPERATING CONTEXT 13
Country context 13
UNICEF in Myanmar 18
UNICEF’s response to the crisis 19
Funding of the response 20
Timeline of the crisis 22
3. METHODOLOGY 25
Evaluation criteria and questions 25
Evaluation phases 26
Management arrangements 26
Data collection, analysis and validation 26
Constraints and limitations 28
4. KEY FINDINGS 31
EQ 1: Relevance 31
- Alignment with international humanitarian standards 32
- Adaptation of UNICEF’s strategies and approach 32
- Gender considerations 34
- Prioritization of needs and community consultations 34
EQ 2: Effectiveness 35
- Influence of the context on UNICEF’s response 37
- Achievement of targets 38
- Influence of the L2 declaration on the response 41
- Procurement and logistics 42
- Risk management and mitigation 43
- Community feedback 44
- Monitoring 45
EQ 3: Coherence and connectedness 46
- Preparedness measures 47
- Integration of the triple Nexus 47
- Coherence with the UN Framework 48
- UN programmatic engagement guidelines 48
EQ 4: Efficiency 49
- How timely was the scale-up of the response? 49
- Contribution of emergency preparedness 50
- Innovation and adaptation 50
EQ 5: Coordination 51
- UNICEF role as a cluster lead agency 52
- UNICEF external coordination 53
- UNICEF internal coordination 53
EQ 6: Coverage 54
- Coverage of affected communities 54
EQ 7: Protection 57
- Protection provision 58
- Prevention of sexual exploitation and abuse 59
5. LESSONS LEARNED 61
6. CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS 63
ANNEXES 71
TABLES
Table 1. UNICEF response strategy for the Myanmar conflict 19
Table 2. Timeline of key milestones as of early December 2022 22
Table 3. Evaluation questions 25
Table 4. Summary of key informants and community discussions 27
Table 5. Constraints, limitations and mitigation strategies 28
Table 6. Qualitative assessment of performance by sector against key objectives 49
FIGURES
Figure 1. Evaluation subject, purpose and scope 11
Figure 2. Total population and people in need (as of early December 2022) 13
Figure 3. Population earmarked for assistance against actual needs, Myanmar (as of early December 2022) 14
Figure 4. Number of IDPs since May 2021 (as of early December 2022), Myanmar 15
Figure 5. Affected areas and displaced people across Myanmar at the end of 2022 17
Figure 6. Funds received by appeal sector against the 2022 HAC (as of 31 December 2022) 20
Figure 7. Funds received compared with 2022 HAC appeal requirements (as of 31 December 2022) 21
Figure 8. Trends in coordinated Myanmar response plan/appeal requirements 21
Figure 9. UNICEF’s response strategy and objectives reflected policies and standards 32
Figure 10. UNICEF was able to adapt its response to changes in a timely way 33
Figure 11. Number of agreements made with CSOs, 2020–2022 33
Figure 12. Communities were involved in identification of needs, design and implementation 35
Figure 13. UNICEF’s L2 response was timely and of good quality 37
Figure 14. ACAPS humanitarian assessment ratings for Myanmar as of July 2022 37
Figure 15. Performance of the sample of 15 UNICEF projects 39
Figure 16. UNICEF met its response targets described in the HAC appeal 39
Figure 17. Declaration of the L2 emergency significantly improved UNICEF’s response 41
Figure 18. Declaration of the L2 emergency by UNICEF was done at the right time 42
Figure 19. Global and local procurement supply timelines, 2020–2022 42
Figure 20. Value of Purchase Orders received by UNICEF Myanmar, 2019–2022 43
Figure 21. UNICEF and partners have collected and used feedback 44
Figure 22. Community feedback dashboard to strengthen programming 45
Figure 23. UNICEF has integrated relief, recovery and longer-term programming 48
Figure 24. UNICEF was able to quickly scale up its response 50
Figure 25. Preparedness measures, including supplies, allowed UNICEF to quickly scale up 50
Figure 26. Innovative approaches by UNICEF improved the efficiency of the L2 response 51
Figure 27. UNICEF’s resources were adequate to perform as cluster lead/co-lead 52
Figure 28. UNICEF coordinated well with other international actors 53
Figure 29. UNICEF was able to coordinate multisectorial responses without problems 54
Figure 30. UNICEF assistance was accessible to affected populations in different areas 55
Figure 31. Displacement in Myanmar 56
Figure 32. UNICEF assistance was accessible to the most vulnerable 57
Figure 33. UNICEF assistance provided protection in line with its mandate 58
Figure 34. UNICEF adhered to the principles of the Monitoring and Reporting Mechanism 59
Figure 35. UNICEF followed its PSEA, Child Protection and Safeguarding guidelines 59
iv UNITED NATIONS CHILDREN’S FUND
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The evaluation team would like to thank all those who have supported and informed this evaluation.
We are particularly thankful to Alessandra Dentice, Deputy Representative, Fawzia Hoodbhoy, Chief of Planning,
Monitoring, and Evaluation (PME) and Linn Thant Aung, Monitoring and Evaluation Specialist (M&E), all from
the UNICEF Myanmar Country Office. Juanita Vasquez, the former Multi-Country Evaluation Specialist (MCES),
and Peter Leth, the current MCES, Koorosh Raffii, former Regional Evaluation Advisor at UNICEF East Asia and
Pacific Regional Office (EAPRO); Jane Mwangi, Regional Evaluation Advisor at UNICEF East Asia and Pacific
Regional Office (EAPRO); and Catalina Salazar Silva, Evaluation Specialist at EAPRO for their support and inputs.
We are also grateful to the full Myanmar Country Office team as well as the Evaluation Reference Group (ERG)
for their reflective and constructive input during interviews and workshops. Your active and committed
participation throughout the evaluation process confirms the feasibility and usefulness of our suggested
participatory methodology for the L2 evaluation. Finally, we want to thank other key stakeholders who dedicated
time and provided important perceptions of UNICEF response to the L2 emergency in Myanmar.
Lattanzio KIBS conducted the evaluation. Special thanks to the team leader, Jock Baker, for his leadership, expertise,
and professionalism, and the rest of the team for their committed efforts throughout the evaluation, including
Aye Aye Kyuu as National Expert and Manuela Aiello as Research Assistant.
Finally, the effort and unwavering dedication of UNICEF staff in Myanmar need to be commended. Their hard work
and commitment, even in the face of an incredibly uncertain and demanding environment, have been instrumental
in carrying out their duties and fulfilling their mission to provide assistance to those in need, particularly vulnerable
children. Their perseverance and commitment deserve the utmost recognition and appreciation.
Disclaimer:
The opinions expressed are those of the independent evaluator, and do not necessarily reflect those of UNICEF.
Responsibility for the opinions expressed in this report rests solely with the author. Publication of this document
does not imply endorsement by UNICEF of the opinions expressed.
The designations employed and the presentation of material in the maps and other material do not imply the
expression of any opinion whatsoever on the part of UNICEF concerning the legal or constitutional status of any
country, territory, or sea area, or concerning the delimitation of frontiers.
EVALUATION OF THE UNICEF RESPONSE TO THE LEVEL 2 HUMANITARIAN CRISIS IN MYANMAR v
ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS
AAP Accountability to affected populations
ACAPS Assessment Capacities Project
CBO Community-based organization
CCCs Core Commitments for Children in Humanitarian Action
CDM Civil disobedience movement
CSO Civil society organization
DAC Development Assistance Committee
EAPRO East Asia and the Pacific Regional Office
EQ Evaluation question
FGD Focus group discussion
GDP Gross domestic product
HAC Humanitarian Action for Children
HCT Humanitarian Country Team
HPD Humanitarian project document
HQ Headquarters
IASC Inter-Agency Standing Committee
IDP Internally displaced person
INGO International non-governmental organization
IT Information technology
LTA Long-term agreement
MoH Ministry of Health
NGO Non-governmental organization
OCHA United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
OECD Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development
PD Programme document
PSEA Prevention of sexual exploitation and abuse
POs Purchase Orders
RCO Resident Coordinator’s Office
RRMP Rapid Response to Movement of Population
SDG Sustainable Development Goal
SOs Sales Orders
SSFA Small-Scale Funding Agreement
ToR Terms of reference
TPM Third-party monitoring
UN United Nations
UNCT United Nations Country Team
UNDAF United Nations Development Assistance Framework
UNDP United Nations Development Programme
UNDSS United Nations Department for Safety and Security
UNFPA United Nations Population Fund
UNHCR United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
UNICEF United Nations Children’s Fund
WASH Water, Sanitation and Hygiene
WFP World Food Programme
WHO World Health Organization
vi UNITED NATIONS CHILDREN’S FUND
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
Evaluation purpose and scope
1. This evaluation focuses on UNICEF’s programmatic and operational response and preparedness in Myanmar
after the activation of a Level 2 (L2) Corporate Emergency Procedure in July 2021 following the military
takeover on 1 February 2021.
2. Building on evidence of how UNICEF responded to this emergency, the evaluation’s purpose is to generate
clear lessons learned for future preparedness and response efforts for similar crises, while setting forth
recommendations for planning and directing ongoing recovery efforts in the country. The evaluation also
aims to strengthen accountability towards affected populations, implementing partners and stakeholders.
Context
3. During the past 50 years, the Republic of the Union of Myanmar has witnessed a sequence of military
takeovers, a resurgence of violence against minorities and the repression of dissent and democratic
formations. All this, coupled with Myanmar’s vulnerability to natural disasters – particularly earthquakes,
floods and cyclones – along with the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, caused a stagnation of the country’s
economic, health and social conditions despite the progress made since a nationwide ceasefire was
declared in 2015. In February 2021, Myanmar experienced a military takeover, which placed around
17.6 million people (32 per cent of the total population), including 5.6 million children, in need of
humanitarian assistance.
4. Following the military takeover, the UNICEF programme in Myanmar transitioned from mainly providing
upstream support to the Government to a humanitarian response delivered through community-based
organizations (CBOs) and national and international non-governmental organizations (INGOs). Towards
the end of 2022, UNICEF revised its Humanitarian Action for Children (HAC) plan for Myanmar, increasing
its funding and target requirements for 2023 to a total of US$169.6 million with the aim of reaching
2.8 million people, including 1.9 million children.
Methodology
5. T he evaluation team used a mixed-methods approach to answer the evaluation questions. UNICEF
interventions were assessed using selected evaluative criteria for humanitarian assistance, namely
relevance, effectiveness, coherence/connectedness, efficiency, coordination, coverage, and protection.
The assessment also reviewed the operational and working arrangements of the interventions, including
specific attention to elements of management, strategic partnerships and coordination.
6. Data collection included a desk review of over 300 relevant documents, 110 key informant interviews
through a purposive sample of UNICEF and external stakeholders, in addition to focus group discussions
(FGDs) that were conducted with 112 community members by the national expert and local researchers.
Two online surveys were conducted, one for UNICEF staff and the other for partner organizations.
Two remote validation workshops involving UNICEF staff were carried out, one following a presentation
of preliminary findings in October 2022 and the other in March 2023 following circulation of the draft
evaluation report.
7. The evaluation was managed by the UNICEF East Asia and the Pacific Regional Office (EAPRO) and the
UNICEF Myanmar Country Office and supported by a Reference Group comprising UNICEF staff from
Myanmar, EAPRO and Headquarters (HQ), plus one external member from the United Nations (UN)
Resident Coordinator’s Office (RCO) in Myanmar.
EVALUATION OF THE UNICEF RESPONSE TO THE LEVEL 2 HUMANITARIAN CRISIS IN MYANMAR 1
Summary of findings
The main findings based on each of the evaluation questions are as follows:
1. Relevance
8. UNICEF was able to adapt its strategy to the changed context guided by principles in the Core Commitments
for Children in Humanitarian Action (CCCs) and Inter-Agency Standing Committee (IASC) guidelines, although
this adjustment took time. A military takeover scenario had not been considered in UNICEF’s preparedness
planning and the after-effects provoked considerable trauma among staff. UNICEF took a pragmatic and
flexible approach to shift from a government-led upstream programme to a humanitarian programme led
by civil society organizations (CSOs), including smaller CBOs, which helped to extend UNICEF’s coverage
notably in remote areas.
9. UNICEF undertook a series of six rapid needs assessment surveys via telephone interviews to inform its
programme design and support fundraising efforts. The survey results were shared with the Humanitarian
Country Team (HCT) and cluster members. Efforts were made to consult with communities but time
constraints, the limited capacities of national organizations and difficulties in accessing certain areas
meant that their views were not reflected as much as was hoped.
2. Effectiveness
10. Following the military takeover, UNICEF was faced with a highly constrained humanitarian space that
negatively affected effectiveness and efficiency, including access to affected communities in many locations,
and difficulties in obtaining permits to import humanitarian supplies and visas for international staff. UNICEF
was not sufficiently prepared for the military takeover and its subsequent aftermath, and international agencies
spent much of the first few weeks focused on ensuring the safety and security of their staff. Family members
of UNICEF’s international staff were evacuated following the military takeover and around half of the staff
ended up working outside the country and were eventually transferred. Many staff, particularly national
staff who remained in Myanmar, were traumatized.
11. Supply timelines for international procurement were around 175–190 days, whereas lead times for local
freight forwarders were reduced from over 280 days in 2021 to just over 100 days in 2022 by means of
additional long-term agreements (LTAs) and more selective procurement. Apart from the relatively long
lead times for procurement, the need to import several key commodities – including vaccines and nutritional
supplies respecting international standards that UNICEF was required to meet – posed significant challenges
to UNICEF’s response. Limited funding and difficulty in accessing affected communities also constrained
UNICEF’s effectiveness. Only 34 per cent of the HAC appeal funding targets were met in 2021 and only
22 per cent had been raised for 2022 by the end of December 2022.
12. Effectiveness varied by sector and geographical area. Sectoral performance in Water, Sanitation and Hygiene
(WASH) was reasonably good, whereas Health and Nutrition struggled to gain momentum largely due to their
dependence on the authorities to facilitate implementation. Education, Social Policy and Child Protection all
initially faced challenges but subsequently picked up momentum by significantly shifting their modus operandi
to implementation by CSOs and informal networks using innovative approaches. The achievement of output
targets in Rakhine and Kachin states, where UNICEF had humanitarian interventions prior to the military
takeover, has generally been at least two to three times higher than that in other areas. However, UNICEF
struggled to reach targets in areas where there were significant numbers of new displacements, such as the
Sagaing Region, due principally to a lack of access.
13. The declaration of an L2 emergency was a helpful support in streamlining some processes and obtaining
additional funding and staffing and it was clear that UNICEF Myanmar felt the benefits of being prioritized by
the region. However, some delays were still experienced. Partner staff mentioned that some UNICEF sectors
demonstrated less flexibility in comparison to other sectors that found it difficult to adapt in a timely way
2 UNITED NATIONS CHILDREN’S FUND
in an environment where needs could rapidly change. Moreover, the declaration of an L2 emergency when
first requested in March 2021 could have taken advantage of a window of opportunity during the first few
months to import additional supplies and obtain visas, thus better positioning UNICEF to respond to the crisis.
14. UNICEF partners were required to have community feedback systems when they signed humanitarian project
documents (HPDs). UNICEF itself initially had no systematic way of collecting community feedback directly
or using feedback received from partners but was in the process of putting these systems in place during this
evaluation, including more systematic collection of data through third-party monitoring (TPM).
15. UNICEF had already been using TPM prior to the military takeover for Rakhine and Kachin States where access
was difficult. In the aftermath, UNICEF expanded TPM to other areas as its own access became more limited
due to conflict, security constraints and difficulties in obtaining travel permits. This was found to be a good
initiative although some areas for improvement were identified.
3. Coherence and connectedness
16. Prior to the military takeover, UNICEF’s emergency preparedness focused almost exclusively on natural
disaster events, and significant unplanned adaptations were required by the new context. Preparedness
nevertheless came in useful, notably with contingency stocks that were distributed although there were
insufficient quantities due to restrictions on the import of supplies after May 2021. Following the military
takeover, emergency preparedness was largely confined to training and the capacity-building of partners
and communities (through partners). Stand-alone emergency preparedness activities by UNICEF Myanmar
were limited due to the need to focus on other priorities with limited funds and humanitarian space.
17. The shift to emergency mode happened more rapidly in UNICEF field offices, such as in Rakhine State, that were
already implementing humanitarian interventions and had the capacity to respond to emergencies. Similarly,
those sectors that had historically relied more on CSO implementation, like WASH, were able to rapidly adapt.
18. UNICEF’s response has greatly expanded capacity-building opportunities for national CSOs and CBOs
across all UNICEF sectors as part of community workforce readiness. Partners, in turn, have been training
community members in activities ranging from teacher training to child protection. Interviews with staff
from UNICEF and partners confirmed that this has the potential to be an invaluable investment for Nexus
programming once the situation in Myanmar improves.
4. Efficiency
19. Many inefficiencies were caused by the challenging operating environment, including limited access to
affected populations; the lack of import permits, visas for international staff and movement permits for staff;
and security restrictions imposed by the United Nations. UNICEF was nevertheless seen as being able to
scale up its response relatively rapidly in a difficult operating context. Some prepositioned supplies and
existing LTAs with local suppliers initially helped to facilitate critical life-saving support to affected communities.
Most of the surge and newly appointed staff deployed to fill staffing gaps were only able to provide remote
support. Feedback from national staff about their value-added was mixed and often related to the individual’s
knowledge of the context. The expanded use of information technology (IT) tools following the COVID-19
pandemic was an important innovation that increased UNICEF’s efficiency during the response.
20. The declaration of an L2 emergency provided UNICEF with more flexible and efficient procedures, but their
application was reported by partners to be inconsistent between different sections. UNICEF has taken steps
to adapt its administrative processes to CBOs with limited capacity and experience in managing grants.
21. Longer-term programming was included in UNICEF’s response strategy, but significant limitations have
been imposed by the context. At the same time, partnerships have greatly expanded capacity-building
opportunities for CSOs and CBOs across all UNICEF sectors. As described above, the increased capacity of
national actors was an investment that can potentially support UNICEF’s Nexus programming in the future.
EVALUATION OF THE UNICEF RESPONSE TO THE LEVEL 2 HUMANITARIAN CRISIS IN MYANMAR 3
5. Coordination
22. UNICEF’s performance regarding its own programme was more effective than the performance of the
IASC clusters it was leading, particularly at a regional level, due to the lower priority given to clusters,
including a lack of funding. By mid-2022, national cluster coordination had reportedly improved but at
a regional level performance continued to be uneven, in part since several UNICEF staff were double
hatting with UNICEF and cluster-lead roles. Partners interviewed and surveyed were nevertheless positive
about the roles UNICEF played in clusters. CBOs, for their part, had difficulty in engaging fully with the
clusters due to their lack of capacity and experience with international systems.
23. UNICEF coordinated well with other international actors, including peer UN agencies and CSO partners.
Some donors felt they did not consistently receive enough information from clusters or from the UNICEF
office, which was of concern given that most donors did not have the option of travelling within Myanmar.
24. UNICEF worked with the United Nations Country Team (UNCT) to agree on common approaches and had
specific partnerships with other UN agencies within the framework of the Humanitarian Response Plan.
While the UNCT engagement guidelines provided clarity about a common United Nations position on
engagement with the de facto authorities, the perception among some UNICEF staff was that the guidelines
hindered humanitarian operations due to UNICEF’s interpretation compared with some peer agencies that
were reported to have adopted more flexible approaches. At the same time, the 2022 Peer-2-Peer review
found that the overall low-profile approach taken by the United Nations to negotiating and securing access
did not result in significantly improved access.
25. The Regional Office periodically reviewed and followed up on a work plan of activities to support UNICEF
Myanmar’s programme after the L2 emergency had been declared. Senior management also organized
regular town hall meetings with staff to inform and help to manage trauma and stress.
6. Coverage
26. UNICEF expanded its programme coverage as the conflict intensified so that the HAC appeal target
population increased from 867,380 people (including 316,164 children) to 1.4 million (including 1.1 million
children) in 2022. Although survey respondents gave favourable ratings for UNICEF coverage, interviews
and narrative responses described the difficulties that UNICEF had in delivering assistance to many areas,
including the Sagaing Region which accounted for almost half of new displacements.
27. The extent to which UNICEF met its targets varied significantly between activities, sectors and geographical
areas. With the exception of WASH, most sectors were only able to reach less than 30 per cent of their
targets. For areas like the Sagaing Region, where there was ongoing active conflict and large numbers
of displaced people, coverage was very low (0–16 per cent) because of severely constrained access due
to security and other factors.
7. Protection
28. CSO partners described how UNICEF had been flexible in its approach to extend protection coverage to
affected populations fleeing armed conflict. UNICEF intervention areas ranged from psychosocial support
for children and caregivers, support for the prevention and mitigation of gender-based violence and the
prevention of sexual exploitation to provision of support to victims of explosive ordnance through a broader
case management mechanism.
29. The prevention of sexual exploitation and abuse (PSEA) was an area of particular focus in UNICEF’s response.
Two consultants were recruited to assess and build capacity for local partners as some of these partners
had received high risk ratings due to their low capacity. This was reflected in the survey since almost half
of UNICEF staff felt that they did not have sufficient information to be able to confirm that PSEA principles
were being respected.
4 UNITED NATIONS CHILDREN’S FUND
30. Special arrangements were made for a lawyers’ network that was not registered as an organization but
rather loosely connected lawyers providing pro bono services for children and youths held in detention.
UNICEF’s Monitoring and Reporting Mechanism succeeded in activating the reporting system, which
informed much of UNICEF’s advocacy. Protection was challenging to implement, yet UNICEF’s support
provided an important evidence base for advocacy even if affected communities expected UN agencies
to do more to protect their rights.
31. Protection was another area where national staff in UNICEF were obliged to step up and take the lead
since three of the four international staff in the unit left the country soon after the military takeover.
EVALUATION OF THE UNICEF RESPONSE TO THE LEVEL 2 HUMANITARIAN CRISIS IN MYANMAR 5
©
UNICEF/UN0324864/Oo
Conclusions
This section begins with an overall statement followed by summary versions of conclusions and recommendations
linked to each conclusion.
OVERALL STATEMENT
The evaluation team’s conclusions for the three overarching questions posed in the terms of reference (ToR)
for this evaluation are described below.
1. How well has UNICEF responded to the Myanmar humanitarian situation?
Like most other humanitarian agencies in Myanmar, UNICEF was not sufficiently prepared for a crisis of this
nature. The Country Office was nevertheless able to make use of the preparedness efforts it had invested in for
disasters, including emergency preparedness stocks, pre-existing tools (such as TPM) and learning about remote
management from the COVID-19 pandemic. The shift from a government-led upstream programme to delivery
of humanitarian programmes through CSOs happened relatively quickly although the ability to respond varied
by sector and geographical area.
The L2 emergency declaration by UNICEF provided needed support to the Country Office although application of
procedures and protocols was inconsistent between sections. The L2 emergency was declared five months after
the military takeover at a time when restrictions on imports and visas were being progressively tightened and
there was little doubt that UNICEF would have been better positioned to respond if the L2 emergency declaration
had been done earlier.
UNICEF increasingly relied on partners, notably local CBOs and local networks that are able to access hard-to-reach
populations, to ensure that its limited assistance was distributed according to need. UNICEF was increasingly
successful in this quest by adapting its processes for smaller organizations that are more flexible. However,
UNICEF still faced obstacles in prioritizing its assistance according to need, notably in assessing needs and
responding in a timely way to meet the needs of newly displaced populations and their hosts.
2. What UNICEF approaches have had the most impact on identifying and addressing the
needs of affected households and populations and what have been the main barriers in
the response so far?
The main barrier in the response was the lack of humanitarian space which restricted UNICEF’s access to affected
communities, limited imports of humanitarian supplies and forced several senior international staff to work
remotely while waiting for visas. Another major barrier was the low level of funding for this crisis. However,
while more funding would help to increase assistance coverage, UNICEF would not be able to achieve the targets
described in the HAC appeal without addressing the barrier of humanitarian space. A third major barrier was
human resources. Like other UN agencies, UNICEF relied on international staff to fill senior management positions.
Such staff, even those who obtained visas, needed to understand the context, a difficult undertaking due to the
travel restrictions placed upon them both by the de facto authorities and the United Nations.
To address these barriers, UNICEF needed to transform its way of working to better support CSOs, and its
partnerships with small, local CBOs in particular have helped UNICEF to extend coverage to affected populations
in conflict-affected areas. Many of these CBOs had little prior experience of working with UN agencies, and
UNICEF adapted its approach accordingly, providing capacity-building, streamlining processes for small grants
and funding overhead costs. At the same time, UNICEF also significantly expanded TPM to help monitor the
quality of its assistance and the extent to which it is fulfilling its commitments for accountability to affected
populations (AAP).
3. What actions and changes in strategy are required to develop a conflict-sensitive,
medium-term programme for the affected states of Myanmar?
Specific conclusions linked to a list of eight strategic recommendations are listed below. These are designed
to help UNICEF develop a conflict-sensitive, medium-term programme for the affected states of Myanmar. The
recommendations are mainly aimed at UNICEF Myanmar, but some are also relevant to the Regional Office and HQ.
6 UNITED NATIONS CHILDREN’S FUND
SPECIFIC CONCLUSIONS
1. Emergency preparedness did not sufficiently assess risks and lessons learned.
Most of the humanitarian community, including UNICEF, does not appear to have paid sufficient attention
to early warning signals of an imminent crisis and was not sufficiently prepared to respond. Even though
the prospect of a military takeover may have appeared to be remote, it was far from an unlikely event and
subsequent events have demonstrated the importance of incorporating this scenario into contingency
planning given the scale of the impact. The humanitarian space has become progressively more restricted
by more stringent visa procedures for international staff, movement authorizations and import permits,
a situation comparable to the experience in Myanmar up until 2008 when the country was under military
control. Except for staff who had worked in Rakhine and Kachin States who were used to working in a highly
restricted environment, most of the staff, national and international, had no prior experience of working
in a context with severe restrictions on procurement, movement and access.
2. UNICEF needs to be more agile in responding to needs in a context where emerging
conflicts cause new and sustained displacements.
The Sagaing Region was an example repeatedly mentioned by the staff of both UNICEF and partners of how
UNICEF had difficulty in responding to newly emerging needs where there was frequent, and at times repeated,
displacement. Given the constraints on UNICEF and UN agencies in general due to rigorous safety and security
regulations and other limitations, there was a need to develop agile mechanisms that could rapidly assess the
scale and level of vulnerability and needs. There are ongoing initiatives in Myanmar to develop an inter-agency
system where UNICEF has a key role due to its capacity and IASC lead roles. UNICEF can therefore support and
strengthen inter-agency systems while at the same time increasing the relevance and effectiveness of its own
programme by drawing on its comparative advantages and lessons from similar contexts characterized by
rapid and frequent displacements due to conflict.
UNICEF has used ‘Rapid Response to Movement of Population’ (RRMP)1 consortia partner systems to reasonable
effect in the past in contexts where there are regular displacements. RRMP teams conduct coordinated assessments
and deliver assistance according to protocols they have adapted based on learning.
3. UNICEF has made good progress in partnering with CSOs and CBOs to increase support
to affected communities in hard-to-reach areas but should continue to streamline its
way of working with small local partners.
During this crisis, humanitarian agencies have learned that if they are to successfully address needs, they need to
give a much greater and more meaningful role to national organizations, including CBOs, which have demonstrated
that they are able to access hard-to-reach communities. Changes in delivery modalities to increase the roles
of national CSOs and CBOs, complemented by capacity-building, provided UNICEF with a reasonably effective
delivery mechanism. This shift resulted in some delays in adapting UNICEF administrative procedures, especially
given that for many UNICEF staff this was an unfamiliar way of working. UNICEF was one of the UN agencies
that did not cover overhead costs of national partners but this changed in October 2022 when it provided an
additional 7 per cent of CBO budgets to cover indirect support costs.
1 In the Democratic Republic of Congo, UNICEF eventually replaced the RRMP with a less costly Rapid Response Mechanism (UniRR). See DARA,
Evaluation of the Rapid Response to Population Movement (RRMP) Mechanism based on Performance, UNICEF Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC),
2018, for a summary of lessons learned.
EVALUATION OF THE UNICEF RESPONSE TO THE LEVEL 2 HUMANITARIAN CRISIS IN MYANMAR 7
4. UNICEF needs a stronger business case to justify coverage of priority humanitarian
needs in Myanmar.
Fundraising was problematic for UNICEF in Myanmar. There were various reasons for this, including the
politicization of the crisis, the prioritization of humanitarian funding for other crises, notably Ukraine, global
economic stress and perceptions among some donors that there were potentially more effective and efficient
ways of reaching those most in need than through UNICEF. While a strong business case should help with
fundraising, it can also strengthen coordination with partners and AAP with communities.
5. UNICEF’s cautious approach to implementing the UNCT engagement guidelines has
hampered its humanitarian access.
The engagement guidelines for UN agencies provided some coherence to the response but did not provide
sufficient practical guidance for operations on the ground. The UNCT engagement guidelines provided high-level
guidance, and the programmatic guidelines gave more detailed guidance about project design, but UNICEF field
staff did not feel they had the authority to negotiate and make decisions on the delivery of humanitarian aid
to affected communities.
UN agencies in Myanmar appear to be interpreting the UNCT engagement guidelines in different ways, with
some reportedly gaining more humanitarian space as measured by visas and import permits granted. UNICEF
needed to walk a fine line to open humanitarian space while maintaining partnerships throughout Myanmar.
While the context was somewhat different to that which existed prior to 2008 when Myanmar was under the
control of military authorities, many of the characteristics that restricted humanitarian space were similar and
it would be worth looking back at lessons learned from previous successful efforts by UN agencies to optimize
humanitarian space.
6. Good public communication and building trust among partners will be key factors in
improving access and AAP.
Internal and external communication have been a critical component of UNICEF’s programme in the Myanmar
context. UNICEF may need to take a more strategic approach to clarifying its public image to help address
misperceptions in a highly volatile environment.
UNICEF has recently developed systems to address AAP more systematically and subsequently needed to
strengthen trust with partners and affected communities. A common understanding of AAP approaches by
UNICEF and partners has helped to engage communities. However, systems were only being put in place so that
UNICEF could follow up and/or provide feedback to communities as this evaluation was being implemented,
two years after the military takeover.
7. UNICEF Myanmar does not have a joined-up system for tracking delivery of supplies
to the end users (affected communities).
Procurement of relief items was a major component of UNICEF’s response. The tracking system currently used
by the UNICEF Supply Division only tracks commodities until they are delivered to the warehouse or handed
over to a partner. Subsequent tracking then becomes the responsibility of the concerned section, which does
not always have the information readily available. Myanmar provided an example of where it can sometimes
take considerable time for relief supplies to get from the warehouse to the affected community. A user-friendly
tool for programme staff to track procurement all the way to communities would provide a more accurate
picture of supply chains from request to delivery to the end user in communities. This would improve
UNICEF’s accountability to affected populations.
8 UNITED NATIONS CHILDREN’S FUND
8. UNICEF was already using TPM systems prior to February 2021, and this provided
a useful basis to expand and improve on its monitoring capacity.
The TPM system set up prior to the military takeover provided a useful tool that could be adapted to a context
where access to affected communities becomes progressively more difficult. The mechanism was expanded
so that UNICEF could monitor its response but improvements in the format and protocols (e.g., follow-up,
feedback to partners) may be needed to strengthen its usefulness.
This conclusion was consistent with the IASC Peer-2-Peer review which recommended that cluster lead agencies
develop and disseminate clear guidance on reporting templates and fulfilling their AAP commitments.
Summary of recommendations
A summary list of the recommendations is provided below. The complete version of these recommendations with
additional guidance can be found at the end of this report.
R1. UNICEF at all levels (country, regional, HQ) should consider all relevant scenarios, including
worst-case and politically sensitive ones, when carrying out emergency preparedness planning.
R2. UNICEF should continue to support and strengthen agile anticipatory systems within both UNICEF
and inter-agency initiatives to be able to rapidly assess and respond to emerging humanitarian crises.
R3. UNICEF should continue to adapt systems to facilitate the work and increase the efficiency of CBOs.
R4. UNICEF should strengthen its business case by demonstrating the return on investment
(value for money) for the selected intervention type.
R5. UNICEF should restructure its staffing to be better positioned to deliver.
R6. UNICEF should build trust with national stakeholders.
R7. UNICEF should improve the efficiency of the supply chain and support AAP by using innovative
approaches to extend tracking to affected communities.
R8. UNICEF should improve TPM by making the process more participatory and fit-for-purpose while
producing user-friendly outputs.
EVALUATION OF THE UNICEF RESPONSE TO THE LEVEL 2 HUMANITARIAN CRISIS IN MYANMAR 9
10 UNITED NATIONS CHILDREN’S FUND
©
UNICEF/UN0697908/Oo
1. INTRODUCTION
32. This evaluation focuses on the programmatic and operational response and preparedness of UNICEF
in Myanmar after the activation of an L2 Corporate Emergency Procedure following the military takeover
on 1 February 2021.
33. Building on evidence of how UNICEF responded to this emergency, the purpose of the evaluation
is to generate clear lessons learned for future preparedness and response efforts to sudden onset crises,
while generating recommendations for ongoing and future humanitarian response interventions.
The evaluation also aims to strengthen accountability towards affected populations, partners and
stakeholders. The ToR of the evaluation provides further details (see Annex 1).
Figure 1. Evaluation subject, purpose and scope
L2 Evaluation Purpose L2 Evaluation Scope
Retrospective
Prospective dimension Temporal February 2021 to present
dimenmsion
Capture Provide recommendations
UNICEF Myanmar
relevant that support adoption of an
(main user),
learning integrated strategy for UNICEF
UNICEF EAPRO,
from UNICEF Myanmar, blending strengths of
UNICEF HQ, Myanmar
Myanmar’s the programme prior to and during Users
UN Country Team
response to the the L2 response while taking
and partners
L2 emergency. into consideration preparedness
(especially implementing
and response capacities.
partners), donors.
UNICEF’s response focusing
Horizontal dimension
on Health, Nutrition, WASH,
Education, Child Protection,
Thematic
Social Policy and Child Rights,
UNICEF Myanmar’s adaptation to changed C4D and Advocacy in addition to
operating conditions and how it has addressed UNICEF’s internal/external
marginalization and deprivation. coordination.
Source: Elaboration of the evaluation team.
EVALUATION OF THE UNICEF RESPONSE TO THE LEVEL 2 HUMANITARIAN CRISIS IN MYANMAR 11
1122 UNITED NATIONS CHILDREN’S FUND
©
UNICEF/UNI218096/Oo
2. COUNTRY AND OPERATING CONTEXT
Country context
34. During the last 50 years, the Republic of the Union of Myanmar has witnessed an almost uninterrupted
sequence of military takeovers, controls on the population, impositions of forced labour, resurgence of
violence against minorities and repression of dissent and democratic formations. All this, coupled with
Myanmar’s vulnerability to natural disasters – particularly earthquakes, floods and cyclones – along with
the outbreak of COVID-19, caused a stagnation of the country’s economic, health and social conditions
despite the progress made since a nationwide ceasefire was declared in 2015.
35. In February 2021, Myanmar experienced a military takeover that subjected the country to a new emergency
affecting some 17.6 million people (32 per cent of the total population), including 5.6 million children,2
greatly increasing the need for humanitarian assistance.3
36. Figure 2 and Figure 3 below show how needs have increased since the military takeover while populations
targeted for assistance have remained relatively small due mainly to a combination of lack of resources
and access constraints.
Figure 2. Total population and people in need (as of early December 2022)
54.8 million
Total population
(World Bank)
25 million
2022 estimated
people in poverty
(UNDP)
17.6 million
People in need
(OCHA)
Source: Elaboration of the evaluation team based on World Bank, UNDP and OCHA data.
2 OCHA Myanmar, ‘Myanmar Humanitarian Response Plan 2023’, January 2023, https://myanmar.un.org/sites/default/files/2023-01/mmr_humanitarian_
response_plan_2023%20final.pdf.
3 Ibid.
EVALUATION OF THE UNICEF RESPONSE TO THE LEVEL 2 HUMANITARIAN CRISIS IN MYANMAR 13
Figure 3. Population earmarked for assistance against actual needs, Myanmar4 (as of early December 2022)
20,000,000
18,000,000
16,000,000
14,000,000
12,000,000
10,000,000
8,000,000
6,000,000
4,000,000
2,000,000
0
December 2019 December 2020 December 2021 December 2022 December 2023
People in need People targeted for assistance Children in need
Source: Elaboration of the evaluation team based on OCHA Myanmar via ReliefWeb dataset.
37. The Republic of the Union of Myanmar lies between India and China and borders Bangladesh, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic and Thailand. Myanmar has the second largest national land area in Southeast Asia and
a long coastline. The country has a population of approximately 54.8 million people,5 including 135 recognized
ethnic groups, 70 per cent of whom live in rural areas.6 Myanmar has extremely diverse agro-ecological zones,
fertile land and a wealth of natural resources.
38. Following a decade of consistent economic growth culminating in the election in November 2015 of the new
civilian Government led by Daw Aung San Suu Kyi, Myanmar is facing multiple crises of an unprecedented
magnitude triggered by the military takeover of February 2021, with devastating effects on the security and
well-being of its 17 million children.
39. After the military takeover, a nationwide civil disobedience movement (CDM) emerged and subsequently
evolved into armed resistance, with a surge of armed conflict in the border areas. Essential public services
and economic activities were severely disrupted. The initial phases of the CDM were characterized by
nationwide strikes that challenged the interests of business and foreign multinationals. This unpredictable
situation was also coupled with a lack of raw materials and finished goods, which forced several local and
international garment manufacturers to pause the placement of new orders and gradually withdraw
from the country. The unemployment rate, which had already increased due to the COVID-19 pandemic,
rose even more. Against the 20.5 million people employed in 2020, in 2021 an estimated 8 per cent of the
workforce – or 1.6 million people – lost their jobs, affecting those both in the formal and informal sectors.
Construction, garments, tourism and hospitality were among the hardest hit industries in 2021. It is
worth noting that women were most affected, particularly those working in the garments, tourism and
hospitality sectors.7
4 Please note that these figures fluctuate during any given month and cumulative numbers are not always available.
5 United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs, Population Division, The 2022 Revision of World Population Prospects, Myanmar.
The projected population for 2022 is based on the 2014 census and annual population growth rates and the UNHCR assessed number of non-displaced
stateless people in Rakhine.
6 World Bank indicators; 2019 Myanmar Inter-Censal Survey, https://www.dop.gov.mm/en/publication-category/2019-inter-censal-survey.
7 International Labour Organization, ‘Employment in Myanmar in 2021: A rapid assessment’, ILO brief, January 2022.
14 UNITED NATIONS CHILDREN’S FUND
40. Cash shortages and the depreciation of the national currency – the Myanmar kyat – deepened an already
dire economic situation, with an estimated 18 per cent decrease in gross domestic product (GDP) during
the 2021 financial year.8 Poverty was projected to increase to pre-2005 levels by early 2022,9 with rising prices
and a widespread loss of income pushing the most vulnerable people to resort to crisis or emergency coping
mechanisms to access basic services (particularly health, nutrition, WASH, and social and child protection
services). Almost half of the population (46 per cent) was expected to be living below the poverty line in 2022,10
particularly in the peri-urban areas of Yangon and Mandalay under martial law. More than 13 million people
were expected to experience moderate or severe food insecurity,11 with rural areas being the most affected due
to the recent disruptions to the agriculture sector, which employs a high share of the country’s working poor.
41. Moreover, the military takeover and subsequent violent crackdown on peaceful protests have rekindled
previously dormant conflicts among the various ethnic armed groups, particularly in Kachin, Rakhine and
Shan States.12 The 2022 Humanitarian Response Plan estimated that almost 12 million people in these States
were in need of humanitarian assistance out of a total of around 17.6 million people in need nationally.13
Overall, since February 2021, approximately 1,159,200 people are displaced internally across the whole
country (see Figure 4), in addition to 330,400 people living in protracted displacement even before the military
takeover. With few signs that the conflict will abate, more people were expected to flee to neighbouring
countries such as Bangladesh, Malaysia and Thailand and also internally, particularly in the northwest and
southeast regions, including areas that have not seen conflict for many decades (i.e., Chin, Sagaing and
Magway).15 In July 2022, a significant surge in the numbers of internally displaced persons (IDPs) was
reported, notably in the Sagaing Region.
Figure 4. Number of IDPs since May 2021 (as of early December 2022), Myanmar
1,400,000
1,200,000
1,000,000
800,000
500,000
300,000
200,000
0
1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2
2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2
M a y J u n e J ul y A u g u S s e t p t e m b er Oct o b N e o r v e m b D er e c e m b er J a n u ar y F e br u ar y M arc h A pril M a y J u n e J ul y A u g u S s e t p t e m b er Oct o b N e o r v e m b er
Source: Elaboration of the evaluation team based on OCHA Myanmar via ReliefWeb dataset.
8 World Bank, ‘Myanmar Economic Monitor July 2021’, https://pubdocs.worldbank.org/en/525471627057268984/Myanmar-Economic-Monitor-July-2021.
9 United Nations Development Programme, Impact of the Twin Crises on Human Welfare in Myanmar, November 2021.
10 Ibid.
11 Food Security Cluster estimate based on assessments conducted in 2021.
12 Crisis Group, ‘Myanmar’s Coup Shakes Up Its Ethnic Conflicts’, Report No. 312, 12 January 2022, https://www.crisisgroup.org/asia/south-east-asia/
myanmar/319-myanmars-coup-shakes-its-ethnic-conflicts.
13 OCHA, ‘Myanmar Humanitarian Needs Overview 2022’, January 2021.
14 ‘Myanmar UNHCR displacement overview 5 December 2022’.
15 OCHA Myanmar.
EVALUATION OF THE UNICEF RESPONSE TO THE LEVEL 2 HUMANITARIAN CRISIS IN MYANMAR 15
42. As 2022 drew to a close, armed clashes, compounded by tight security, access restrictions and threats
against aid workers, continued to hamper humanitarian operations across Myanmar. An escalation of
the conflict was observed across the country, including heavy fighting in existing ‘hot spot’ regions such
as the northwest and southeast. The humanitarian community hoped that an informal ceasefire agreement
between the Arakan Army and the Myanmar Armed Forces could create space for the delivery of
much-needed assistance in Rakhine and southern Chin States where access was restricted.16 A new
Association Registration Law was approved in late October, repealing the 2014 law, which provoked
deep concern among humanitarian agencies since it would make delivery of life-saving humanitarian
assistance even more difficult.17 Inflation in commodity prices, including for food and fuel, deepened the
socioeconomic stresses on communities, forcing populations to adopt negative coping mechanisms.
43. Even prior to the crisis, there were substantial disparities in child-specific social indicators between
the country’s seven states. Myanmar was still classified as a lower-middle-income country, ranking
147th of 188 countries in the 2021 Human Development Index and in the Gender Inequality Index.
Underrepresented segments of the population – including women, elderly people and minorities – were
affected disproportionately by poverty, ethnic conflict and climate change. Despite reporting significant
funding increases for the 2017–2018 financial year – which were largely due to investments in the Maternal
and Child Cash Transfer programme, the Social Pension programme and Early Childhood Care and
Development – the overall percentage of the national budget dedicated to social welfare (0.49 per cent)
was still very low compared to other countries in the region.18 With frequent floods, landslides and cyclones,
Myanmar is among the countries most vulnerable to the effects of climate change: natural disasters are
estimated to cost up to 3 per cent of Myanmar’s annual GDP, and the longer-term impacts may be still
greater.19 The country was severely affected by the COVID-19 pandemic, with a third wave between June
and August 2021, resulting in a total of 633,457 confirmed cases reported to WHO since 2020.20 Although
vaccines are being distributed by the de facto authorities, Myanmar was still far from reaching targets
set by WHO to vaccinate 40 per cent of the population by the end of 2021 and 70 per cent by mid-2022.
44. The military takeover has effectively erased gains made during the country’s fledgling transition to
democracy and development, leading to ongoing protracted and multifaceted needs, with significant
numbers of IDPs and displacement-affected communities, refugees and vulnerable residents, including
children requiring assistance, combined with underdevelopment and a need to address the root causes
of vulnerability.
45. The L2 evaluation has therefore considered significant issues affecting Myanmar. More specifically:
a. T he uncertain scenario brought about by the military takeover and its specific implications in terms
o f human rights violations and barriers to basic services;
b. T he persistence of active fighting in several regions throughout the period covered by this evaluation,
p articularly in the northwest and southeast, resulting in consistent population displacement and
s everely limiting access for the delivery of essential services to the most vulnerable population;
c. T he fighting as a reminder of the importance of coordination among international organizations and
d istribution of aid in the country; for despite impeded access and other constraints, UNICEF and its
i mplementing partners are the only actors responding to the basic and humanitarian needs of the
affected population.
16 UNICEF Myanmar, ‘Myanmar Humanitarian Situation Report No. 10 – 30 November 2022’.
17 United Nations Human Rights Office of the High Commissioner South-East Asia Regional Office, ‘Myanmar: UN Human Rights Office deeply concerned by
new NGO law’, News release, 28 November 2022.
18 Myanmar 2019–2020 Social Welfare Budget Brief, Ministry of Social Welfare, Relief and Resettlement.
19 Myanmar Information Management Unit, ‘Climate, Environmental Degradation and Disaster Risk in Myanmar: A MIMU analytical brief’, May 2022.
20 WHO Health Emergency Dashboard, accessed 20 December 2022.
16 UNITED NATIONS CHILDREN’S FUND
Figure 5. Affected areas and displaced people across Myanmar at the end of 2022
Source: OCHA Myanmar, Myanmar Humanitarian Update No. 24, 3 December 2022.
EVALUATION OF THE UNICEF RESPONSE TO THE LEVEL 2 HUMANITARIAN CRISIS IN MYANMAR 17
UNICEF in Myanmar
46. UNICEF has been delivering programmes in Myanmar since 1950, shortly after the country achieved
independence. UNICEF has more than 270 staff currently deployed across its main offices in Yangon and
Naypyitaw and seven field offices,21 covering all conflict-affected states and regions in the country.
47. Prior to the military takeover, the response of UNICEF in the country was guided by the 2018–2022 Country
Programme Document, which was subsequently extended to cover 2023. In line with UNICEF’s Strategic Plan
2018–2021 and its Goal Areas (outcomes),22 the UNICEF country programme in Myanmar integrated six
interrelated outcomes:
• P rogramme component 1. Health and Nutrition
• P rogramme component 2. WASH
• P rogramme component 3. Education
• P rogramme component 4. Child protection
• P rogramme component 5. Social policy and child rights monitoring
• P rogramme component 6. Programme effectiveness
48. During implementation of the 2018-2022 Country Programme Document, UNICEF also worked at the central
government level to support systems-building and upstream work in each component area. The main focus
of UNICEF’s work both at central and field level may be briefly summarized as follows:
a. O verall support for the implementation of child-relevant Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs);
b. H ealth and Nutrition: support for health systems strengthening, integrated health and nutrition services;
c. W ASH: support for WASH national strategy implementation;
d. E ducation: support for the National Education Strategic Plan in specific output areas;
e. C hild protection: strengthening social work, addressing violence against children and vulnerability
t hrough capacity-building at central level and work at state level, including in conflict areas;
f. S ocial policy and child rights monitoring: strengthen social protection, relevant government
m echanisms and data gathering capacity, as well as public finance systems that benefit children.
49. In relation to capacity-building, the Country Programme Document addressed the issue of institutional
capacity-building in social services delivery and information systems, providing training and technical
advice on issues such as the development, management and use of data, the design and implementation
of inclusive and integrated social programmes, and on equity-sensitive planning, budgeting and
implementation. These capacity-building efforts focused on the key ministries partnering with UNICEF
(Social Welfare, Education, Health and Sports, Relief and Resettlement, and so forth) and corresponding
departments at state/regional level.
50. With regard to the COVID-19 response, UNICEF support included advice at the national level and the provision
to affected communities of essential life-saving services and supplies (i.e., local procurement and distribution
of information, education and communication materials and WASH supplies) to fill critical gaps in service
delivery. UNICEF also provided technical assistance to local authorities and frontline staff – for example in
the form of technical coordination support for the development of the COVID-19 response plan in Kayin State.
51. The Myanmar Country Programme was notably anchored in national priorities and harmonized with the overall
development assistance available to the country. The programme was designed to contribute to the SDGs
(specifically SDG 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 10 and 17) in addition to the United Nations Development Assistance Framework
(UNDAF)23 2018–2022 outcomes. These outcomes are framed around the five ‘Ps’ of the SDGs: People, Prosperity,
Planet, Peace and Partnerships. UNICEF in Myanmar focused in particular on three UNDAF outcomes:
a. A ll people in Myanmar, particularly those affected by poverty, unemployment and vulnerability,
b enefit from improved sustainable access to social services and enhanced opportunities for human
d evelopment to reach their full potential.
b. B y 2022, Myanmar is enabled to engage in sustainable development processes through enhanced
e quitable and transparent management of natural resources, environment, climate and disaster risks.
c. B y 2022, all people in Myanmar enjoy greater peace, democracy, justice, human rights and equality.
21 UNICEF has two main offices, in Yangon and Naypyitaw, as well as five field offices and two sub-offices.
22 UNICEF’s Goal Areas are as follows: Outcome 1: Goal Area 1: Every child survives and thrives; Outcome 2: Goal Area 5: Every child lives in a safe and
clean environment; Outcome 3: Goal Area 2: Every child learns; Outcome 4: Goal Area 3: Every child is protected from violence and exploitation;
Outcome 5: Goal Area 4: Every child has a fair chance in life.
23 In 2019, UNDAF was renamed ‘United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework (Cooperation Framework)’ to more accurately reflect
the relationship and collaboration between governments and the United Nations development system to achieve the SDGs.
18 UNITED NATIONS CHILDREN’S FUND
UNICEF’s response to the crisis
52. Following the military takeover in February 2021, resources were diverted to the implementation of the
Interim Emergency Response Plan developed under the leadership of the HCT, which was updated in
January 2022 with the new Humanitarian Response Plan. A key component of the response strategy was
to strengthen partnerships with a variety of local and international partners (including NGOs, CSOs, CBOs
and the private sector) to ensure the continued implementation of UNICEF programmes to reach children,
including in areas where access was difficult.
53. UNICEF-supported humanitarian interventions prior to 2021 were limited to certain geographical areas
in Rakhine, Kachin, Shan and Chin States. Following the military takeover UNICEF transitioned from
a programme that mainly provided upstream support to the Government to humanitarian response
interventions to address needs arising from conflict, displacement and natural disasters. UNICEF’s
response thus had an overall goal of mobilizing a multisectoral response to meet the humanitarian
needs of affected populations. Key elements of UNICEF’s strategies are described in Table 1 below.
Table 1. UNICEF response strategy for the Myanmar conflict24
Programme Coordination
Provide immediate support to WASH, health, nutrition, Support providers of services and duty bearers, as
child protection and education they provide and coordinate the international response
Implement an approach that equitably reaches Lead and coordinate the cluster response in sectors
affected communities in different locations where UNICEF was cluster lead or co-lead
Support vulnerable groups in hard-to-reach rural areas Seek and foster inter-agency complementarity by
implementing the response strategy in coordination
with key partners
Prioritize and address the needs of vulnerable groups,
including girls, children with disabilities and those Operations
living with HIV and AIDS
Use a programming approach that delivers Reinforce UNICEF’s field presence and humanitarian
an integrated package of services capacity to provide operational support
Link UNICEF’s humanitarian response to recovery Establish operational hubs in the vicinity of the areas
programming through working with governments most affected
and the cluster system
Implement ‘build back better’ programming to build Promote innovation through technological platforms
community resilience and approaches for assessment, data collection,
monitoring, information-sharing and feedback
collection
54. The HAC appeal identified specific targets and related plans to guide UNICEF’s response. Annexes 3 and 4
provide a detailed overview of UNICEF programme targets and achievements in 2022 and 2023.
24 United Nations Children’s Fund, ‘The Myanmar Conflict: An update on UNICEF 2022 response planning’, Presentation, 2022.
EVALUATION OF THE UNICEF RESPONSE TO THE LEVEL 2 HUMANITARIAN CRISIS IN MYANMAR 19
Funding of the response
55. At the end of 2022 UNICEF revised its HAC plan for Myanmar, defining its funding and target requirements
for 2023. The 2023 HAC appeal totals US$169.6 million, compared to US$151.3 million requested in 2022,
and aims to reach 2.8 million people, including 1.9 million children.
56. As of December 2022, UNICEF had received a total of US$33.92 million of its 2022 HAC appeal.25
As illustrated in Figure 6, WASH absorbed the largest proportion of funding (33 per cent) followed by
Child Protection (24 per cent), Health (15 per cent) and Education (15 per cent). Nutrition received 10 per cent
of the emergency response funds and Social Protection only 2 per cent.
Figure 6. Funds received by appeal sector against the 2022 HAC appeal (as of 31 December 2022)
2%
2%
10%
0%
33%
15%
15%
24%
WASH Child Protection Health Education
Nutrition Social Protection Cluster Coordination Cross-sectoral
Source: UNICEF Myanmar, Myanmar Humanitarian Situation Report #12 – 10 February 2023.
57. Figure 7 shows funding received as of the end of 2022 compared with funding requirements and the
breakdown of resources received by sector.
58. As noted above, the UNICEF emergency response in Myanmar received US$33.92 million as of end-2022,
or 22 per cent of the US$151.3 million requested in the 2022 HAC appeal to meet the increasing humanitarian
needs caused by crisis.26
25 UNICEF Myanmar, ‘Myanmar Humanitarian Situation Report #12 – 10 February 2023’.
26 Ibid.
20 UNITED NATIONS CHILDREN’S FUND
Figure 7. Funds received compared with 2022 HAC appeal requirements (as of 31 December 2022)
Total 33,918,648
Cluster Coordination 749,436
Cross-sectoral (AAP) 32,029
Social Protection 844,735
WASH 11,084,183
Education 4,945,576
Child Protection 8,014,879
Nutrition 3,292,442
Health 4,955,367
20,000,000 40,000,000 60,000,000 80,000,000 10,000,000 12,000,000 14,000,000 16,000,000
Funds received (US$) Funding gap (US$)
59. In 2022, UNICEF was the third largest recipient of funds according to the Financial Tracking Service, with
WFP and UNHCR receiving the largest share (US$78,032,239) and second largest share (US$37,135,200)
respectively. Although UNICEF HAC appeals struggled with funding, coordinated appeals were relatively
well funded in 2020 and 2021 although efforts to increase the amount of the appeal in 2022 were only
moderately successful (see Figure 8).
Figure 8. Trends in coordinated Myanmar response plan/appeal requirements
$900m
$800m
$700m
$600m
$500m
$400m
$300m
$200m
$100m
0
2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022
Response plan/appeal funding Unmet requirements
EVALUATION OF THE UNICEF RESPONSE TO THE LEVEL 2 HUMANITARIAN CRISIS IN MYANMAR 21
)$SU(
latoT
Child Social Cross- Cluster
Health Nutrition Education
protection WASH protection sectoral coordination Total
(AAP)
Funds received
4,955,367 3,292,442 8,014,879 4,945,576 11,084,183 11,084,183 32,029 749,436 33,918,648
(US$)
Funding gap
29,622,633 2,035,371 1,855,874 17,075,389 18,724,638 24,035,221 -3,779 5,796,996 117,460,342
(US$)
Source: UNICEF Myanmar, Myanmar Humanitarian Situation Report #12 – 10 February 2023.
35%
70% 86%
85%
59% 74% 75%
Source: OCHA Financial Tracking Service website, https://fts.unocha.org/appeals/1095/summary (as of February 2023).
Timeline of the crisis
60. A timeline showing key UNICEF-specific (shaded) and main external events relevant to the crisis and
response is presented in Table 2 below, drawing from UNICEF situation reports, the HAC appeal and the
Humanitarian Needs Overview. A more detailed timeline can be found in the annex.
Table 2. Timeline of key milestones as of early December 2022
Colour legend:
Month
UNICEF milestones UN/RCO decisions Key external events
February 2021 •• On 1 February, Myanmar armed forces (the Tatmadaw) stage a military takeover declaring
fraud in the November 2020 multiparty general election won by the National League for
Democracy. A year-long state of emergency is ordered with a promise that new elections
would take place in one year.
•• A civil disobedience movement is launched in response to the military takeover and
protesters take to the streets.
•• The military authorities expel the United Nations envoy.
March 2021 •• UNICEF expands and adapts its partnerships with local CSOs and other partners to
ensure implementation of its activities.
•• UNICEF requests a rapid scale-up of emergency assistance outside the current
Humanitarian Response Plan locations
8 March 2021 •• Operationalization of UNCT engagement principles guidance for programme review
5 May 2021 •• The People’s Defence Forces are formed by the National Unity Government to unite
resistance against the military takeover. The military clashes with the People’s Defence
Forces in the southeast and northwest regions.
June 2021 •• The military authorities attempt to reopen schools nationwide, but more than half of the
country’s 400,000 teachers are on strike and just 10 per cent of the estimated 9 million
students in the country opt to enrol.
1 July 2021 •• UNICEF activates L2 emergency for 6 months (until 31 December 2022)
9 July 2021 •• COVID-19 pandemic worsens: A third wave of COVID-19 hits the country. Schools that
reopened in June close again.
August 2021 •• Military extends the state of emergency until August 2023.
1 August 2021 •• UNICEF releases the 2021 HAC appeal revision for Myanmar, tripling the numbers in need
(3.1 million people of which 1.2 million children).
November 2021 •• Schools across Myanmar, except for 46 townships where COVID-19 restrictions remain in
place, are allowed to reopen after a four-month closure. However, many schools remain
closed or are poorly attended.27
February 2022 •• The number of IDPs significantly increases across the country, particularly in the city of
Sagaing, and more than a million have been forced to flee into neighbouring countries.
February 2022 •• UNCT programmatic engagement guidelines version one plus is released
Early 2022 •• UNICEF releases its 2022 HAC appeal for Myanmar with 14.4 million people in need,
including 5 million children.
30 March 2022 •• UNICEF extends L2 emergency until 30 September 2022.
27 Schools in some areas remained open, such as in Rakhine, Mon and some of the other States.
22 UNITED NATIONS CHILDREN’S FUND
Colour legend:
Month
UNICEF milestones UN/RCO decisions Key external events
May 2022 •• A reported 694,300 civilians have been displaced nationally by the conflict, more than
double the 320,900 displaced at the end of 2021.
June 2022 •• 4.5 million children – half of all school-aged children in Myanmar – have not accessed
education for two academic years, and nearly 6 million children have restricted or
no access to learning.
August 2022 •• As of 29 August, an estimated 974,4001 people are internally displaced, resulting in
more than 1.3 million IDPs, with the northwest region being the most affected.
August 2022 •• The HCT approves an Inter Cluster Coordination Group for the northwest to address
strategic operational issues.
August 2022 •• UNICEF improves its MHPSS activities even in hard-to-reach areas, with a 53 per cent
increase compared to the previous month thanks to virtual access and hotlines,
capacity-building and community empowerment.
September 2022 •• On 16 September, at least 11 children die after an air strike and indiscriminate fire in
civilian areas in the Sagaing Region.
October 2022 •• Intensifying conflict is reported in Rakhine State, with reported clashes in northern
Maungdaw, northern Rathedaung, southern Buthidaung, Kyauktaw, Minbya and
Paletwa townships.
22 December 2022 •• The UN Security Council adopts resolution 2669 calling for the immediate end to all
forms of violence in Myanmar, urging restraint, de-escalation of tensions and the release
of arbitrarily detained prisoners.
December 2022 •• UNICEF extends the L2 emergency until 31 March 2023.
EVALUATION OF THE UNICEF RESPONSE TO THE LEVEL 2 HUMANITARIAN CRISIS IN MYANMAR 23
©
UNICEF/UNI126282/Rosetti
24 UNITED NATIONS CHILDREN’S FUND
©
UNICEF/UNI359467/Oo
3. METHODOLOGY
61. This evaluation took place during an ongoing crisis so the design contained some elements of a ‘real time
evaluation’ approach28 with the aim of supporting UNICEF’s adaptation to the crisis and providing UNICEF
with learning opportunities. One such opportunity was the ‘Real Time Action Plan’, attached as an annex,
which was drafted following a remote workshop on preliminary findings in October 2022. The evaluation
was launched approximately one year after the L2 response was declared by UNICEF and offered an
opportunity to guide programme transition from emergency to longer-term interventions.
62. The team used a mixed-methods approach to collect quantitative and qualitative data as described in more
detail below. A utilization approach was used throughout the evaluation process that aimed to optimize the
participation of staff from UNICEF and partners while respecting their workloads.
63. For the purposes of this evaluation, affected populations comprise both direct beneficiaries of UNICEF
support and non-beneficiaries, including community leaders. The context in Myanmar required that much
of the data collection was remote; however, the team made efforts within the constraints imposed by the
operating environment so that affected community perspectives were considered through FGDs facilitated
by field researchers, remote interviews with community leaders and analysis of UNICEF and partner
monitoring data from hard-to-access areas.
Evaluation criteria and questions
64. UNICEF interventions were assessed using selected evaluative criteria for humanitarian assistance,29
namely relevance, effectiveness, coherence/connectedness, efficiency, coordination, coverage, and protection.
The assessment not only dealt with the actual results of the response, but also with the operational and
working arrangements of the interventions, including specific attention to elements of management, strategic
partnerships and coordination.30
65. The team paid particular attention to assessing the capacity of UNICEF to manage the operations according
to the CCCs, including the principles and obligations of the Monitoring and Reporting Mechanism on grave
violations against children in situations of armed conflict, such as the ‘do no harm’ approach.
66. This evaluation aimed to draw evidence-informed conclusions based on evaluation criteria of the Development
Assistance Committee of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD/DAC).
Evaluation questions in the ToR for this evaluation are shown in Table 3 below. These questions were used
in the drafting of the evaluation matrix, interview guide and surveys, attached as annexes to this report.
Table 3. Evaluation questions
OECD/DAC criteria Evaluation question
Relevance EQ 1. How relevant and appropriate was UNICEF’s response?
Effectiveness EQ 2. How effective was the UNICEF response?
Coherence/Connectedness EQ 3. How coherent and connected was the UNICEF response?
Efficiency EQ 4. Was UNICEF’s response efficient?
Coordination EQ 5. How did UNICEF coordinate internally and externally?
Coverage EQ 6. What coverage did UNICEF achieve?
Protection EQ 7. To what extent did UNICEF provide protection to the targeted community
in line with its mandate?
28 Buchanan-Smith, M., and S. Morrison-Métois, ‘From Real-Time Evaluation to Real-Time Learning’, ALNAP, 2021.
29 Peersman, G., 2014, and Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, 2021.
30 More detail is provided in the evaluation matrix in Annex 8.
EVALUATION OF THE UNICEF RESPONSE TO THE LEVEL 2 HUMANITARIAN CRISIS IN MYANMAR 25
Evaluation phases
67. The evaluation was divided into three phases: inception, data collection, and analysis and reporting. Given
the context in the country, interviews with key stakeholders during the data collection phase were conducted
remotely by the team leader and in-country by the national expert and the local researchers. Key milestones
during the evaluation process were the inception report and related remote presentations to both the UNICEF
Programme Management Team on 2 August 2022 and the Evaluation Reference Group on 4 August 2022,
a preliminary findings online presentation and relevant report on 14 October 2022, and the evaluation report
and related online presentation session to be held in January 2023.
Management arrangements
68. The evaluation was managed by EAPRO and the UNICEF Myanmar Country Office, supported by a Reference
Group composed of UNICEF staff from Myanmar, EAPRO and HQ plus one external member from the
UN Resident Coordinator’s Office in Myanmar.
Data collection, analysis and validation
69. The data collection phase included a review of key documents and existing secondary data and documentation,
including situation reports, the HAC, needs assessments, UNICEF and partner monitoring reports, funding
information, human resource data, supply data, and preparedness and contingency plans. Key informant
interviews and community FGDs were also conducted using a purposive sample of stakeholders, including
UNICEF staff at country/regional/HQ levels, implementing partners, development and humanitarian partners
and other UN agencies.
70. A sample of 15 projects, which were selected during the inception phase, was also subjected to a detailed
analysis. This sample was defined by the team based on a database provided by UNICEF Myanmar listing
active and completed programme documents, humanitarian programme documents and Small-Scale
Funding Agreements. The database contained 96 projects covering the period from January 2021 to July 2022.
The sample was selected according to an analysis of the projects’ overall portfolio and reviewed jointly with
UNICEF to ensure a reasonably representative cross-section of the UNICEF response. To balance the sample
representativeness, the selection was based on five criteria: funding scale and sectoral distribution;
geographical area representativity; temporal coverage; partner diversity; and project status. See Annex 10
or more details.
71. An adapted interview guide based on the evaluation questions (attached as an annex) was used as a tool
to gather qualitative data during semi-structured interviews and community FGDs to ensure that the relevant
data were collected to build an evidence base to support the evaluation’s conclusions and recommendations
under each key question. In particular, the FGD method was made possible with the support of local
researchers identified by the national expert given their access to hard-to-reach locations where FGDs were
conducted and their ability to communicate with the communities without translator assistance. The local
researchers were experienced in conducting FGDs in a gender-sensitive and conflict-sensitive way while
respecting the principles of do no harm. The local researchers were trained by the national expert on
UNICEF ethical standards for research, evaluation, data collection and analysis, to ensure that ethical
standards were always upheld.
72. Important milestones of the analysis and reporting phase were the two remote validation workshops
involving UNICEF staff. One took place during a presentation of preliminary findings and emerging
conclusions in October 2022 and the other workshop was conducted in March 2023 following circulation
of the draft evaluation report to workshop participants.
26 UNITED NATIONS CHILDREN’S FUND
73. A total of 110 staff from UNICEF and implementing partners were interviewed for this evaluation. In addition,
112 displaced and host community members in Shan North, Kachin, Chin, Hakha, Shan South, Chit, Rakhine,
Kayin and Yangon took part in FGDs with local field researchers. Details are provided in Table 4 below.
Table 4. Summary of key informants and community discussions
Organization Participants Men Women Total
Regional/HQ UNICEF staff 1 5 6
UNICEF staff 28 17 45
National CSO implementing partners 14 5 19
UNICEF and
implementing in CBO implementing partners 11 14 25
Myanmar
INGO implementing partners 10 4 14
Other interviewees 8 7 15
Total 72 52 124
Community FGDs (16 in total) 51 61 112
Community
74. During this evaluation, the team applied UNICEF ethical guidelines for evaluations,31 OECD/DAC quality
standards and United Nations Evaluation Group ethical standards for evaluation, notably in terms of
confirming consent, the voluntary nature of participation, plus confidentiality and carrying out a risk
assessment prior to conducting interviews and FGDs. The inception report and data collection tools were
subjected to an ethical review, which was provided by an external body before proceeding to the data
collection phase. More details are provided in Annex 15.
75. Data collection was also informed by the results of an online survey for UNICEF staff and implementing
partners to gain a better understanding of UNICEF’s work in Myanmar since the activation of the
L2 emergency, complementing data collected through key informant interviews, FGDs and the literature
review. The survey was administered online through KoboCollect in both Myanmar language and English.
Participants from implementing partners were selected based on a list of partners prepared by the
Country Office and sent out to UNICEF staff in the Country Office and at the regional level who had
participated in the L2 emergency response, including staff deployed to provide remote surge capacity.
76. The survey was based on the adapted interview guide and, recognizing the limited time that field staff
have, it was designed so that most questions could be answered in a multiple-choice format with the
possibility of adding an optional narrative. It consisted of an online questionnaire based on selected
questions and sub-questions of the evaluation matrix and certain other issues relevant to the evaluation
(e.g., other partnerships, use of internal resources, communication). The survey was supported by a
communication strategy to encourage a good response rate, and that helped respondents to understand
the survey’s purposes, results and confidentiality principles and the importance of their honest feedback.
77. A total of 61 UNICEF staff responded to the survey, 57 from UNICEF Myanmar, 1 from EAPRO and 3 remote
surge staff who had supported the response. Responses were received from 11 national and international
implementing partners, most of which were collective responses by the partner. The results were used in the
findings to strengthen the analysis in the evaluation report. Data collected through the survey helped the team
in answering the evaluation questions and providing a widespread perspective regarding the achievements,
challenges and barriers in the response but also examples of good practice and unintended results.
31 United Nations Children’s Fund, ‘UNICEF Procedure for Ethical Standards in Research, Evaluation, Data Collection and Analysis’, 2015.
EVALUATION OF THE UNICEF RESPONSE TO THE LEVEL 2 HUMANITARIAN CRISIS IN MYANMAR 27
78. The first workshop with UNICEF staff, in October 2022, reviewed emerging conclusions. During the
March 2023 validation workshop, conclusions and draft recommendations were discussed and participants’
feedback was considered during finalization of the report.
Constraints and limitations
79. The main challenges to conducting a quality evaluation were identified during the inception phase and
measures were taken to mitigate their effects as much as possible. The main challenges/limitations and
how the team mitigated these are listed below in Table 5.
Table 5. Constraints, limitations and mitigation strategies
Challenges Likely influence Mitigation
Complex operating The complex and rapidly changing operating • Remote methodology.
environment environment in Myanmar limiting access to • Use of local researchers to achieve
affected communities. better coverage.
Remote design Lack of direct observation opportunities. • Optimize national expert’s and
local field researchers’ contributions.
• Surveys for UNICEF and
implementing partners.
• Triangulation, including remote
validation workshops.
• Review of TPM reports which
provided an independent perspective.
Community FGDs Individuals participating in interviews • Community consultations included
and FGDs may be put at risk by their a risk and protection assessment by
participation. Access to some communities the team with UNICEF, partners and
will be limited due to security and/or community leaders. Ensure data
internet connectivity challenges. were collected where possible
about communities in areas
prioritized for UNICEF assistance,
including communities from camps
and host communities, where FGDs
could not be held.
Size of The small size of the evaluation team limited • Clarified to stakeholders that this
evaluation team the ability to provide in-depth sectoral evaluation is aimed primarily at a
technical assessments for each sector. strategic level.
• The team used perspectives of
technical staff in different agencies
to triangulate data.
Time and capacity A small evaluation team, a relatively • Clarified to stakeholders that this
constraints limited budget and the fact that staff evaluation is aimed primarily at
from UNICEF and partners are engaged a strategic level.
in ongoing operations place a premium • The team used perspectives of
on time invested in the evaluation process. technical staff in different agencies
to triangulate data.
28 UNITED NATIONS CHILDREN’S FUND
Challenges Likely influence Mitigation
Response to surveys A low response rate would reduce the • The survey was supported by a
value of this data source as evidence for communication strategy to raise
the evaluation. awareness about the survey’s
purpose and motivate respondents.
• To mitigate against biased responses
the evaluation team tried to ensure
that communication strategies were
tailored to each subgroup.
Data quality and Affect the quality of the evidence base • The availability and quality
availability and analysis. of secondary data, particularly
disaggregated, and outcome
data that were validated through
triangulation, including participatory
remote workshops for diverse
stakeholders so that they could
validate, provide feedback and add
complementary qualitative data.
80. O verall, there was a high level of engagement with the process by UNICEF staff and partners. Most
respondents viewed the evaluation as a useful exercise and this, along with the excellent logistics support
provided, greatly facilitated the team’s work to mitigate the constraints and help the evaluation team
to develop a reasonable evidence base with which to draw concrete conclusions.
EVALUATION OF THE UNICEF RESPONSE TO THE LEVEL 2 HUMANITARIAN CRISIS IN MYANMAR 29
©
UNICEF/UN0406599/Htet
30 UNITED NATIONS CHILDREN’S FUND
©
UNICEF/UNI193987/Gilbertson
VII
Photo
4. KEY FINDINGS
81. This section presents findings based on each of the seven evaluation questions in the evaluation ToR.
A summary of findings for each evaluation question is followed by a narrative referencing sub-questions
in the evaluation matrix.
82. As described above in the methodology section, findings were drawn from various sources including
document review, interviews, surveys and, to a limited extent due to the context, FGDs with communities
and observations.
83. Readers will notice that the survey results illustrated below for implementing partners were significantly more
positive than those for UNICEF staff. The lower ratings given by UNICEF staff could partially be attributed to
a tendency for being more self-critical due to greater awareness of internal challenges and frustration at
not being able to do more in the face of a challenging operating environment. However, the evaluation team
attributed these differences mainly to variation in performance between sectors and clusters. Following
the military takeover in February 2021, NGO, national CSO and CBO implementing partners assumed a
primary implementation role for UNICEF-supported WASH, education, social policy and child protection
interventions. Health, and to a slightly lesser extent, nutrition, involved many fewer non-government
partners. The ratings in the partners’ survey thus applied to sectors that were performing better.
84. As stated in the methodology section, the evaluation team interviewed 110 UNICEF and external stakeholders,
spoke to 112 community members and reviewed more than 300 documents, including TPM reports. Where
contradictions were found with the survey results during triangulation, these were stated. Otherwise, it may
be assumed that the survey results were consistent with data from interviews, FGDs and/or desk research.
EQ 1: Relevance
EQ 1 How relevant and appropriate was UNICEF’s response?
85. This question looks at the extent to which UNICEF adapted its strategy and programme design to
the changing situation by responding to the needs of different groups within affected communities.
This question also assesses the extent to which the response was designed based on sound analysis
and a risk management strategy that mitigated challenges.
Summary response to EQ 1
• UNICEF was guided by the CCCs when developing strategies, guidance and the IASC cluster standards with
an understanding of the constraints, particularly access to affected populations.
• UNICEF was able to progressively adapt its strategy to the changed context although this adjustment took
time. Some sectors were able to adapt more quickly than others. A military takeover scenario had not been
considered in UNICEF’s preparedness planning and caused considerable trauma among staff. The UNICEF
office in Rakhine was the quickest to adapt to the changed context as it was already implementing a
humanitarian programme in a restrictive environment.
• UNICEF took a pragmatic and flexible approach to shift from a government-led upstream programme to a
CSO-led humanitarian programme issuing humanitarian project documents to existing partners and identifying
new partners, including small CBOs with Small-Scale Funding Agreements who were able to work in areas
that were difficult for UNICEF staff to access.
• UNICEF undertook a series of six successive needs assessment surveys via telephonic surveys to inform its
programme design. Results were also shared with the UNCT. Efforts were made to involve communities but
time constraints and limited capacities of national organizations, and difficulties in accessing certain areas
meant that their views were not reflected as much as desired.
EVALUATION OF THE UNICEF RESPONSE TO THE LEVEL 2 HUMANITARIAN CRISIS IN MYANMAR 31
Summary response to EQ 1
• UNICEF worked closely within the UNCT to agree on common approaches and had specific partnerships with
other UN agencies within the framework of the Humanitarian Response Plan and the United Nations
Socio-Economic Resilience Response Plan.
• While the UNCT engagement guidelines provided clarity about a common United Nations position, there was
a perception among some staff, notably field-based staff, that they did not provide sufficient clarity to facilitate
the delivery of assistance. The guidelines also did not cover engagement with non-State actors who also
influenced access to affected populations in some areas.
Alignment with international humanitarian standards
86. T he UNICEF CCCs were embedded in the strategies and guidance for its own programme and the IASC cluster
standards for its IASC coordination roles in WASH, nutrition, education and child protection. UNICEF also
exceptionally led the Mine Action working group given that the lead agency was not able to gain access to
Myanmar. UNICEF and partners mostly agreed that the response tried to reflect the CCCs and other relevant
standards (see Figure 9). While these were viewed as relevant, they were seen as aspirational since UNICEF’s
ability to meet the CCC benchmarks and other relevant standards was constrained both by its policies and
the lack of access.
Figure 9. UNICEF’s response strategy and objectives reflected policies and standards32
Implementing partners 45% 55%
UNICEF staff 21% 67% 3% 2% 3%
2%
Strongly agree Mostly agree Neutral/Neither agree nor disagree
Mostly disagree Strongly disagree No opinion/Cannot judge
Source: Survey data.
Adaptation of UNICEF’s strategies and approach
87 UNICEF was able to adapt its strategy to the changing context although the adjustment took time. Since the
military takeover was not sufficiently considered in preparedness planning, a significant factor contributing
to the delay in the response was the need to address human resources issues, notably staff safety and the
evacuation of family members of international staff. In addition, approximately half of the international staff
asked to be reassigned from Myanmar after the military takeover. Some continued to provide remote
support but UNICEF’s capacity to adapt quickly to a significantly changed context was diminished.
88. A notable exception was the UNICEF office in Rakhine which, since it had already experienced multiple
emergencies including a major refugee exodus into Bangladesh in 2017, was already set up for emergency
operations and was able to adapt quickly to the radically changed context following the military takeover.
Specific examples of this operational capacity reported during interviews included the ability to rapidly assess
needs and deliver assistance while maintaining communication on relevant issues internally and externally
despite being subject to various restrictions, along with an understanding of how to engage with authorities
in sensitive contexts. Other UNICEF field offices took longer to adapt and indeed continued to experience
problems in accessing communities and responding quickly in areas where there have been new conflicts
and where UNICEF often had no presence.
32 The full statement in the survey was “UNICEF’s response strategy and project objectives appropriately reflected the CCCs, Sphere and other relevant
policies and standards.”
32 UNITED NATIONS CHILDREN’S FUND
89. Responses to the survey indicated that most staff felt that UNICEF was able to adapt its programme
reasonably quickly (see Figure 10).33 Problems highlighted included delayed procurement processes,
difficulties in creating humanitarian space and occasional delays in making decisions by management.
Figure 10. UNICEF was able to adapt its response to changes in a timely way
Implementing partners 27% 64% 9%
UNICEF staff 16% 62% 3% 7% 7% 5%
Strongly agree Mostly agree Neutral/Neither agree nor disagree
Mostly disagree Strongly disagree No opinion/Cannot judge
Source: Survey data.
90. The desire to overcome challenges to deliver assistance drove adaptation. There was a progressive shift
to local procurement in conflict-prone regions where possible. In the Sagaing Region, for example, local
procurement of supplies has helped to mitigate access restrictions that resulted in UNICEF supplies being
held up at check points.
91. Interim strategies were developed by the different sectors and a revised HAC plan was eventually produced
during the third quarter of 2021 with support from UNICEF surge staff working remotely. UNICEF did not wait
for the HAC plan to be finalized but demonstrated a pragmatic approach in shifting from a government-led to
a CSO and CBO-led humanitarian programme. The partners were generally accorded a considerable amount
of flexibility, although partners reported different degrees of flexibility between sectors for compliance
requirements. Humanitarian project documents were issued to existing partners reasonably quickly (averaging
around 15/45 working days), and UNICEF proceeded with identification of new partners, notably national
CSOs and small CBOs which were able to work with a low profile to minimize risks for staff and communities.
92. This evolution, notably with the addition of small CBOs issued with Small-Scale Funding Agreements,34
can be observed in Figure 11 below comparing 2020 (pre-crisis) with the L2 emergency declaration (2021–2022).
Figure 11. Number of agreements made with CSOs, 2020–2022
40
30
20
10
0
2017 2019 2021
Academic institution Community-based organization
33 The ability of UNICEF to respond quickly was rated less favourably in the survey as can be seen in the Efficiency section.
34 UNICEF also used a ‘Note for the Record’ tool that facilitated engagement with CSOs that were not registered on the UN Partner Portal (UNPP).
EVALUATION OF THE UNICEF RESPONSE TO THE LEVEL 2 HUMANITARIAN CRISIS IN MYANMAR 33
AFSS/DPH/DP
fo
rebmuN
Year PD/HPD/SSFA started
International National
Source: UNICEF data.
93. The role of CBOs and informal networks, such as the network of volunteer lawyers, became increasingly
critical in assessing needs and assisting hard-to-reach communities. UNICEF introduced lighter procedures
and processes for these types of organizations. At the same time, it was pointed out by national partners
that UNICEF was one of the few UN agencies that did not regularly provide funding for operational costs.
In October 2022, UNICEF began to cover 7 per cent of the indirect support costs of the budgets for national
CSOs and CBOs, a system that was better adapted to the context and was also in line with IASC guidelines.35
Gender considerations
94. UNICEF undertook a Gender Programmatic Review covering the period from November 2019 to February 2020
with support from the Regional Office with the purpose of informing UNICEF’s Gender Action Plan. While
the military takeover changed many of the parameters, this provided a useful baseline for UNICEF to orient
its response from a gender perspective. A review by the evaluation team showed that nearly all UNICEF
assessments and monitoring frameworks disaggregated results for girls, boys, women and men, which was
reflected in the response strategy and project designs. Similarly, the Peer2Peer review found that joint needs
assessments informed the humanitarian response and included the needs of women, men, girls and boys
and other vulnerable groups.
95. PSEA was identified as a key risk by UNICEF Myanmar following the military takeover and received particular
attention. Given their more restricted access to communities, UNICEF staff became increasingly reliant on
partners and TPM to ensure that the programme respected relevant codes of conduct and standards and they
were able to monitor and follow up on reported abuses. UNICEF Myanmar incorporated PSEA in its capacity
building for local actors, which included engagement with field offices and programme teams to encourage
mentoring and partner reporting.36 As mentioned above, PSEA questions were also included in the TPM
protocols. Community FGDs and interviews confirmed that partner and UNICEF staff had been respectful
although UNICEF staff responding to the survey (see Figure 17) and during interviews noted the difficulties
of monitoring in insecure areas.
Prioritization of needs and community consultations
96. UNICEF undertook a series of six multisectoral needs assessment telephonic surveys from 2020 to 2022,
which were complemented by U-reports and cluster assessments. TPM protocols also included consultations
with affected communities during monitoring missions. Project designs were based on these assessments
and monitoring that considered the different needs of girls, boys, women and men. UNICEF provided to
most camp communities appropriate tools designed to promote assistance to persons with disabilities.
Assessments were also conducted by cluster members and the results shared. Moreover, UNICEF shared the
results of its own assessments with the HCT. This enabled UNICEF to have both an overview of the needs and,
via its own assessments, to use the results of more granular assessments to design its own programme and
mobilize funds.
97. Interviewees and respondents to both surveys indicated that UNICEF and partners made efforts to be
inclusive where possible and there was evidence that some consultations at field level took place to ensure
that local contexts and needs were considered. A significant obstacle was access to affected populations.
International staff had little access to communities and even national staff had only limited access due to
United Nations safety and security restrictions. UNICEF and INGOs relied on national partners, particularly
CBOs who had the best access and good community contacts but limited capacity and experience of
working with UN agencies. Lack of time to carry out meaningful consultations was also cited as a factor
by interviewees and survey respondents, given the tight deadlines imposed by UNICEF’s humanitarian
proposal and reporting processes. Restrictions due to COVID-19 such as social distancing in 2020–2021
were also cited as an obstacle to consultation.
35 Inter-Agency Standing Committee, ‘IASC Guidance on the Provision of Overheads to Local and National Partners’, 2022.
36 UNICEF Myanmar, ‘2022 End of Year Results Summary Extended Narrative’.
34 UNITED NATIONS CHILDREN’S FUND
Figure 12. Communities were involved in identification of needs, design and implementation
Implementing partners 27% 55% 18%
UNICEF staff 11% 57% 7% 11% 4% 10%
Strongly agree Mostly agree Neutral/Neither agree nor disagree
Mostly disagree Strongly disagree No opinion/Cannot judge
Source: Survey data.
98. The evaluation team reviewed a selection of 57 TPM reports. The scope of these reports included feedback
collection from communities on the quality and appropriateness of the assistance they had received and
the extent to which partner agencies had consulted with them and checked to see if they had suggestions
for improvement. The reports also asked whether there had been any PSEA incidents. The overall feedback
was that the communities were satisfied with the assistance provided and found it relevant. The complaints
mainly covered issues around insecurity/protection and insufficient quantities of assistance.
EQ 2: Effectiveness
EQ 2 How effective was the UNICEF response?
99. This question looks at the results of UNICEF’s response, including achievements against planned results,
the extent to which these planned results were updated as needed, the main contributing factors and
obstacles to achievement, and the timeliness of the response.
Summary response to EQ 2
• The main challenge that UNICEF and other agencies have faced in Myanmar is a highly constrained
humanitarian space that has negatively affected effectiveness and is due to the difficulties in accessing
communities affected by the conflict and also in obtaining permits to import humanitarian supplies and
visas for international staff.
• UNICEF, along with most of the international community, was not sufficiently prepared for the military
takeover and its subsequent aftermath. The post of head of the United Nations Department for Safety and
Security (UNDSS) was vacant when the military takeover occurred and international agencies spent much of
the first few weeks focused on ensuring the safety and security of their staff, many of whom were traumatized.
• Effectiveness has varied by sector and geographical area. Sectoral performance in WASH was reasonably good
whereas the Health and Nutrition sector has struggled to gain momentum largely due to its dependence on
the authorities to facilitate import licences and implementation. Education, Social Policy and Child Protection
all initially faced challenges but subsequently picked up momentum by significantly shifting their modus
operandi to implementation by CSOs and networks.
• Most output targets in Rakhine and Kachin were met where UNICEF had humanitarian interventions prior
to the military takeover. However, UNICEF struggled to reach targets in areas where there were significant
numbers of new displacements such as the Sagaing Region.
• Procurement was a challenge. Supply timelines for international procurement remained around 175–190 days,
whereas lead times for local freight forwarders were reduced to just over 100 days in 2022 by means of
additional LTAs and more selective procurement. Apart from the relatively long lead times for procurement,
the need to import several key commodities, including vaccines and nutritional supplies respecting
international standards that UNICEF was required to meet, posed significant challenges to UNICEF’s response.
EVALUATION OF THE UNICEF RESPONSE TO THE LEVEL 2 HUMANITARIAN CRISIS IN MYANMAR 35
Summary response to EQ 2
• Limited funds have constrained UNICEF’s effectiveness. Only 34 per cent of the HAC appeal funding targets
were met in 2021 and only 22 per cent had been raised for 2022 by the end of December 2022.
• Most UNICEF Myanmar staff found the declaration of an L2 emergency to be a helpful support in
streamlining some processes and obtaining additional funding and staffing and it was clear that
UNICEF Myanmar felt the benefits of being prioritized by the region. Others pointed out that unnecessary
delays were still caused due to administrative bottlenecks that prevented UNICEF from acting as nimbly
as it should have. Partner staff mentioned that some UNICEF sectors demonstrated little flexibility in
comparison to other sectors and found it difficult to follow strict regulations in a fast-changing context.
• Most UNICEF staff felt that the declaration of an L2 in July 2021 had been timely although senior
management had asked for it to be declared in March, soon after the military takeover. A declaration
of an L2 emergency when it was first requested could have taken advantage of a window of opportunity
during the first few months to import additional supplies and obtain visas, thus better positioning
UNICEF to respond to this crisis.
• Results of UNICEF’s flexible and innovative approaches were observed by the support given to a lawyers’
network and to formal and informal education.
• UNICEF ensured that its programming was informed by humanitarian principles and human rights by
continuously strengthening its AAP systems and constant monitoring for human rights abuses covering
PSEA, sexual and gender-based violence and the Monitoring and Reporting Mechanism. The effectiveness
of these actions was hindered by a lack of access to affected communities, notably in areas where there
was ongoing conflict and displacement.
• UNICEF partners are required to have community feedback systems when they sign humanitarian project
documents. UNICEF itself had no systematic way of collecting community feedback directly or using
feedback received from partners but was in the process of putting these systems in place. UNICEF
expressed concern that it had become more difficult to obtain community feedback since the military
takeover due to limited access and communities’ fear of reprisals.
• UNICEF had already been using TPM prior to the military takeover for difficult-to-access zones. UNICEF
subsequently expanded TPM to other areas as its own scope for monitoring progressively narrowed.
This was a good initiative although some areas for improvement were identified.
100. While respondents rated UNICEF’s response to be relatively good (see Figure 13), they made it clear that
their assessment took into account a very challenging context with extremely limited humanitarian space.
Respondents pointed to the fact that the organization and even some national staff of UNICEF were blamed
by Myanmar communities for being unable to protect children from arrest or grave violations, especially in
conflict-affected areas.37 UNICEF had to carefully assess risk when advocating on behalf of children without
further reducing its humanitarian space.
37 The most widely cited example was an air raid resulting in deaths and injuries of children. UNICEF condemned this air strike without mentioning the
DFA air force (more details available at https://www.unicef.org/press-releases/least-11-schoolchildren-killed-myanmar-attack). There was an expectation
that UNICEF would have spoken out more strongly.
36 UNITED NATIONS CHILDREN’S FUND
Figure 13. UNICEF’s L2 response was timely and of good quality
Implementing partners 18% 82%
UNICEF staff 8% 54% 5% 13% 4% 16%
Strongly agree Mostly agree Neutral/Neither agree nor disagree
Mostly disagree Strongly disagree No opinion/Cannot judge
Source: Survey data.
101. One of the main challenges that UNICEF and other humanitarian agencies faced in Myanmar was the lack
of humanitarian access. ACAPS rated the situation in Myanmar 5/5 on the Humanitarian Access Index, which
represents extreme humanitarian access constraints. ACAPS foresaw further deterioration in the situation
due to the significant rise in violence and insecurity and bureaucratic and administrative constraints for both
people in need and humanitarian workers, along with a rise in attacks on public infrastructure.
Figure 14. ACAPS humanitarian assessment ratings for Myanmar as of July 2022
Crisis severity
0 Very low Very high 5
Impact
0 Very low Very high 5
Humanitarian conditions
0 Very low Very high 5
Complexity
0 Very low Very high 5
Access constraints
0 Very low Extreme constraints
Influence of the context on UNICEF’s response
102. UNICEF, together with most of the rest of the international community, was not sufficiently prepared for the
military takeover and its subsequent aftermath. UNICEF was relatively flexible when responding, but staff
were unsure about the quality and effectiveness of their response due to access restrictions and insecurity
across so many areas. Almost two years after the military takeover, UNICEF continued to struggle to mobilize
the human resources and procurement needed for the response while seeking ways to ensure that it can
reach those most in need.
38 ACAPS, Humanitarian Access Overview July 2022, 2022.
EVALUATION OF THE UNICEF RESPONSE TO THE LEVEL 2 HUMANITARIAN CRISIS IN MYANMAR 37
103. A global evaluation of UNICEF responses in complex emergencies found that an integrated United Nations
presence and broader engagement with the military or armed groups can influence how UNICEF is
perceived, and this can be a significant constraint in conflict contexts. Across the case studies, the impact
of the United Nations security management system on UNICEF’s coverage was extremely variable and
in some contexts was a considerable constraint. It was found that positive working relationships between
UNDSS and humanitarian agencies tend to be influenced by personality and background rather than by
structure or policy, which leads to inconsistencies. The evaluators’ recommendation was that UNICEF
should continue to maintain its own security risk management capacity.39
104. The above scenario appears to have also played out in Myanmar. At the time the military takeover occurred,
the post of head of the UNDSS office in Myanmar was vacant, with a P3 acting officer-in-charge. The UNICEF
Representative assumed the role of Designated Official until she left the country in April 2021. Therefore,
it was important for UNICEF to continue to maintain its own security risk management capacity. While
UNDSS did provide remote support to the UNCT with scenario development, much of its efforts were
reportedly focused on ensuring the safety and security of UN staff in the first few months after the military
takeover.
105. Initially, UNICEF was able to continue to import supplies without many problems but in May 2021,
the military authorities began to place more controls on incoming shipments, notably for medicines and
medical supplies, and also started requesting detailed distribution plans. As a result, UNICEF had difficulties
importing any medical supplies after May 2021. National CSO and INGO partners also faced restrictions
on importing supplies.
Achievement of targets
106. The effectiveness of UNICEF’s response varied by sector and geographical area. Sectoral performance in
WASH was reasonably effective, whereas the Health and Nutrition sector has struggled to gain momentum.
This difference can be attributed to a combination of restrictions on importing supplies and the extent to
which partnership with the Government was important for delivery (e.g., health), something that was no
longer possible following the military takeover. The effectiveness of Education, Social Policy and Child
Protection monitoring has changed over time. These sectors worked very closely with the Government
prior to the military takeover and faced challenges during the initial response but subsequently picked up
momentum during 2022 while broadening their partnerships with CSOs and CBOs. These sectors have
required a significant shift in implementation modality and risk management given their political sensitivity.
107. Output targets tend to be most regularly met in areas where there were already humanitarian interventions
prior to the military takeover, mainly in Rakhine and Kachin. Performance in areas that have been affected
by significant numbers of new displacements due to the conflict was lower – in many cases much lower,
for example in the Sagaing Region where UNICEF has had no permanent presence and access was difficult.
108. As described above in the methodology section, the selected sample of 15 projects (humanitarian programme
documents, programme documents, Small-Scale Funding Agreements) encompassing different sectors
provided a representative overview of the implementation status, with performance rates analysed based on
targets attained by each project. Two of the three education projects have fully met or in some cases exceeded
their targets. Social Policy showed good progress with its cash transfer interventions. The WASH and Child
Protection sectors showed a mix of good to limited progress. Health and nutrition projects showed either no
or limited progress largely due to procurement and implementation modality obstacles. Additional details
of the individual projects can be found in Annex 11.
39 United Nations Children’s Fund, Evaluation of the Coverage and Quality of the UNICEF Humanitarian Response in Complex Humanitarian Emergencies, 2019.
38 UNITED NATIONS CHILDREN’S FUND
Figure 15. Performance of the sample of 15 UNICEF projects
13% 13%
No progress Targets met
(output targets
≥100%)
13%
Constrained
(<20% of output
targets met)
33%
Good progress
(> 50% of output
targets met)
27%
Limited progress
(20-49% of output
targets met)
Source: UNICEF project and monitoring data.
109. Although 15 per cent of UNICEF respondents felt that the HAC appeal targets had not been met, most staff
tended to be more positive in their survey response (see Figure 16) when assessing progress against the
HAC appeal, noting that progress was reasonable given the limited funding resources and access constraints.
For projects showing ‘no progress’, staff cited examples of the difficulties faced in resuming immunization
services and access constraints to essential nutrition services such as the integrated management of acute
malnutrition and infant and young child feeding.
Figure 16. UNICEF met its response targets described in the HAC appeal
UNICEF staff 5% 66% 3% 10% 5% 11%
Strongly agree Mostly agree Neutral/Neither agree nor disagree
Mostly disagree Strongly disagree No opinion/Cannot judge
Source: Survey data.
110. The difficulties in raising funds have limited UNICEF’s effectiveness (34 per cent of the HAC appeal targets
were achieved in 2021 and 22 per cent as of the end of December 2022).40 Such a significant shortfall indicated
that UNICEF was having trouble achieving the coverage to meet identified needs or was overestimating its
capacity to deliver due the constrained humanitarian space.
111. An assessment of UNICEF’s performance in different sectors is presented in Table 6 below using the UNICEF
CCCs as a point of reference. This represents a qualitative analysis conducted by the evaluation team based
on data drawn from various sources, including UNICEF reports, survey results, project sample analysis,
FGDs with communities and interviews with staff from UNICEF and implementing partners.
40 UNICEF Myanmar, ‘Myanmar Humanitarian Situation Report #11 – 31 December 2022’.
EVALUATION OF THE UNICEF RESPONSE TO THE LEVEL 2 HUMANITARIAN CRISIS IN MYANMAR 39
Table 6. Qualitative assessment of performance by sector against key objectives41
Sector Performance Supporting narrative
WASH Good performance both in terms of UNICEF’s interventions and
cluster coordination. Some difficulty in accessing populations in
conflict zones.
Health High degree of dependence on de facto authorities, notably the
Ministry of Health (MoH), for implementation and international
procurement of medical supplies (including vaccines) that meet
UNICEF standards.
Nutrition High degree of dependence on de facto authorities, notably the
MoH, for international procurement and implementation. Some
limited scope to partner with CSOs and import supplies that meet
UNICEF standards.
Social Policy Good progress with cash programming, including adapting to
new currency controls and design based on a longer-term vision.
Scope limited by funding and access to affected populations.
Education Initially slow to start, in part due to widespread protests by teachers.
Subsequently made good progress in partnering with CSOs and
CBOs and promoting a home-based approach to increase coverage
although reach was limited by funding and access.
Child Protection Adaptation to emergency programming was done through
an innovative and flexible shift in delivery modalities. While
capacity-building of partners was continuing, there was much
more direct protection work with detainees and monitoring abuses.
The child protection Area of Responsibility was satisfactory given
the funding situation, but the mine action Area of Responsibility
struggled in 2021 and for much of 2022 due to a lack of capacity.
This sector has provided the basis for much of UNICEF’s advocacy.
Communication UNICEF was recognized by its peers as having good capacity
in communication. Good performance with community level
messaging but struggling with external communication (social
media, donors). Communication with partners was mostly
satisfactory but could be improved.
41 Performance ratings are as follows: oo High standard of performance oo Good performance oo Mixed performance oo Shortfalls oo Significant gaps.
40 UNITED NATIONS CHILDREN’S FUND
Influence of the L2 declaration on the response
112. Most staff who were interviewed and responded to the survey (see Figure 17) were positive about the
support that the declaration of L2 had brought. While some gave examples of how their work had been
streamlined, such as no longer needing each and every project to be reviewed by the Project Review
Committee, others felt that processes had not been streamlined. Yet others said that most approvals still
required a signature from top management instead of section heads and felt that unnecessary delays were
still being caused by administrative bottlenecks and at times were preventing UNICEF from acting as nimbly
as it should in the fast-changing context. Partner staff interviewed mentioned inconsistency by UNICEF staff
in different sectors. Some sections were seen to be reasonably flexible while others were quite strict about
compliance limits, something they found difficult to manage in a rapidly changing environment.
113. Interviewees said that the Regional Office had provided significant support to the UNICEF Myanmar
Country Office following the L2 declaration. Examples cited were support to human resources, facilitating
the development of the HAC appeal and ensuring that the 2022 workplan was aligned with the CCCs.
Other interviewees pointed out that the support from the Regional Office was not as effective as they had
expected in solving some of the main challenges faced by the Country Office, such as obtaining vaccines,
cross border support and establishing a humanitarian corridor.
Figure 17. Declaration of the L2 emergency significantly improved UNICEF’s response
UNICEF staff 20% 51% 7% 10% 1% 11%
Strongly agree Mostly agree Neutral/Neither agree nor disagree
Mostly disagree Strongly disagree No opinion/Cannot judge
Source: Survey data.
114. The initial request for an L2 emergency declaration was submitted by the Country Director in February 2021,
but this was rescinded on 13 March as the request had to be submitted by the Regional Director. A formal
request to declare an L2 emergency was subsequently lodged by the UNICEF Regional Director a little more
than a month after the military takeover. During a call with UNICEF HQ on 24 March it was decided not to
declare an L2 at that time in part since a global L3 response was still active for the COVID-19 pandemic.
While the L3 helped to streamline some administrative processes, this status did not highlight Myanmar
as needing specific support. An L2 emergency was subsequently declared in July 2021, five months after
the military takeover, which set the wheels in motion to prioritize support to Myanmar, including circulating
a compelling memo from the Regional Director that reportedly helped to galvanize action.
115. As seen from the responses to the survey in Figure 18, most UNICEF staff felt that the declaration was
timely even though interviews with senior management indicated that they felt it should have been
declared earlier. With the benefit of hindsight and equipped with the knowledge that there was a very
similar restrictive operating environment prior to 2008 under a previous military regime, the response
would have benefited from anticipatory action to declare an L2 emergency when it had first been
requested. This would have enabled UNICEF to take advantage of the window of opportunity during
the first few months after the military takeover when it was still relatively easy to import supplies,
obtain visas for incoming international staff and move more freely in the country while respecting
United Nations security guidelines. This would have put UNICEF in a much better position to respond.
42 Anticipatory action, which is also sometimes referred to as ‘early action’ or ‘forecast-based financing’ is defined here as “…an activity taking place between
an early warning trigger, or a high-probability forecast and the actual occurrence of the corresponding disaster in order to mitigate or prevent the
humanitarian impact of the anticipated disaster.”
EVALUATION OF THE UNICEF RESPONSE TO THE LEVEL 2 HUMANITARIAN CRISIS IN MYANMAR 41
Figure 18. Declaration of the L2 emergency by UNICEF was done at the right time
UNICEF staff 20% 51% 13% 2%3% 10%
Strongly agree Mostly agree Neutral/Neither agree nor disagree
Mostly disagree Strongly disagree No opinion/Cannot judge
Source: Survey data.
Procurement and logistics
116. Procurement was a key component of UNICEF’s response but UNICEF faced significant challenges trying
to procure supplies and deliver them to communities in need. The supply chain was just starting to
recover after restrictions imposed by the COVID-19 pandemic. In fact, when the military takeover happened
the borders with China, where many of the supplies were sourced, were still closed. The scope for local
procurement was reported to be very limited due to a combination of factors, including the low capacity
of local firms, frequent electricity blackouts and the requirement for supplies to meet UNICEF’s standards.
As shown in Figure 19, average supply timelines for international procurement have remained around
175–190 days, whereas lead times for local freight forwarders were reduced from over 280 days in 2021
to just over 100 days in 2022. Apart from more emphasis given to local procurement with the signing of
additional LTAs with local freight forwarders, the reduction was also due to the Country Office prioritizing
items which are more likely to be cleared. Apart from the relatively long lead times for procurement,
the need to import several key commodities, including vaccines and nutritional supplies respecting
international standards, posed significant challenges to UNICEF’s response. Since UNICEF does not
compromise on standards for vaccines and nutritional supplies, this meant that there was a considerable
shortfall in some categories of assistance for affected communities. Limited funding and difficulties
in accessing affected communities also contributed to the challenges in meeting targets.
Figure 19. Global and local procurement supply timelines, 2020–2022
Global freight forwarders
2019 19.9 20.1 91.0 11.6 49.8
2020 14.5 25.9 119.7 15.0 50.3
2021 20.7 28.4 121.9 12.8 75.0
2022 13.6 26.2 127.8 14.6 83.2
0 50 100 150
Local freight forwarders
2019 28.2 20.9 94.8 14.5
2020 22.4 30.3 94.7 31.0
2021 26.8 28.3 128.6 97.4
2022 18.0 25.2 93.5 7.3
0 50 100 150
Avg. days:
SO creation and SO release SO release and PO/SD WH order creation PO/SD WH order creation and release
PO release and POD (local shipment) GR/IP and POD (local shipment) No opinion/Cannot judge
Source: UNICEF Supply Division.
42 UNITED NATIONS CHILDREN’S FUND
117. Import licences need to be signed off by the relevant ministries and this has created disparities between
sectors with regard to delivery times, most notably for health supplies which have not received the
necessary permits since April 2021. There were reported to be limited local procurement options since
supplies need to meet UNICEF standards. Figure 20 below shows how much supplies have been affected
by these restrictions.
118. A significant increase in supplies would normally be expected during an L2 emergency response, but
instead there was a severe reduction in supplies as can be seen when comparing the value of Purchase
Orders (POs) between years. Since restrictions started to take effect in mid-2021, figures for 2022 provide
a more accurate picture of the effects on supplies.
Figure 20. Value of Purchase Orders received by UNICEF Myanmar, 2019–2022
$27.4M
2022 $26.9M
$16.5M
$45.0M
2021 $43.5M
$40.9M
$66.2M
2020 $65.2M
$65.1M
$48.2M
2019 $44.3M
$44.3M
$0M $10M $20M $30M $40M $50M $60M $70M
Budget of released SOs Value of released POs raised against released SOs Value of received POs
Source: UNICEF Supply Division.
Risk management and mitigation
119. A 2019 UNICEF global evaluation found few examples of UNICEF undertaking a light operational context or
conflict analysis that could assist in identifying the dynamics that influence access to those in greatest need,
as well as offer UNICEF the opportunity to exploit changes in the context to access vulnerable communities.43
In Myanmar, UNICEF was perceived both by its peers and by its own staff as being a relatively risk-averse
organization although the evaluation team observed that following the military takeover, UNICEF regularly
updated its risk assessments via the risk register, identifying key risks and proposed mitigation strategies.
120. UNICEF’s risk management principles include accepting risk where the benefits outweigh the costs, while
anticipating and managing risk through contingency planning and mitigating identified risks. Although
many areas reportedly remain underserved, the outcomes of this risk assessment as well as flexible and
innovative approaches adopted by UNICEF can be seen in UNICEF’s support to develop a lawyers’ network,
partnering with lawyers and helping to link them with social workers. Similarly, continued support to
formal and informal education has helped many children to continue their education despite the risks.
43 United Nations Children’s Fund, Evaluation of the Coverage and Quality of the UNICEF Humanitarian Response in Complex Humanitarian Emergencies, 2019.
EVALUATION OF THE UNICEF RESPONSE TO THE LEVEL 2 HUMANITARIAN CRISIS IN MYANMAR 43
121. UNICEF Myanmar invested in the capacity-building of its staff across functional roles on humanitarian
access as well as various related issues, including organizing a series of webinars in May and June 2022
on access and the engagement of armed non-State actors. UNICEF Myanmar has also supported the
training of field staff to operate in complex, high-threat environments along with the development of
access action plans and a more systematic way of monitoring access constraints.
122. Partners identified the shrinking humanitarian space in Myanmar as the most critical concern and called
for strong HCT leadership on a principled response with protection and humanitarian access the top
priorities; and for pragmatic solutions to delivering protection and humanitarian assistance to the affected
population.44
Community feedback
123. CSOs in Myanmar have a relatively long history of working with AAP standards and tools and an
Accountability and Learning Working Group was set up in in 2008 during the response to cyclone Nargis.
This group was considered as an ‘informal cluster’ by a 2010 IASC global cluster evaluation that viewed
it as an important resource to fill accountability gaps within clusters which at that time were all
Yangon-based.45
124. UNICEF has striven to embed AAP in its response and has made seeking feedback from the community
a mandatory part of sector questionnaires and humanitarian project documents for partners. Until late 2022,
responsibility for establishing and running community feedback systems was delegated to the partners,
and UNICEF itself had no system for collecting and following up on feedback although feedback was shared.
However, interviewees and UNICEF respondents to the survey expressed concern that it had become more
difficult to obtain community feedback since the military takeover due to limited access and fears of reprisal.
Respondents to the survey were overall positive about feedback being used, but unease about the negative
trend of not being able to obtain feedback directly from communities was evident.
Figure 21. UNICEF and partners have collected and used feedback46
Implementing partners 36% 55% 9%
UNICEF staff 15% 57% 10% 6% 2% 10%
Strongly agree Mostly agree Neutral/Neither agree nor disagree
Mostly disagree Strongly disagree No opinion/Cannot judge
Source: Survey data.
125. The evaluation team confirmed with the partners interviewed that they had feedback systems in place
although UNICEF was only piloting a community feedback system for itself in late 2022. In September 2022,
UNICEF’s management was presented with plans for the roll-out of a UNICEF dashboard to help facilitate
communication and follow up on community feedback collected.
44 Inter-Agency Standing Committee, ‘Peer-2-Peer Support Project Mission Report: Myanmar’, 2022
45 URD and GPPI, IASC Cluster Approach Evaluation, 2nd Phase: Myanmar country study, 2010.
46 The complete statement in the survey was “UNICEF and their partners have collected community feedback on services provided and used this feedback to
improve the quality of their interventions.”
44 UNITED NATIONS CHILDREN’S FUND
Figure 22. Community feedback dashboard to strengthen programming
How can it be used to strengthen/inform the
programming?
• Whether the services we provide are
directed to the needs of the community
• Understand the preferred channels for
the community to provide their feedback
• For course corrections
• To inform programming/review
• Evidence-based decision making
• Commitment on AAP in donor proposals
or reports
Source: UNICEF Myanmar presentation to senior management.
126. The community feedback system was developed jointly with partners and pre-tested and, provided the
system functions as planned, it will offer a valuable resource in a context where the ability of UNICEF staff
to collect feedback from communities has become very limited. It was too early to judge whether this
system will add value by improving the use of community feedback without adding undue burdens on
partners and/or UNICEF staff and it will be important to periodically monitor the use of the system and the
quality of data collected while mitigating risks for communities and partners. A key element of successful
community feedback systems is community trust in the system. This means, notably, that the feedback
communities provide will be kept confidential, that communities receive proof that their feedback has been
received and that they can expect actions to be taken or receive a reasonable explanation as to why UNICEF
or the partner is unable to follow up. It was not yet clear to the evaluation team how UNICEF planned to
build this trust.
Monitoring
127. UNICEF was already using TPM prior to the military takeover in certain areas in Rakhine and in other zones
with difficult access. Following the military takeover, UNICEF saw value-added in expanding TPM to other
areas in Myanmar that were progressively consumed by the conflict. This has proved to be a useful tool
for UNICEF as its own scope for monitoring interventions has narrowed.
128. The evaluation team was able to review TPM reports, including a more detailed review of reports covering
the sampled projects. The team also spoke to staff from UNICEF and partners whose activities were being
monitored, as well as staff from the contractor undertaking the TPM. The team’s findings can be
summarized as follows:
• TPM was a key component of the L2 response that helped UNICEF to meet its quality and accountability
commitments since it routinely sought community feedback about the provision of UNICEF assistance,
including whether supplies had been received, and checked whether there were any cases of PSEA
in the community. The TPM teams’ access was also restricted, but teams were still able to considerably
extend UNICEF’s outreach to communities (see Annex 4 for TPM guidelines).
EVALUATION OF THE UNICEF RESPONSE TO THE LEVEL 2 HUMANITARIAN CRISIS IN MYANMAR 45
• Learning was ongoing, including in regard to how surveys could be done quicker. A lessons learned
session was conducted with the agency contracted to conduct TPM at the end of Phase I. This could
perhaps be more participatory and systematic in nature since there was limited evidence that key
learning points to take forward were documented or applied.
• Initially, recommendations were included in the reports. However, it was found that these were not
helpful, and it was agreed with UNICEF that the report would stick to findings.
• Contracting processes were not systematic, creating challenges for TPM teams to retain staff and
conduct follow-up visits to better measure outcomes.
• Areas identified for further improvements of this useful tool were as follows:
• Overall, the evaluation team found TPM to be a tool appropriate to the context and one that
could be improved over time. It was uncertain to what extent the TPM information was used.
Partners said they do not receive any feedback after a monitoring visit that could help to clarify
findings by the monitors and help them to improve.
• There was a lack of technical expertise among the field researchers.
• The feedback from beneficiaries was that “we received what was planned” but they claimed
that the feedback/suggestions they had made during previous visits were not addressed.
• There was some confusion about what UNICEF wanted out of the monitoring since the
information needs of field offices were different from sector specialists. This seemed to be
aggravated by a high turnover of staff.
• There was resistance from some implementing partners and UNICEF field offices since they
view the monitoring as an inspection of their work and they felt that they will be blamed for any gaps.
EQ 3: Coherence and connectedness
EQ 3 How coherent and connected has the UNICEF response been?
129. This question looks at how UNICEF has integrated preparedness and Nexus components into the design of
its strategies, programme and projects and how these have been implemented in practice, including capturing
any examples of learning and good practice. Given the limitations on supporting institutions at a national level,
the team mainly focused on assessing how preparedness systems were strengthened at a community level
and at a coordinated UN level.
Summary response to EQ 3
• UNICEF’s emergency preparedness focused almost exclusively on natural disaster events, and significant
unplanned adaptations were required by the new context. Preparedness was nevertheless useful, notably
having contingency stocks available that could be distributed although there were insufficient quantities
due to restrictions on the importation of supplies after May 2021.
• The shift to emergency mode happened more rapidly in UNICEF offices that already had the capacity to
respond to emergencies such as Rakhine. Similarly, those sectors that had historically relied more on NGO
and CSO implementation, such as WASH, were able to rapidly shift.
• Since the military takeover, emergency preparedness has largely been confined to training and
capacity-building of partners and communities (through partners). Stand-alone activities are very limited
due to other priorities.
46 UNITED NATIONS CHILDREN’S FUND
Summary response to EQ 3
• The Peer2Peer review conducted in 2022 found that coordination structures support preparedness plans that
are effective. As part of the UNCT, UNICEF worked within the framework of the Humanitarian Response Plan
and the United Nations Socio-Economic Resilience Response Plan with the aim of preventing duplication
and complementing other UN agencies. UNICEF contributed to the development of the UNCT engagement
guidelines, which, for the most part, they were perceived as respecting.
• Longer-term programming was included in UNICEF’s strategy, but significant limitations were imposed by
the context. At the same time, partnerships have greatly expanded capacity-building opportunities for national
CSOs and CBOs across all UNICEF sectors. This will potentially be an invaluable investment for UNICEF’s
Nexus programming in the future.
• UNICEF’s response has greatly expanded capacity-building opportunities for national CSOs and CBOs
across all UNICEF sectors. Partners, in turn, have been training community members in activities ranging
from teacher training to child protection. Interviews with staff from UNICEF and partners confirmed that
this has the potential to be an invaluable investment for Nexus programming once the situation improves.
Preparedness measures
130. UNICEF Myanmar’s emergency response plans prior to the military takeover focused almost exclusively
on natural disaster events. The HAC appeal and Annual Work Plan had to undergo significant revisions in
2021 and 2022 to adapt to the new situation. Contingency stocks were distributed but were insufficient
in quantity to respond to the crisis. Preparedness planning by UNICEF has ramped up since the military
takeover but is constrained by restrictions on imported relief materials, notably medical and nutrition
supplies due to the requirement that they meet UNICEF’s quality standards.
131. In Rakhine the shift to emergency mode happened quickly since the UNICEF office already there had the
capacity to respond to emergencies. Emergency response appeared to be easier in sectors such as WASH
that has historically relied on NGO and CSO partnerships and entailed distribution of relief. The shift in
Education, Social Policy and Child Protection was more complex since there could be no pre-planning for
scenarios without substantive engagement with the Government, and innovative approaches were needed.
Health and Nutrition appear to have struggled the most to respond effectively due to their reliance on
government structures for implementation.
132. Since the military takeover, emergency preparedness has shifted from upstream work with the Government
to increasing community resilience. This has mainly been done through the training and capacity-building
of partners and communities (through partners). Some WASH infrastructure installed was also designed
to increase resilience. However, interviewees stressed that stand-alone preparedness activities were very
limited due to other priorities.
Integration of the triple Nexus
133. UNICEF included relief, recovery and longer-term programming in its strategy, but survey respondents
and interviewees cautioned that there were significant limits imposed by the context and noted the
difficulty of taking a long-term programming perspective without engagement of government structures.
Humanitarian assistance, often using funding with relatively short timeframes, continued to dominate
UNICEF’s programming and planning for the long term. Thanks to its upstream work undertaken prior
to the military takeover, UNICEF had compiled a considerable amount of data, processes and tools.
It was seen as important that relevant data be retained so that recovery, when it happens, makes full
use of these resources.
EVALUATION OF THE UNICEF RESPONSE TO THE LEVEL 2 HUMANITARIAN CRISIS IN MYANMAR 47
134. WASH was able to install some permanent and semi-permanent infrastructure at a community level.
However, the main reason given in the survey (see Figure 22) for UNICEF’s integration of relief and
longer-term programming in its response was due to the greatly expanded capacity-building opportunities
for national CSOs and CBOs across all UNICEF sectors. Partners, in turn, have been training community
members in activities ranging from teacher training to child protection. Interviews with staff from UNICEF
and partners confirmed that this has the potential to be an invaluable investment for Nexus programming
once the situation improves.
Figure 23. UNICEF has integrated relief, recovery and longer-term programming47
Implementing partners 36% 55% 9%
UNICEF staff 15% 49% 14% 16% 3% 8%
Strongly agree Mostly agree Neutral/Neither agree nor disagree
Mostly disagree Strongly disagree No opinion/Cannot judge
Source: Survey data.
Coherence with the UN Framework
135. UNICEF worked closely with the UNCT, with specific partnerships with WFP, UNDP, UNHCR and UNFPA
within the framework of the Humanitarian Response Plan and the United Nations Socio-Economic Resilience
Response Plan with the aim of preventing duplication and complementing the work of other UN agencies.
Specific examples of how UNICEF has supported the UNCT include providing technical support on risk
assessment and communications; and the stand-in by the former UNICEF Myanmar Representative as
Designated Official for safety and security immediately following the military takeover.
UN programmatic engagement guidelines
136. A dominant theme throughout this evaluation that was raised during interviews and the survey was the
application of UNCT engagement guidelines, which were last revised in February 2022.48 The guidelines
were seen to provide coherence for UN agencies in their dealings with the military authorities by promoting
a common approach. Feedback from some UNICEF staff, particularly those in field offices, and external
key informants indicated that UNICEF was among those UN agencies that have adopted a relatively strict
interpretation of the guidance, which hindered its ability to open humanitarian space. The UNCT guidelines
also gave no guidance on how to deal with other actors who had influence over access to affected
communities in some areas. Other UN agencies were perceived as having a more flexible approach in
interpreting the guidelines, indicated by more visas being issued to staff, although access by all agencies
was acknowledged as being constrained.
137. A consistent message from UNICEF staff in the field was that they would like to better understand how
the UN engagement guidelines could be used in practice to facilitate, rather than hinder, their work.
This message emanated not only from UNICEF. During the IASC Peer-2-Peer mission in late 2022,
partners identified the shrinking humanitarian space in the country as the most critical concern and
called for strong HCT leadership to improve protection and humanitarian access.
47 The full statement in the survey was “UNICEF has been successful in integrating relief, recovery and longer-term programming in its strategy and
interventions within the limits imposed by the context.”
48 ‘UNCT Programmatic Engagement Guidelines’, Version one plus, February 2022.
48 UNITED NATIONS CHILDREN’S FUND
EQ 4: Efficiency
EQ 4 Was UNICEF’s response efficient?
138. This question looks at how efficiently inputs were converted into outputs. It also assesses how quickly
UNICEF was able to respond and transition between emergency and longer-term programming.
Summary response to EQ 4
• Many inefficiencies were caused by the challenging operating environment, including limited access to affected
populations, lack of import permits, difficulty in obtaining visas for international staff and movement permits
for staff, and security restrictions imposed by the United Nations. UNICEF was nevertheless seen as being
able to scale up its response relatively rapidly in a difficult operating context.
• An L2 emergency was only declared more than five months after the military takeover. Once declared, the
L2 provided UNICEF with more flexible and efficient procedures although their application was reported by
partners to be inconsistent between different sections.
• Administrative processes were seen to be not always well adapted to small CBOs with limited capacity
managing small grants.
• Some prepositioned supplies and existing LTAs with local suppliers initially helped to facilitate critical
life-saving support to affected communities.
• Most of the surge and newly appointed staff deployed to fill staffing gaps were only able to provide remote
support. Feedback from national staff about their value-added was mixed and was often related to the
individual’s knowledge of the context.
• Expanded use of IT tools following the COVID-19 pandemic was an important innovation for UNICEF during
the response.
• UNICEF support to capacity-building for national CSOs and communities across all UNICEF sectors is likely
to be an invaluable investment for Nexus programming once the situation improves.
How timely was the scale-up of the response?
139. There were many inefficiencies caused by the challenging operating environment, ranging from difficulties
with importing, transporting and distributing assistance to obtaining visas for international staff, movement
permits for staff in-country and security restrictions imposed by the United Nations. Although the L2
declaration gave UNICEF Myanmar more flexibility in how to apply financial, administrative and project
management rules, their application seems to have been variable. Some partners complained that the
financial rules for some activities (but not necessarily others) were not sufficiently flexible enough for
a dynamic situation. Other partners noted that the administrative processes were not always adapted
to small CBOs with limited capacity who were managing small grants.
140. The evaluation team’s assessment based on feedback from UNICEF staff was that this variance was due
to a combination of an incomplete understanding of flexibility accorded by L2 procedures and risk-adverse
behaviour by some individual staff, at times seemingly because they did not feel they had been given the
necessary authority by their superiors. While citing these issues, survey respondents were mainly positive
about the ability of UNICEF to quickly scale up its response considering the difficult operating context.
EVALUATION OF THE UNICEF RESPONSE TO THE LEVEL 2 HUMANITARIAN CRISIS IN MYANMAR 49
Figure 24. UNICEF was able to quickly scale up its response
Implementing partners 18% 55% 9% 9% 9%
UNICEF staff 11% 57% 3% 18% 2% 9%
Strongly agree Mostly agree Neutral/Neither agree nor disagree
Mostly disagree Strongly disagree No opinion/Cannot judge
Source: Survey data.
Contribution of emergency preparedness
141. Some supplies were prepositioned in nine warehouses around the country, which initially helped to facilitate
critical life-saving support to affected communities. LTAs with local suppliers together with streamlined
processes allowed UNICEF staff to prepare a ‘Note for the record’ to expedite procurement processes
to provide certain supplies, such as for WASH and Child Protection, to partners and clusters/Areas of
Responsibility. Some survey respondents (see Figure 25) and interviewees felt that, despite the expedited
L2 processes, they were still subjected to unnecessarily complex administrative procedures, which were
given as some of the reasons behind the negative or neutral ratings in the surveys above (see Figure 24).
Figure 25. Preparedness measures, including supplies, allowed UNICEF to quickly scale up
UNICEF staff 8% 64% 3% 10% 7% 8%
Strongly agree Mostly agree Neutral/Neither agree nor disagree
Mostly disagree Strongly disagree No opinion/Cannot judge
Source: Survey data.
142. The efficiency of UNICEF’s response was heavily affected by human resource constraints following the
military takeover. In the months afterwards, many of the national staff were traumatized and some were
directly affected. Many international staff members left the country. With very few exceptions, surge staff
ended up providing remote support since they could not get visas. Staff reported that remote support
was of variable quality. It was evident based on interviews that staff (both surge and appointed) without
experience of the Myanmar context were challenged in providing useful support.
Innovation and adaptation
143. One of the major innovations that emerged during the COVID-19 pandemic was the expanded use of
IT tools. While the threat of COVID diminished, approaches such as home-based learning in the education
sector, online trainings and audio-based, self-learning systems for partners and UNICEF’s own remote
management have continued to play an important role during this crisis.
50 UNITED NATIONS CHILDREN’S FUND
144. Responses to the survey and interviews suggested other innovations had been developed to better
understand needs and the state of the response more easily since UNICEF staff had difficulty in visiting
communities and project sites either due to restrictions imposed by the de facto authorities or the
United Nations and/or UNICEF’s safety and security rules. Dashboards were developed for monitoring
and a partner database and mapping for localization established along with multiple modalities for
TPM and access trackers.
145. UNICEF interviewees and survey respondents also mentioned direct partnering with small CBOs
using relatively light procedures as a new approach since this was not common practice prior to
the military takeover.
Figure 26. Innovative approaches by UNICEF improved the efficiency of the L2 response
Implementing partners 18% 55% 9% 9% 9%
UNICEF staff 6% 61% 8% 13% 2% 11%
Strongly agree Mostly agree Neutral/Neither agree nor disagree
Mostly disagree Strongly disagree No opinion/Cannot judge
Source: Survey data.
EQ 5: Coordination
EQ 5 How did UNICEF coordinate internally and externally?
146. This evaluation question looks at three types of coordination that will have influenced the role of UNICEF
in its response, internal coordination, lead agency role for several clusters and reference groups/strategic
advisory groups, and, finally its coordination role as a major humanitarian agency within the HCT.
Summary response to EQ 5
• UNICEF generally accorded higher priority to its own programme than to the IASC clusters that it leads,
particularly at a regional level. By mid-2022, national cluster coordination had reportedly improved, but at a
regional level several UNICEF staff were still double hatting, mainly due to a lack of funds. Partners interviewed
and surveyed were nevertheless positive about how UNICEF’s cluster roles had helped to improve the
effectiveness of sectoral interventions.
• CBOs have difficulty in engaging fully with clusters due to their lack of capacity and unfamiliarity with
international systems.
• UNICEF was perceived to coordinate well with other international actors.
• S ome donors felt that they were not consistently receiving sufficient information from clusters or the UNICEF
office, which was of concern given that most donors did not have the option of travelling within Myanmar.
• The Regional Office periodically reviewed and followed up on a workplan of activities to support UNICEF
Myanmar after the L2 emergency had been declared.
• S enior management also organized regular town hall meetings with staff to inform and help them to manage
trauma and stress.
EVALUATION OF THE UNICEF RESPONSE TO THE LEVEL 2 HUMANITARIAN CRISIS IN MYANMAR 51
UNICEF role as a cluster lead agency
147. UNICEF’s performance with regard to its own programme was more effective than the IASC bodies
(clusters and Areas of Responsibility) that it was leading. UNICEF-led clusters have continued to operate
but were reported to lack the necessary capacity or funding to provide sustained cluster coordination
and information management. Prior to the military takeover, clusters were co-chaired by government
representatives. Similar to the finding about UNICEF’s own programme, there appeared to be similar
differences in performance between different clusters as there were between sectors. By mid-2022, the
situation for cluster coordination and information management at a national level was reported to have
improved, but at a regional level several UNICEF staff were still double hatting, forcing them to often
choose between priorities.
148. Evidence from interviews suggests that UNICEF did not give equal priority to clusters. While UNICEF
Myanmar held regular meetings with the Regional Office to systematically follow up on the L2 workplan,
the clusters and working groups they were leading did not figure in the agenda. Funding was a constraint
across most clusters and this led to turnover and to staff double or, in some cases, triple hatting between
their UNICEF role and one or more cluster coordination roles. Information Management Officers were
also not always available.49 The WASH cluster was reported to have been the best-performing of the
UNICEF-led clusters. A dedicated WASH cluster coordinator was in place before the military takeover
although subnational coordinators and Information Management Officers were often playing dual roles.
149. The IASC Peer-2-Peer review found across clusters that lack of understanding about information-sharing,
concerns about the security management of information and duplicative reporting processes were
hindering information flow and recommended that OCHA, the Inter-Cluster Coordination Group and
cluster lead agencies develop and disseminate guidance. The review also recommended continued
expansion of joint assessments, particularly in difficult-to-access areas.
150. Given the increasingly important role of CBOs in assessing needs and delivering assistance to hard-to-reach
communities, it was seen as important for UNICEF to support the search for better ways to engage and
integrate with locally led coordination mechanisms as recommended by the IASC Peer-2-Peer review.
151. Despite these challenges, partners responding to the survey were relatively positive about UNICEF’s cluster
lead roles. They felt that they benefited from participation not only in terms of coordinating their work and
approaches but also in terms of knowledge-sharing.
Figure 27. UNICEF’s resources were adequate to perform as cluster lead/co-lead
Implementing partners 55% 45%
UNICEF staff 5% 61% 13% 18% 3%
Strongly agree Mostly agree Neutral/Neither agree nor disagree
Mostly disagree Strongly disagree No opinion/Cannot judge
Source: Survey data.
49 These findings are consistent with a 2022 global evaluation commissioned by UNICEF: see Schenkenberg, Ed, et al., Evaluation of the Role of UNICEF as Cluster
Lead (Co-Lead) Agency (‘CLARE II’), and UNICEF, Review of Education Cluster Co-Leadership, UNICEF Evaluation Office, New York, 2022.
52 UNITED NATIONS CHILDREN’S FUND
UNICEF external coordination
152. As shown in Figure 28, survey respondents and interviewees felt that overall, UNICEF coordinated
relatively well with other international actors. There was encouraging feedback from peer UN agencies
and most partners who clearly viewed their relationship with UNICEF as a partner rather than as a
sub-contractor. The perspectives of donors were at times different from those of UNICEF. Most UNICEF
staff perceived that they were communicating frequently with donors, whereas some donors interviewed
felt that they were not consistently obtaining the information they needed, which was seen to be important
given that most donors do not currently have the option of travelling within Myanmar.
153. The highly restricted operating environment in the aftermath of the military takeover put pressure on
UN coordination to ensure a unified approach. Although lacking a Representative in-country for much
of the L2 response period, UNICEF Myanmar was a key member of the UNCT throughout the response
despite capacity constraints. Immediately following the military takeover, the UNICEF Representative
took on the additional role of acting Designated Official for UN staff security for almost two months until
she left Myanmar. Moreover, UNICEF Myanmar worked with other UN agencies to develop the UNCT
guidelines and agree on a common approach.
Figure 28. UNICEF coordinated well with other international actors50
Implementing partners 45% 27% 9% 9% 10%
UNICEF staff 3% 69% 11% 7% 10%
Strongly agree Mostly agree Neutral/Neither agree nor disagree
Mostly disagree Strongly disagree No opinion/Cannot judge
Source: Survey data.
UNICEF internal coordination
154. At a senior management level there were specific efforts by the UNICEF Regional Office to support
UNICEF Myanmar following the declaration of an L2 emergency, including putting in place a mechanism
for periodically reviewing and following up on a workplan of activities.
155. At a country level, programme and operations meetings were held regularly, mostly online due to
a combination of COVID-19 restrictions, insecurity and/or the fact that many international staff were outside
the country. Senior management also organized regular town hall meetings with staff to inform and help
them to manage trauma and stress.
156. Attempts to carry out multisectoral projects had mixed results, a finding confirmed by our analysis of
a project sample. The evaluation team observed a siloed approach during FGDs with UNICEF field office
staff. When a question was asked about a sector and the specialist responsible for that sector was not
present, there was usually no answer. UNICEF made attempts to integrate activities and integrated
activities are tracked by their monitoring and evaluation systems. Responses to the survey by UNICEF
staff confirmed mixed experiences with regard to multisectoral projects (see Figure 29).
50 The full statement in the survey was “UNICEF coordinated well with other international actors to optimise its comparative advantage.”
EVALUATION OF THE UNICEF RESPONSE TO THE LEVEL 2 HUMANITARIAN CRISIS IN MYANMAR 53
Figure 29. UNICEF was able to coordinate multisectorial responses without problems
UNICEF staff 5% 44% 10% 21% 20%
Strongly agree Mostly agree Neutral/Neither agree nor disagree
Mostly disagree Strongly disagree No opinion/Cannot judge
Source: Survey data.
EQ 6: Coverage
EQ 6 What coverage did UNICEF achieve during the L2 response?
157. This evaluation question assesses whether UNICEF was able to fulfil its humanitarian mandate by providing
support to those most in need regardless of gender, ethnicity, risk of conflict, age, socioeconomic status,
disability status or geographic location.
Summary response to EQ 6
• UNICEF expanded its programme as the conflict intensified so that the HAC appeal target population increased
from 867,380 people (including 316,164 children) to 1.4 million (including 1.1 million children) in 2022.
• Although survey respondents gave favourable ratings for UNICEF coverage, interviews and narrative responses
described the difficulties that UNICEF had in delivering assistance to many areas, including the Sagaing Region,
which accounted for almost half of new displacements.
• The extent to which UNICEF met its coverage targets objectives varied significantly between activities, sectors
and geographical area by the end of 2022.
Coverage of affected communities
158. UNICEF expanded the number of people earmarked for humanitarian assistance as the conflict and
displacement intensified. Prior to the military takeover, 1 million people were assessed to be in need
of humanitarian assistance in Rakhine and Chin States and the southeast. In 2021, this number increased
to 3.1 million (including 1.2 million children) and in 2022 it rose almost fivefold to 14.4 million (including
5 million children). The target population in the HAC appeal increased accordingly from 867,380
(including 316,164 children) to 1.4 million (including 1.1 million children) in 2022. UNICEF tried to expand
its operations to meet the increased needs while being challenged by low funding and difficulty in accessing
conflict-affected areas. WASH assistance, for example, focused on regions with the highest IDP populations,
notably the northwest and southeast, by forming new partnerships in Chin and Kayah and the southeast.
During the first half of 2022, UNICEF and its partners expanded the coverage of nutrition programmes
aimed at children and pregnant and lactating women in Rakhine, northern Shan, Kachin, Kayin, Yangon
and Ayeyarwaddy.51
159. Respondents to the survey in Figure 30 thus qualified their positive ratings with narratives acknowledging
the difficulties that UNICEF had in accessing populations in conflict-affected areas.
51 UNICEF 2022 Situation Reports.
54 UNITED NATIONS CHILDREN’S FUND
Figure 30. UNICEF assistance was accessible to affected populations in different areas
Implementing partners 27% 64% 9%
UNICEF staff 2% 66% 18% 5% 11%
Strongly agree Mostly agree Neutral/Neither agree nor disagree
Mostly disagree Strongly disagree No opinion/Cannot judge
Source: Survey data.
160. The extent to which UNICEF met its population coverage objectives showed significant variations
between activities, sectors and geographical area by the end of 2022 (see tables in Annex 8). In Education,
for example, 49 per cent of children were reported to have access to formal and non-formal education,
but only 15 per cent received individual learning materials.
161. In Health, only 2 per cent of the targeted 760,000 children were immunized against measles while nearly
three times (458,141) the target number of children and women were reported to have accessed primary
health care in UNICEF-supported facilities. Cash transfers under Social Policy were confined to Yangon and
its surroundings and reached only 8,809 out of a target of 90,000 (10 per cent). WASH reported 64 per cent
coverage of its 2022 target of over 2.3 million people. Child Protection achieved less than 10 per cent
coverage, with the exception of mental health support to boys and girls (26–28 per cent) and individual
case management (70-88 per cent).
162. When geographical differences are considered, consistently higher coverage was observed in Rakhine
for Nutrition (18 per cent), WASH (27 per cent), Education (16 per cent) and AAP (58 per cent). In the
Sagaing Region, where most of the newly displaced are located, coverage was much less, for example
in Nutrition (1 per cent) and WASH (16 per cent). Population coverage objectives were not even set for
Education and AAP in the Sagaing Region.
163. As noted elsewhere, while needs among the newly displaced tend to be high, access was severely
constrained due to a lack of resources and supply bottlenecks caused by difficulties in obtaining permits,
notably in areas such as the Sagaing Region where there was ongoing active conflict.
164. Many of the priority needs were observed in areas where there was new displacement, and narratives
in the survey and feedback from key informants gave a more accurate assessment than the ratings in
Figures 28 and 29 suggest. Whereas nearly half of new displacements were in and around the Sagaing
Region (see Figure 31), an analysis of supply data showed that only 4 per cent of UNICEF supplies were
distributed in this area in 2021–2022. UNICEF has had no permanent presence in Sagaing and interviews
with staff from UNICEF Myanmar and partners indicated that it is struggling with responding in a timely
way in this area. While TPM teams had relatively better coverage than UNICEF, their access was also
restricted by security concerns.
EVALUATION OF THE UNICEF RESPONSE TO THE LEVEL 2 HUMANITARIAN CRISIS IN MYANMAR 55
Figure 31. Displacement in Myanmar
Kachin
Sagaing
Rakine
Source: UNHCR as of October 2022.
56 UNITED NATIONS CHILDREN’S FUND
Figure 32. UNICEF assistance was accessible to the most vulnerable52
Implementing partners 27% 64% 9%
UNICEF staff 3% 66% 10% 16% 3%2%
Strongly agree Mostly agree Neutral/Neither agree nor disagree
Mostly disagree Strongly disagree No opinion/Cannot judge
Source: Survey data.
EQ 7: Protection
To what extent did UNICEF provide protection to the
EQ 7
targeted community in line with its mandate?
165. This evaluation question examines how UNICEF was able to provide protection to the affected population
within its mandate, including specific to PSEA. Application of the Monitoring and Reporting Mechanism
was also examined in a context of increasing armed conflict.
Summary response to EQ 7
• UNICEF with its CSO and CBO partners has been able to extend protection coverage to affected populations
fleeing armed conflict. Areas of UNICEF intervention ranged from psychosocial support for children and
caregivers, support for the prevention and mitigation of gender-based violence and prevention of sexual
exploitation to the provision of support to victims of explosive ordnance through the case management
mechanism.
• PSEA was an area of particular focus in UNICEF’s response. Two consultants were recruited to assess and
build the PSEA capacity of local partners. Some of these partners had received high risk ratings due to
their low capacity in PSEA. Because of this capacity issue among local partners, only half of UNICEF staff
felt that PSEA principles were being respected.
• Special arrangements were made for a lawyers’ network that was not registered as an organization
but which rather loosely connected lawyers providing pro bono services for children held in detention.
• UNICEF’s Monitoring and Reporting Mechanism succeeded in activating the reporting system, which
has informed much of UNICEF’s advocacy. Protection was among the most challenging programmes to
implement but UNICEF’s support provided an important evidence base for UNICEF’s advocacy even if
affected communities expected UNICEF and the rest of the United Nations systems to have been able
to do more about protecting their rights.
• Protection was another area where national staff in UNICEF were obliged to step up and take the lead
since three of the four international staff in the unit left the country soon after the military takeover.
52 Survey data. The complete statement in the survey was “UNICEF assistance was accessible to the most vulnerable (e.g., minorities, people with disabilities, etc.)
within the affected populations.”
EVALUATION OF THE UNICEF RESPONSE TO THE LEVEL 2 HUMANITARIAN CRISIS IN MYANMAR 57
Protection provision
166. The protection system supported by UNICEF prior to the military takeover was integrated with the country’s
justice system, social welfare and capacity-building of government and CSO partners. After the military
takeover, UNICEF changed its delivery mechanism and CSO partners described how UNICEF had adapted
its approach to build their capacity in order to extend protection coverage to affected populations fleeing
armed conflict. UNICEF has continued to strengthen its engagement and investment in CSO and CBO
capacity-building, which has not only increased coverage but also created an important capacity for future
Nexus programming.
167. Following the military takeover, UNICEF has had to rely on CSOs, CBOs and informal and national volunteer
lawyer networks to deliver protection to people in need. As these activities progressively expanded, child
protection staff had to negotiate with operations and management to set up special arrangements since
such networks were unregistered, composed of loosely connected lawyers providing pro bono services to
help children in detention. This system reportedly functioned relatively well and according to data available
to the evaluation team, these partners were perhaps the only legal representatives able to conduct prison
visits to children.53 Such visits were, however, limited to certain geographical areas, and the outcomes of
legal processes have been difficult to predict. In the aftermath of the promulgation of a new Organization
Registration Law in October 2022, the status of legal aid service providers has become even more uncertain.
Interviewees acknowledged that there are substantial target populations who UNICEF was unable to access
or assist.
168. Protection was another area where national staff in UNICEF and CSOs had to step up and take the lead
since three of the four international staff in the unit left the country soon after the military takeover.
Based on survey results and key informant interviews, including with donors, the unit was relatively
successful although almost half of UNICEF staff either did not feel confident stating that protection
interventions were having an effect or felt that UNICEF was not doing enough. Concerns were principally
in terms of advocacy due, in part, to the challenges of sharing relevant information without putting the
safety and security of human rights defenders at risk.
Figure 33. UNICEF assistance provided protection in line with its mandate54
Implementing partners 45% 36% 9% 10%
UNICEF staff 3% 52% 11% 13% 21%
Strongly agree Mostly agree Neutral/Neither agree nor disagree
Mostly disagree Strongly disagree No opinion/Cannot judge
Source: Survey data.
169. The same was true for how UNICEF staff perceived the adherence to the principles of the Monitoring
and Reporting Mechanism. A majority recognized that UNICEF had succeeded in activating the reporting
system and was regularly generating reports, which, in turn, informed much of UNICEF’s protection-related
advocacy around the crisis.
53 This intervention has defined children as up to 25 years old.
54 The full statement in the survey was “UNICEF assistance provided protection to all the target population in line with its mandate.”
58 UNITED NATIONS CHILDREN’S FUND
Figure 34. UNICEF adhered to the principles of the Monitoring and Reporting Mechanism55
UNICEF staff 3% 48% 16% 8% 25%
Strongly agree Mostly agree Neutral/Neither agree nor disagree
Mostly disagree Strongly disagree No opinion/Cannot judge
Source: Survey data.
Prevention of sexual exploitation and abuse
170. PSEA has been an area of particular focus in UNICEF’s response. UNICEF included PSEA clauses in
humanitarian project documents for all partners and encouraged new partners to join the PSEA task force.
UNICEF recruited two consultants to support PSEA, one for capacity-building of local partners and one
for assessing PSEA in partners.
171. UNICEF respondents to the survey and interviewees noted that many smaller CBOs were rated as ‘high risk’
for PSEA either because the partnership was initiated before a full assessment had been completed, or
they had difficulty in fully meeting United Nations PSEA standards. Even though mitigation measures
were drafted, almost 50 per cent of UNICEF staff responded to the statement on PSEA (see Figure 35) with
“neutral” or expressed no opinion as they felt there were risks but they did not have sufficient information
or access to certain areas to be confident that adequate mitigation measures were in place.
Figure 35. UNICEF followed its PSEA, Child Protection and Safeguarding guidelines56
Implementing partners 73% 27%
UNICEF staff 3% 46% 38% 2% 11%
Strongly agree Mostly agree Neutral/Neither agree nor disagree
Mostly disagree Strongly disagree No opinion/Cannot judge
Source: Survey data.
55 The full statement in the survey was “UNICEF adhered to the principles of the Monitoring and Reporting Mechanism on Grave Violations against Children
in Situations of Armed Conflict.”
56 The full statement in the survey was “UNICEF followed their Protection against sexual exploitation and abuse (PSEA) guidelines and Child Protection in
Emergency and Child Safeguarding.”
EVALUATION OF THE UNICEF RESPONSE TO THE LEVEL 2 HUMANITARIAN CRISIS IN MYANMAR 59
60 UNITED NATIONS CHILDREN’S FUND
©
UNICEF/UN0579222/Htet
5. LESSONS LEARNED
This section presents selected key lessons learned that will be useful for UNICEF staff when revising preparedness
approaches or implementing a response during similar emergencies, whether in Myanmar or elsewhere.
172. Contingency planning should be based on the principle of ‘hope for the best but prepare for the worst’.
The impacts of the military takeover provide many important lessons for humanitarian agencies such as
UNICEF. There was little evidence of learning from practices prior to 2008, when similar restrictions were in
place in Myanmar under a previous military regime. While Myanmar was a specific context in many ways,
some of these lessons nevertheless have potentially broader applications, particularly in conflict-affected
and fragile operating environments with difficult access, notably:
a. The importance of investing in and empowering national staff. More than a year after the military
takeover all senior UNICEF positions were international staff positions, many of which had only recently
been filled by individuals who could not obtain visas;
b. Prioritizing LTAs for local procurement of supplies, especially in areas where there are likely to be restrictions;
c. The need to anticipate and deal with human resources issues, notably traumatized UNICEF staff and
adapting human resources and structures to the new context;
d. T he importance of designing programmes with a view to their potential integration with national
systems in the future. An example can be seen in UNICEF’s capacity-building work with local CBOs
and CSOs with regard to preparing local community workforces.
173. The UNCT programmatic engagement guidelines provided a useful process and guidance that assisted
a common approach and messaging with the military authorities. There is still a significant amount of
work to be done, notably with field-based staff, as to how these should be practically applied. UNICEF
has been addressing this through various trainings for their staff, including training to operate in complex,
high-threat environments, although these took time to organize.
174. There are some examples of lessons that had been previously identified but based on the experience during
the Myanmar response still require UNICEF’s attention before they can be considered as learned and applied.
These lessons were identified in a 2019 UNICEF evaluation that assessed UNICEF’s operations in complex
emergencies57 and lessons from prior emergencies.58
a. Reliance on UNDSS capability. UNICEF’s 2019 global evaluation also found the impact of the
United Nations security management system on UNICEF’s coverage to be “extremely variable”
and the experience in Myanmar has underlined the evaluation team’s recommendation that it is
worthwhile for UNICEF to maintain its own security management capacity.
b. Engagement and integration with locally led coordination mechanism. It is important for the
international humanitarian coordination structures to find ways to also engage and integrate with
locally led coordination mechanisms rather than just expecting the CSOs to participate in international
systems. It should be noted that many CSOs did not have the capacity or resources to devote to the
heavy burden of coordination work envisaged in IASC guidance. This will potentially enable more
sustained programmes with national systems alongside generating a greater sense of ownership
among local actors, not only with regard to programme implementation but also for coordination
and monitoring and evaluation of the programmes.
c. Empowering national staff to make decisions. As described above, one lesson that has emerged from
Myanmar is the importance of empowering national staff, particularly in the field, to make key decisions
themselves. While UNICEF’s 2020 ‘Strengthening UNICEF’s Humanitarian Action’ review mainly
recommends developing and strengthening systems, one of the obstacles observed was that staff
were somewhat reluctant to make decisions, notably with regard to the interpretation of the UNCT
programmatic engagement guidelines to deliver assistance to communities in need.
57 United Nations Children’s Fund, Evaluation of the Coverage and Quality of the UNICEF Humanitarian Response in Complex Humanitarian Emergencies, 2019.
58 United Nations Children’s Fund, Strengthening UNICEF’s Humanitarian Action – The Humanitarian Review: Findings and recommendations, 2020.
EVALUATION OF THE UNICEF RESPONSE TO THE LEVEL 2 HUMANITARIAN CRISIS IN MYANMAR 61
62 UNITED NATIONS CHILDREN’S FUND
©
UNICEF/UN0325881/Htet
6. CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
175. This chapter presents the conclusions and recommendations that have emerged from the findings of this
evaluation and their analysis. They are structured as follows:
• An overarching statement for the overall response to the crisis; and
• Conclusions linked to corresponding recommendations based on an analysis of evidence collected
in the evaluation.
176. As described in the methodology section, this section was revised based on discussions with UNICEF staff
during the remote validation workshop held in March 2023. The conclusions and recommendations set forth
below have considered feedback from this interactive session.
OVERALL CONCLUSIONS
Following the military takeover in Myanmar, UNICEF shifted its delivery modalities and partnerships to adapt to
the transformed context and better meet the needs of affected populations while trying to respect core humanitarian
principles. Based on interviews and the results of two surveys, most UNICEF staff and partners in Myanmar
appear to be reasonably satisfied with what the response has achieved so far despite ongoing challenges although
opinions vary according to what sector they are working in. At the same time, staff are searching for ways to
widen the humanitarian space to meet the needs of communities located in areas that they are unable to access.
The evaluation team’s conclusions for the three overarching questions posed in the ToR for this evaluation are
described below.
1. How well has UNICEF responded to the Myanmar humanitarian situation?
Like most other humanitarian agencies in Myanmar, UNICEF was not sufficiently prepared for a crisis of this nature.
The Country Office was nevertheless able to make use of prior disaster preparedness efforts, including investments
in emergency preparedness stocks, pre-existing tools (such as TPM) and knowledge of remote management from
the COVID-19 pandemic, in its response to this crisis. The shift from a government-led upstream programme to
delivery of humanitarian programmes through CSOs happened relatively quickly although the ability to respond
varied by sector and geographical area.
The L2 emergency declaration by UNICEF provided needed support to the Country Office although the application
of procedures and protocols was inconsistent between sections. The L2 emergency was declared five months after
the military takeover at a time when restrictions on imports and visas were being progressively tightened and there
is little doubt that UNICEF would have been better positioned to respond if the L2 emergency declaration had been
made earlier.
UNICEF increasingly relied on partners, notably local CBOs and local networks, that have been able to access
hard-to-reach populations and helped to ensure that limited assistance was distributed according to need. UNICEF
was increasingly successful in this quest by adapting its processes to smaller organizations that are more flexible.
However, UNICEF still faced obstacles in prioritizing its assistance according to needs, notably in assessing needs
and responding in a timely way to meet the needs of newly displaced populations and their hosts.
EVALUATION OF THE UNICEF RESPONSE TO THE LEVEL 2 HUMANITARIAN CRISIS IN MYANMAR 63
OVERALL CONCLUSIONS
2. What UNICEF approaches have had the most impact on identifying and addressing the
needs of affected households and populations and what have been the main barriers in
the response so far?
Among the barriers to the response, the main one has been a lack of humanitarian space, which has restricted
UNICEF’s access to affected communities, limited imports of humanitarian supplies and forced several senior
international staff to work remotely while waiting to obtain visas. Another major barrier was the low level of
funding for this crisis. However, while more funding would help to increase coverage, UNICEF would not be able
to achieve the targets described in the HAC appeal without addressing the barrier of humanitarian space. A third
major barrier was human resources. Like other UN agencies, UNICEF has relied on international staff to fill senior
management positions. Yet, even for those who obtained visas, there was a need to understand the context –
difficult to do with travel restrictions placed on them both by the de facto authorities and the United Nations.
To address these barriers, UNICEF needed to transform its way of working to better support CSOs, and its
partnership with small, local CBOs in particular has helped UNICEF to extend coverage to affected populations
in conflict areas. Many of these CBOs had little prior experience of working with UN agencies and UNICEF adapted
its approach, accordingly providing capacity-building, streamlining its processes for small grants and funding
overhead costs. At the same time, UNICEF also significantly expanded TPM to help monitor the quality of its
assistance and the extent to which it is fulfilling its AAP commitments.
3. What actions and changes in strategy are required to develop a conflict-sensitive,
medium-term programme for affected states of Myanmar?
Specific conclusions linked to a list of eight strategic recommendations are listed below. These are designed to help
UNICEF develop a conflict-sensitive, medium-term programme for affected states of Myanmar. These recommendations
are mainly aimed at UNICEF Myanmar, but some are also relevant to the Regional Office and HQ.
Emergency preparedness did not sufficiently assess risks and
CONCLUSION 1.
lessons learned.
Most of the humanitarian community in Myanmar, including UNICEF, does not appear to have paid sufficient
attention to early warning signals of an imminent crisis and was not sufficiently prepared to respond. Even
though the prospect of a military takeover may have appeared to be remote, it was far from an unlikely event
and subsequent events have demonstrated the importance of incorporating this scenario into contingency
planning given the scale of the impact. The humanitarian space has become progressively more restricted through
restrictions on visa procedures for international staff, movement authorizations and import permits, a situation
comparable to the experience in Myanmar up until 2008 when the country was under military control. Except
for staff who had worked in Rakhine and Kachin, who were used to working in a highly restricted environment,
most of the staff – national and international – had no prior experience of working in a context with severe
restrictions on procurement, movement and access.
Based on findings from EQ 1, EQ 2, EQ 3 and EQ 4
64 UNITED NATIONS CHILDREN’S FUND
R1. UNICEF at all levels (country, regional, HQ) should consider all relevant scenarios,
including worst-case and politically sensitive ones, when carrying out emergency
preparedness planning. Among issues that should be considered:
• A risk analysis that should inform likely impacts and mitigation strategies. In cases that were similar to
Myanmar, there were several lessons learned from the situation pre-2008 that would have been relevant;
• Prioritizing LTAs for local procurement of supplies, notably where there are likely to be restrictions;
• Potential impacts on international and national staff and how these can affect their ability to support
affected communities;
• Assessment of the capacity and experience of staff inside and outside the country to mount a response;
• Ensuring that surge deployments, notably by UNICEF staff, consider the context to add optimum value
to UNICEF’s response and recovery interventions;
• Including anticipatory action59 in emergency preparedness planning.
UNICEF needs to be more agile in responding to needs in a context
CONCLUSION 2.
where emerging conflicts cause new and sustained displacements.
The Sagaing Region was an example repeatedly mentioned by the staff of both UNICEF and partners of how
UNICEF had difficulty in responding to newly emerging needs where there was frequent, and at times repeated,
displacement. Given the constraints on UNICEF and UN agencies in general due to rigorous safety and security
regulations and other limitations, there is a need to develop agile mechanisms that can rapidly assess the scale,
need and level of vulnerability. There are ongoing initiatives in Myanmar to develop an inter-agency system where
UNICEF has a key role due to its capacity and IASC lead roles. UNICEF can therefore support and strengthen
inter-agency systems while at the same time increasing the relevance and effectiveness of its own programme
by drawing on its comparative advantages and lessons from similar contexts characterized by rapid and frequent
displacements due to conflict.
UNICEF has used RRMP60 consortia partner systems to reasonable effect in the past in contexts where there are
regular displacements. RRMP teams conduct coordinated assessments and deliver assistance according to
protocols they have adapted based on learning.
Based on findings from EQ 1, EQ 2 and EQ 6.
R2. UNICEF should continue to support and strengthen agile anticipatory systems within
both UNICEF and inter-agency initiatives to be able to rapidly assess and respond to
emerging humanitarian crises. UNICEF can draw upon resources such as:
• T he Risk Communication and Community Engagement Strategy tool that was used extensively
around the world as an effective way of communicating information and collecting feedback from
affected communities during the COVID-19 pandemic. UNICEF provided particular value-added
to this inter-agency effort through its risk management and communication expertise;
• Further refinement of the AAP tools of UNICEF and partners to extend reach to communities,
including those who are experiencing displacement in difficult-to-reach areas;
• Using lessons learned from UNICEF’s experience with RRMP and similar partner-based rapid
assistance models.
59 Anticipatory action, which is also sometimes referred to as ‘early action’ or ‘forecast-based financing’ is defined here as “…an activity taking place between an
early warning trigger, or a high-probability forecast and the actual occurrence of the corresponding disaster in order to mitigate or prevent the humanitarian
impact of the anticipated disaster”.
60 In the Democratic Republic of Congo, the RRMP was eventually replaced by UNICEF with a less costly Rapid Response Mechanism (UniRR). See DARA,
Evaluation of the Rapid Response to Population Movement (RRMP) Mechanism based on Performance, UNICEF Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC), 2018,
for a summary of lessons learned.
EVALUATION OF THE UNICEF RESPONSE TO THE LEVEL 2 HUMANITARIAN CRISIS IN MYANMAR 65
UNICEF has made good progress in partnering with CSOs and
CBOs to increase support to affected communities in hard-to-reach
CONCLUSION 3.
areas but needs to continue to streamline its way of working with
small local partners.
During this crisis, humanitarian agencies have learned that, if they are to successfully address humanitarian needs
in the new context, they need to give a much greater and more meaningful role to national organizations, including
CBOs, which have demonstrated that they are able to access hard-to-reach communities. Changes in delivery
modalities to expand the roles of national CSOs and CBOs, complemented by capacity-building, have provided
UNICEF with a reasonably effective delivery mechanism. This shift resulted in some delays in adapting UNICEF
administrative procedures, especially given that for many UNICEF staff this was an unfamiliar way of working.
In October 2022, UNICEF began to cover 7 per cent capacity strengthening cost of programme intervention for
national CSOs and CBOs to be better aligned with the needs of these organizations and IASC guidance. Previously,
UNICEF had followed the Harmonized Approach to Cash Transfers guidance, which covers for staff salaries and
other operational costs under project support cost by direct project funding, but this was found to be inappropriate.
Experience has shown that providing core funds and higher allocation for indirect costs helps local organizations’
sustainability and enhances their ability to respond to emerging needs for communities. Similarly, it was shown
that risk-sharing should follow do no harm principles and involve regular communication and consultations to
understand the challenges and situations on the ground and make the necessary adjustments.
Among the UN agencies in Myanmar, UNOPS has probably gone the furthest with its localization approach and
its Livelihoods and Food Security Fund programme. UNOPS began its localization programme in the 2000s during
the previous military regime and has used this experience to adapt, following the military takeover.
Based on findings from EQ 1, EQ 2, EQ 4, EQ 6 and EQ 7
R3. Continue to adapt systems to facilitate the work and increase the efficiency of CBOs by:
• Sharing learning with other UN agencies to improve and better align localization approaches;
• Actively seeking feedback from partner organizations to learn how UNICEF could work more
efficiently and effectively with smaller CBOs.
UNICEF needs a stronger business case to justify coverage
CONCLUSION 4.
of priority humanitarian needs in Myanmar.
Fundraising was problematic for UNICEF and other humanitarian agencies in Myanmar. This was due to various
factors, including the politicization of the crisis; prioritization of humanitarian funding for other crises, notably
Ukraine; global economic stress; and perceptions among some donors that there are potentially more effective
and efficient ways of reaching those most in need than through UNICEF.
A business case for humanitarian interventions should not merely be about reducing costs but rather being able
to demonstrate that UNICEF has analysed quality, vulnerability, risk, timeliness and cost so that it can provide an
optimal way to meet the humanitarian needs of affected communities. While UNICEF has comparatively strong
assessment (needs and risk) capabilities, its budget and financial management systems do not make it easy to
accurately measure results based on costs.61 It should be possible, nevertheless, to show how cost is considered
when deciding on the design of an intervention. While a strong business case should help with fundraising,
it can also strengthen coordination with partners and AAP with communities.
Based on findings from EQ 1, EQ 2, EQ 4 and EQ 5
61 See, for example, Baker, J., and M. Salway, Development of a Proposal for a Methodology to Cost Inter-Agency Humanitarian Response Plans, IASC, 2016,
for a description and illustrative examples of how humanitarian interventions could be costed.
66 UNITED NATIONS CHILDREN’S FUND
R4. Strengthen UNICEF’s business case by demonstrating the return on investment
(value for money) for the selected intervention type. Options for doing this include:
• Encouraging and incentivizing an investment appraisal mindset and common language among
UNICEF staff and partners through joint training and coaching of programme and programme
support staff. The level should be adapted based on the capacities of different types of partners;
• Developing business cases that highlight the comparative advantages and disadvantages of different
intervention strategies, including from a cost perspective, to show why the preferred option was selected.
UNICEF’s cautious approach to implementing the UNCT
CONCLUSION 5.
engagement guidelines has hampered its humanitarian access.
The UNCT programmatic engagement guidelines for UN agencies provided some coherence to the response in
Myanmar but did not provide sufficient practical guidance for operations on the ground. The engagement guidelines
provided high level guidance and the programmatic guidelines gave more detailed guidance about project design,
but UNICEF field staff did not feel they had the authority to be able to negotiate and make decisions on delivery
of humanitarian aid to affected communities.
UN agencies in Myanmar appear to be interpreting the UNCT engagement guidelines in different ways, with some
reportedly gaining more humanitarian space as measured by visas and import permits granted. UNICEF had to
walk a fine line to open humanitarian space while maintaining partnerships throughout Myanmar. While the context
was evidently different to that which existed prior to 2008 when Myanmar was under the control of military authorities,
many of the characteristics that restricted humanitarian space were similar and it would be worth looking back at
lessons learned from previous successful efforts by UN agencies to optimize humanitarian space.
Based on findings from EQ 1, EQ 2, EQ 3, EQ 4 and EQ 5
R5. UNICEF should restructure its staffing to be better positioned to deliver humanitarian
support by:
• Strengthening its in-country risk and analysis capabilities;
• Strengthening the capacity of UNICEF field staff to make structured decisions on access and strengthening
capacities for humanitarian negotiation with State and non-State entities;
• Placing more national staff at senior levels, including a national officer attached to the Representative who
can help to inform the Country Office’s situation analysis and liaise at a senior level with authorities.
EVALUATION OF THE UNICEF RESPONSE TO THE LEVEL 2 HUMANITARIAN CRISIS IN MYANMAR 67
Good public communication and building trust among partners
CONCLUSION 6.
will be key factors in improving access and AAP
Internal and external communication have been a critical component of UNICEF’s programme in the Myanmar
context. UNICEF may need to take a more strategic approach to clarifying its public image to help address
misperceptions in a highly volatile environment. UNICEF has recently developed systems to address AAP
more systematically and now needed to strengthen trust with partners and affected communities. A common
understanding of AAP approaches by UNICEF and partners has helped to engage communities. However, systems
were only being put in place so that UNICEF could follow up and/or provide feedback to communities as this
evaluation was being implemented, two years after the military takeover.
Based on findings from EQ 1, EQ 2, EQ 5 and EQ 7
R6. Build trust with national stakeholders through:
• Consultations/workshops that actively seek feedback from local partners and other local stakeholders,
based on the ongoing stakeholder mapping exercise;
• A collective approach to communication as recommended by the IASC Peer-2-Peer review,
implying a strong and more explicit collective effort in engaging with all sides of the conflict
aimed at depoliticizing humanitarian assistance.
UNICEF Myanmar does not have a joined-up system for tracking
CONCLUSION 7.
delivery of supplies to the end users (affected communities).
Procurement of relief items was a major component of UNICEF’s response in Myanmar. The tracking system
currently used by the UNICEF Supply Division only tracks commodities until they are delivered to the warehouse
or handed over to a partner. Subsequent tracking then becomes the responsibility of the concerned programme
section, which does not always have the information readily available. While there were data for supplies distributed
to communities, data showing the total time taken for supplies to reach affected communities were not available.
Myanmar provides an example of where it can sometimes take considerable time for relief supplies to get from
the warehouse to the final destination. A user-friendly tool for programme staff to track procurement all the way
would provide a more accurate picture of supply chains from request to delivery to the end user in communities.
This would improve UNICEF’s accountability to affected populations.62
Based on findings from EQ 1, EQ 2, EQ 5 and EQ 7
R7. Improve the efficiency of the supply chain and support UNICEF’s accountability to
affected populations by using innovative approaches to extend tracking to affected
communities. Some actions that could be considered include:
• P articipating in UNICEF Supply Division’s Last Mile Supply Monitoring Project;
• Encouraging a common understanding across programme, procurement and finance teams.
62 The UNICEF Supply Division initiated a pilot project to address this AAP gap called the ‘Last Mile Supply Monitoring Project’.
68 UNITED NATIONS CHILDREN’S FUND
Monitoring and information management
UNICEF was already using TPM systems prior to February 2021,
CONCLUSION 8. and this provided a useful basis to expand and improve on its
monitoring capacity.
The TPM system set up prior to the military takeover provided a useful tool that could be adapted to a context
where access to affected communities becomes progressively more difficult. The mechanism was expanded so that
UNICEF could monitor its response but improvements in the format and protocols (e.g., follow-up, feedback to
partners) may be needed to strengthen its usefulness.
This conclusion was consistent with the IASC Peer-2-Peer review, which recommended that cluster lead agencies
develop and disseminate clear guidance on reporting templates and requirements with a view to making cluster
members better capacitated to support operations and necessary accountability.
Based on findings under EQ 2, EQ 4, EQ 6 and EQ 7
R8. Improve TPM by making the process more participatory and fit-for-purpose while
producing user-friendly outputs. Specific actions could include:
• Periodic updating of risk vs. benefit and cost-effective analyses;
• Including researchers with specific technical expertise to improve the utility of outputs;
• Improving the quality of monitoring and supporting the capacity-building of partners by involving
them in the debriefing sessions;
• Making reports more user-friendly and synthesizing results;
• Ensuring complementarity with the Community Feedback dashboard;
• Periodic opportunities, at least annually, to reflect with partners and TPM managers on lessons learned
and possible revisions and innovations to the methodologies.
EVALUATION OF THE UNICEF RESPONSE TO THE LEVEL 2 HUMANITARIAN CRISIS IN MYANMAR 69
UNITED NATIONS CHILDREN’S FUND
©
UNICEF/UNI358748/Oo
ANNEXES
Table of Contents
ANNEX 1. ‘REAL-TIME’ ACTION PLAN........................................................................................... 1
ANNEX 2. MYANMAR DISPLACEMENT MAPS .................................................................................. 2
ANNEX 3. TIMELINE OF MYANMAR CRISIS .................................................................................... 4
ANNEX 4. HAC TARGETS BY YEAR ................................................................................................. 9
ANNEX 5. THIRD PARTY MONITORING GUIDELINES ................................................................ 10
ANNEX 6. PROGRAMME ACHIEVEMENTS VS. TARGETS .............................................................. 17
ANNEX 7. WORKSHOP AGENDA .................................................................................................... 21
ANNEX 8. KEY REFERENCE DOCUMENTS ................................................................................... 22
ANNEX 9. EVALUATION MATRIX .................................................................................................. 24
ANNEX 10. PEOPLE REACHED VS. TARGETS AS OF DECEMBER 2022 ........................................... 34
ANNEX 11. PROJECT SAMPLE ANALYSIS OVERVIEW ...................................................................... 41
ANNEX 12. CCC ASSESSMENT MATRIX .......................................................................................... 51
ANNEX 13. LIST OF PERSONS INTERVIEWED .............................................................................. 129
ANNEX 14. EVALUATION ETHICS ................................................................................................. 132
ANNEX 15. INTERVIEW GUIDES ................................................................................................... 133
ANNEX 16. ETHICS REVIEW APPROVAL LETTER.......................................................................... 137
ANNEX 17. TERMS OF REFERENCE .............................................................................................. 138
Annex 1. ‘Real-Time’ Action Plan
The potential real-time actions that could be considered for immediate follow-up were identified by
participants during the workshop include:
• Consistency in applying L2 emergency flexible systems – promote a common understanding
of the flexibility of financial, administrative, and reporting requirements for partners provided by
the L2 emergency declaration to ensure consistency across all sectors.
• Greater consistency for cluster operations – the quality of UNICEF cluster coordination has
varied by cluster. Part of the problem seems to have been related to the high turnover of cluster
staff (coordinators and information managers), who have often been double hatted, most of whom
have worked remotely. While this situation appears to have improved recently through
secondments UNICEF could monitor performance and feedback from cluster members more
systematically through, for example, adding cluster coordination to their regular management
reviews.
• UNICEF systems for CBOs – continue to adapt UNICEF systems to enable CBOs to make
them fit-for-purpose to assess and meet the humanitarian needs of the most vulnerable.
• Apply lessons learned from UNICEF’s emergency response in Rakhine – UNICEF has
developed and adapted their response to emergencies in Rakhine over several years. UNICEF has
been applying some of this learning in other areas, but it may be worth taking a more systematic
approach to extracting and applying relevant lessons learned from the Rakhine response notably
in terms of structure, ways of working including external reporting.
• Third Party Monitoring – review of templates and protocols to increase the utility of the third-
party monitoring results by, for example, providing an opportunity for partners and UNICEF field
staff to discuss and complement the Third-Party Monitoring findings and reach a consensus on
improvements needed.
• UNICEF communication – while UNICEF is recognized as having strong communication
capacities, there is a need to strengthen UNICEF’s public image. Based on preliminary findings,
three areas may warrant attention:
o Improved use of social media and other public information tools to further clarify
UNICEF’s impartial humanitarian mission for children.
o Support dialogue with partners to develop greater trust so that there is a common
understanding of UNICEF’s vision and mission in Myanmar.
o Improve UNICEF’s external communication strategy, notably with donors, to
communicate to better understand results UNICEF is achieving and challenges that are
being faced.
• National staff capacity – previous experience in Myanmar when it has been under the control of
the military has been that visas and subsequent access to affected communities by international
staff has been relatively difficult. These obstacles, along with the considerable national capacities
(UNICEF and partners) makes it likely that there will need to be greater reliance on national staff
in future to achieve UNICEF’s goals.
1
Annex 2. Myanmar displacement maps
Figure 1 – Numbers of displaced persons since February 2021
Source: UNHCR as of October 2022
2
Figure 2 – Comparison of displaced persons before and after February 2021
Source: UNHCR as of October 2022
3
Annex 3. Timeline of Myanmar crisis
Table 1 – Timeline of key milestones as of early December 2022
Colour UN / RCO Key external
Month UNICEF milestones
legend: decisions events
• On February 1st, Myanmar armed forces (the Tatmadaw) stages a military
takeover declaring fraud in the November 2020 multiparty general election
won by the National League for Democracy. A year-long state of emergency
is ordered with a promise that new elections would take place in one year.
February 2021
• A Civil Disobedience Movement (CDM) is launched in response to the
military takeover and protesters take to the streets.
• The military junta expels the UN envoy.
March 2021 • Martial law imposed in 11 townships in the Yangon and Mandalay regions.
• UNICEF expands and adapts its partnerships with local CSOs and other
partners to ensure implementation of its activities.
March 2021
• UNICEF requests a rapid scale up of emergency assistance outside the
current Humanitarian Response Plan (HRP) locations
• Operationalization of UNCT engagement principles guidance for
8 March 2021
Programme Review
• The People’s Defence Forces (PDF) are formed by the National Unity
5 May 2021 Government (NUG) to unite resistance against the military takeover. The
military clashes with the PDF in the southeast and northwest regions.
• UNICEF works with the humanitarian community on an Interim
May 2021 Emergency Response Plan for Urban Areas as an Addendum to the 2021
Myanmar Humanitarian Response Plan.
• The military authorities attempt to reopen schools nationwide, but more
June 2021 than half of the country’s 400,000 teachers are on strike and just 10 percent
of the estimated 9 million students nationwide opt to enrol.
• UNICEF activates L2 emergency for 6 months (until 31 December
1 July 2021
2022)
• Severe flooding affects some townships in Rakhine and in the south-eastern
July 2021
part of Myanmar
• COVID-19 pandemic worsens: A third wave of COVID-19 hits the country.
9 July 2021
Schools that reopened in June were closed again.
August 2021 • Military extend the state of emergency until August 2023.
1 August 2021 • UNICEF releases the 2021 HAC appeal revision for Myanmar tripling the
4
Colour UN / RCO Key external
Month UNICEF milestones
legend: decisions events
numbers in need (3.1 million people of which 1.2 million children).
• Nationwide cluster activation
• Schools across Myanmar, except for 46 townships where COVID-19
November 2021 restrictions remain in place, are allowed to reopen after a 4-month closure.
However, many schools remain closed or are poorly attended.1
11 November 2021 • UN Security Council calls for end to violence.2
• Many sectors remain underfunded such as WASH with a current gap of 60
Oct – Nov 2021
percent of UNICEF funding requirements.
• The number of internally displaced persons (IDP) significantly increased
across the country, particularly in the city of Sagaing, and more than a
February 2022
million have been forced to flee into neighbouring countries (Bangladesh,
Malaysia, and Thailand).
February 2022 • UNCT programmatic engagement guidelines version one plus is released
• UNICEF releases its 2022 HAC appeal for Myanmar with 14.4 million
Early 2022
people in need, of which 5 million children.
• The Northwest region, including the city of Sagaing, Chin and Magway, has
28 March 2022
308,600 IDPs out of a total of 558,000 people displaced since February 2021.
30 March 2022 • UNICEF extends L2 emergency until September 30, 2022.
• A reported 694,300 civilians have been displaced nationally by the conflict,
May 2022
more than double that of the figure of 320,900 at the end of 2021.
• UNICEF providing activities to ensure uninterrupted water supply to IDPs
and expanding its response to protect children from landmines and
May 2022
explosives risk by ensuring that Explosive Ordnance Risk Education is
integrated across all relevant sectors of its humanitarian response.
• The number of displaced men, women and children in Myanmar remains
above one million, including 760,000 displaced by the conflict and insecurity
since the military takeover in February last year.
• Many schools reopened with the beginning of the new school year (2022–
June 2022
2023), while many remain closed, particularly in rural areas: 96 per cent in
Rakhine, 92 per cent in Mon, 80 per cent in Shan, 71 per cent in Kayin, 35
per cent in Chin, and 18 per cent in Kayah.
• According to UNICEF, 4.5 million children – half of the school-aged children
in Myanmar – have not accessed education for two academic years, and that
1 Schools in some areas remained open, such as in Rakhine, Mon and some of the other states.
2 UN News (2021). Security Council appeals for end to violence in Myanmar. https://news.un.org/en/story/2021/11/1105642
5
Colour UN / RCO Key external
Month UNICEF milestones
legend: decisions events
nearly six million children currently have restricted or no access to learning.
27 June 2022 • The monsoon season continues to cause heavy rain and flooding.
• Active fighting is reported in the northwest and southeast regions, resulting
in continuous population displacement. Particularly, surge of displacement is
reported in Sagaing, with a total of 395,600 IDPs located within the region,
including an estimated 146,000 children and their families with immediate
June 2022
needs for essential services.
• IDP numbers remains stable in the southeast (in Kayah state) and new
displacements have been offset by reported returns.
• Immediate delivery of humanitarian assistance was provided by UNICEF
through direct distribution modality.
• A total of 16,023 individuals in Loikaw and Demoso townships received
June 2022
basic WASH, child protection, education, health and nutrition supplies.
• UNICEF continued to build upon this experience to foster unimpeded and
continuous access to areas previously out of reach.
July 2022 • Number of IDPs increased to 470,000 in the Sagaing region.
• Escalation in armed conflict in the northwest and southeast regions and in
Kachin state, resulting in increased displacement.
• As of August 29th, an estimated 974,4001 people had been internally
displaced since February 2021, which has resulted in more than 1.3 million
IDPs, with the northwest region being the most affected.
August 2022
• Access for aid workers not improved, as the de facto authorities maintain
tight control on issuing travel authorizations.
• Humanitarian situation remains unpredictable in Rakhine due to the
heightened tension and clashes between the Arakan Army and the Myanmar
Armed Forces. 219,000 people remain in a situation of protracted
displacement.
• The HCT has approved an Inter Cluster Coordination Group (ICCG) for
August 2022
the northwest to address strategic operational issues.
• UNICEF improves its MHPSS activities, even in hard-to-reach areas, with a
53 per cent increase compared to the previous month thanks to virtual
August 2022 access and hotlines, capacity building and community empowerment.
• Distribution of measles vaccines to 3,568 9-18 months children in Rakhine,
Kachin and Shan.
• On 16 September, at least 11 children died as a result of an air strike and
indiscriminate fire in civilian areas, including a school, in Tabayin Township,
September 2022 in the Sagaing region.
• Deteriorating security situation in Rakhine. Movement restrictions imposed
due to continuing clashes between the Arakan Army and Myanmar Armed
6
Colour UN / RCO Key external
Month UNICEF milestones
legend: decisions events
Forces, severely affecting humanitarian interventions and the ability of aid
workers to reach the affected population.
• Conflict also reported in the in Loikaw township in Kayah, resulting in
civilian casualties and displacement.
• Humanitarian situation closely monitored by UNICEF and partners despite
challenges posed by movement restrictions and security measures,
preventing access to the affected population.
September 2022
• UNICEF distributing WASH, child protection, health, and nutrition supplies
to 21,095 people in 48 displacement sites in Loikaw and Demoso township
in Kayah state.
• On 23 October, airstrikes killed and injured 100 people in Hpakant in
Kachin state, continuing to deteriorate the security situation of the country.
• On October 28th, the State Administration Council endorsed a new law on
October 2022
the registration of associations, repealing the one of 2014, which makes
registration compulsory for both national CSOs and international NGOs
and associations. This law could have implications for humanitarian
operations.
• Since February 2021, UNICEF and its implementing partners have provided
October 2022
legal aid support to 3,985 children and young people.
• Intensifying conflict is reported in Rakhine, with reported clashes in
northern Maungdaw, northern Rathedaung, southern Buthidaung, Kyauktaw,
Minbya and Paletwa townships.
October 2022
• On 25 October, cyclone Sitrang impacted Rakhine coasts. Damages of
WASH infrastructures located in the displaced camps of Sittwe and Pauktaw
are reported.
• + 29,200 displaced people compared to October, mainly in North and
Central Rakhine and Kachin state
• Prolonged violence and conflict, access constraints and blocked
November 2022 transportation routes keep hindering the work of humanitarian workers and
the possibility to support children and their families.
• Casualties from landmines and explosive remnants of war are reported
mostly in Shan State and also in Sagaing.
• Essential medical supplies for primary health care services have been
distributed to partners in Northwest and Southeast regions.
• In-person and remote MHPSS activities provided to a total of 10,370
children and 2,062 caregivers.
November 2022
• Nearly 28,000 temporarily displaced people in Kayin, Kayah, Magway and
Tanintharyi received life-saving WASH supplies.
• UNICEF provided cash assistance to a total of 8,467 participants through its
Maternal and Child Cash Transfer programme so far.
7
Colour UN / RCO Key external
Month UNICEF milestones
legend: decisions events
• The UN Security Council adopts resolution 2669 calling for the immediate
22 December 2022 end to all forms of violence in Myanmar, urging restraint, de-scalation of
tensions and the release of arbitrarily detained prisoners.
End December • UNICEF extends the L2 emergency until March 31, 2023.
2022
8
Annex 4. HAC Targets by year
MYANMAR HAC TARGETS Early 2021 August 2021 (rev.) 2022 2023
Funding requirement 61.000.000 7.450.000 151.400.000 169.000.000
Total people in need 1.000.000 3.100.000 14.400.000 17.600.000
Total children (<18) in need 455.000 1.200.000 5.000.000 5.600.000
Total people to be reached 424.000 667.389 1.700.000 2.800.000
Total children to be reached 224.000 316.164 1.100.000 1.900.000
Source: UNICEF – Myanmar HACs
9
Annex 5. Third Party Monitoring Guidelines
Extracted from UNICEF (2019) Field Monitoring in Myanmar Guidelines to Third Party
Monitoring
Objective of Field Monitoring
I.
• Field monitoring is an integral part of UNICEF programming. It serves as an input to wider
programme monitoring and managing for results. It entails going to the field (service point or
community) to witness implementation (inputs, activities), and their contribution to outputs,
based on volume and criticality.
• Consistent with UNICEF’s longstanding commitment to a human rights approach to
programming and to support accountability to our primary stakeholders, monitoring
systematically gathers, analyses and triggers programme responsiveness to the perspectives of
children, women and their families, especially those from most vulnerable groups
Benefits of Field Monitoring
II.
• Assure progress towards achievement of planned results
• verify the progress as reported by partners including use of resources
• Improve the quality of interventions through communicating and engaging with the
beneficiaries
• Identify issues related to “do not harm”, exclusion, bottlenecks and barriers
Objective of Third-Party Monitoring
III.
• UNICEF Myanmar recognizes the importance of field monitoring and has been trying its best
to comply with “minimum requirements”, an organizational HACT procedural requirement.
Due to reasons related to access, security, pre-occupation with programme implementation,
lack of role clarification between field and CO for Prog visits, and issues around government
approval, the programmatic visits are below target visits.
• An analysis of 10 programmatic visits in 2018 shows that we are on an average covering only
10 % areas (village/IDP camps level) as part of our compliance to meet minimum requirement
for programmatic visit. It may be noted that the minimum visits are “just bare minimum”.
Good programming demands “feet on the ground”, particularly where the political
environment is complex, and where UNICEF need to constantly engage with
ed
communitiesto assess their changing needs and situation on the ground.
• Third party monitoring, as part of organizational good practice, allows UNICEF to reach and
cover remote, inaccessible and security compromised areas where UNICEF staff is
unable/constrained to go. It will also help in covering multiple locations per
Programmatic Visit.Field monitoring is an important vehicle to demonstrate accountability
and transparency todonors and community at large. Findings resulting from TPM will
enable UNICEF to takecorrective actions leading to improvement in quality of
interventions, and better results forchildren.
Benefits of Third-Party Field Monitoring
IV.
• Cover remote, inaccessible and security compromised areas where UNICEF staffs are
unable/constrained to go
• Cover multiple Programmes per location (opportunities for programmatic integration)
• Contribute to better coverage of areas
10
• Enhance accountability and transparency to donors and community
• Provide an independent view (a different lens)
• Strengthen community engagement (AAP)
• Information on Situation Analysis
• Conduct quick and dirty needs assessment
• Take corrective action to improve quality of intervention and better results for children
V. Composition of Field Team
• One team of Field monitors will be comprised of 2 persons – 1 male and 1 female. It is
recommended that cross sectoral approach to data collection be used. This would mean using
generalists rather than specialist field monitors. This will enable covering multiple outputs across
sectors, probing corresponding services in the community resulting in more efficient use of field
monitoring resources, and better cross-sectoral analysis of implementation. Request for specialist
will however be built into the RFP so that they are available as needed. E.g. engineers to monitor
construction projects.
• The number of field teams will depend on the geographical coverage. For above highlighted areas,
five teams each comprising of 2 field monitors may be required as follows; Kachin (2), Rakhine
(2), and Northern Shan (1).
VI. Phases of Field Monitoring
• Preparation Phase: Before going into the Field
• UNICEF and Third Party conduct a training to Third Party team and monitors on
UNICEF programs, section observation checklists, and introduction by Field Office on
access
• UNICEF and Third-party develop Monthly Travel Plan (deployment plan in coordination
with UNICEF)
• Third Party conducts a pre-deployment training in FO for monitors to ensure mutual
understanding of checklists
• UNICEF and Third-party prepare for Field Monitoring/Programmatic Visit
• During the field monitoring trip: Field Work Phase
• Uses combination of mixed methods:
o Observations
o key informant interviews
o focus group discussions
o Situation Monitoring
• Field Monitor and Third Party use real-time monitoring tools
After the field monitoring trip: Analysis & Report Phase
• Monitoring tools are uploaded on eTools as part of PV requirement within two weeks of FM
visit
• Complete and upload into eTools a short summary of field monitoring report.
o The short summary report would be translated to English before submitting to
UNICEF.
• All action points are entered into the Kobo database
• Monthly monitoring report that covers all the visits during that period as well as a comprehensive
report after 6 months and 12 months after the implementation of the project is submitted to
PME
11
VII. Data Collection Methods
Flow Chart below depicts the data collection and reporting process at the CO and FO. The cycle concludes
with presentation of findings at the Pre-Prog Ops meeting, and feeding highlights of discussions to the
CMT for decision
• Methods
• Observation Checklists, including: Key Standards, a translated guideline in Myanmar language and
section specific document on acronyms and pictures
• The PRT will conduct field observations in each implementation site. Direct observation
of project implementation and impact will enable third-party evaluation of the intervention
process and therefore facilitate analysis of effectiveness of service delivery. Observation
will also enable the PRT to identify gaps and bottlenecks in service delivery.
• Should be filled out by field monitors as they move around and observe the site. There are
separate checklists for WASH, Education, Health, Nutrition, and Child Protection which
should be filled out accordingly to the demand of the Programme Sections in a given
geographical area.
• Key Informant Interviews (KIIs)
• Key informant interviews will be conducted with a range of stakeholders. The stakeholders
to be interviewed will be identified before the commencement of the field visit and will be
selected purposely to provide relevant insight into the quality and effectiveness of
UNICEF implementations. Possible stakeholders include implementing partners and
service providers in, for example, health centres, schools, Outpatient Therapeutic Centres
in implementation sites. KIIs with key stakeholders will facilitate evaluation of
implementation and facilitate the identification of gaps in service delivery
• Situation Monitoring
• Situation monitoring helps to ensure UNICEF development and humanitarian
interventions are adapting and responding to the environments they serve.
• Situation monitoring will also be conducted in each site to identify any emerging issues
related to the affected population which need urgent attention by UNICEF.
• Focus Group Discussions
• Focus group discussions will be conducted with a range of beneficiaries and stakeholders.
The PRT will conduct FGDs with service users and affected populations at each
implementation site in order to develop an understanding of the effect and outcomes of
the UNICEF development interventions. FGDs will therefore facilitate analysis of the
12
impact of UNICEF projects and will also help to identify gaps in service provision and
potential issues or bottlenecks through collecting data from affected populations
themselves.
• Measurements and Quick Assessments
• Measurements will be performed against key programme indicators in order to assess
effectiveness of UNICEF interventions. Third-party monitors will also conduct quick
assessments of project interventions against a set standard to gain an understanding of the
effectiveness and quality of services provided. These are treated as field monitoring visits.
• ‘Trainer of trainers’
• method will be deployed in instances where field monitors are restricted due to conflict or
extreme weather. In these instances, Field Monitors will establish relationships with local
contacts and be trained to collect certain information in the inaccessible location.
VIII. Guidance to Combination of Mixed Methods
• Observation and Situation Monitoring
• Try to avoid entering the observation process with pre-conceived notions and fixed
expectations.
• Observe as much as you can, including people’s physical condition and activities; children,
mothers, persons with disabilities; state of infrastructure and public services.
• Note observations that are related to subjects beyond your concerns. Be prepared to follow
advice from people you meet on the places you visit. Use the opportunity to observe things
which were not planned.
• Walk around the site (after checking with relevant partners) to obtain a cross-section of points
for observation and provide a balanced view of conditions.
• Record information which is contradictory or surprising to your expectations.
• Be aware of what you may not have seen. Note down the absence of services and
infrastructure.
• Respect local culture. Be sensitive to local concerns, for example if there is a shortage of food
and water, do not consume snacks and drinks in front of affected community members.
• Do not be intrusive. Take steps to be as sensitive and respectful as possible; observation should
as unobtrusive as possible.
• Do not take photographs or videos without asking prior permission.
• Key Informant Interviews
• It is important to choose key informants who have good knowledge of the situation/activities
you are trying to assess. Key informant interviews are useful to:
• Obtain technical information from people representing specific professions, such as health
workers or school teachers
• Gain specific knowledge about a specific topic or sector (e.g. interviewing a water committee
representative)
• Gain information on project implementation including any constraints (e.g. partner staff)
• Gain the perspectives of particular groups that are of interest (e.g. women, adolescent
girls/boys, etc.) – though if possible, Focus Group Discussions would provide a broader
perspective of beneficiaries.
•
• The greatest limitation of a key information interview is that it provides a subjective
perspective. As with all individual responses, information will have both an individual and a
cultural bias which needs to be considered when analyzing key informant interview responses.
Tips for Key Informant Interviews:
• Make sure people understand why you wish to talk to them and what you will do with the
information they share. Be careful not to raise expectations or make promises about assistance.
13
• Ensure good communication and informed consent. Participants must understand that they
are not required to participate in the interview. Make sure they understand that a lack of
participation will not negatively impact them. Ask if notes can be taken.
• Start the interview with general questions about the situation and allow the interviewee to raise
issues of concern to them before guiding the conversation to the subjects of interest to you.
• Combine interviews with observation to verify information and correct inconsistencies.
• Be alert to behaviours and non-verbal signs that indicate how comfortable the person is with
the interview, whether questions are too sensitive or if the respondent is losing patience. When
people are uncomfortable with the questions, do not insist.
• Give key informants the opportunity to ask questions or share their thoughts on issues that
have not yet been discussed.
• Record metadata (location, date, social role of interviewee, group represented by the
interviewee, etc.)
• Focus Group Discussions
• Focus Group Discussions (FGDs) are small group discussions with approximately 6-10 people
(can be a bit more or less, although larger numbers can be difficult to manage). FGDs can be
used to understand a target group: how they feel, what they think, and how they perceive
specific issues. The ideal amount of time to set aside for a focus group is anywhere from 30
to 60 minutes.
• Focus groups are structured around a set of carefully predetermined questions but the
discussion is free-flowing. Ideally, participant comments will stimulate and influence the
thinking and sharing of others. Some people even find themselves changing their thoughts and
opinions during the group.
• Work best when the participants in the group are from a similar background – this way, they
will feel more comfortable expressing their views. For field monitoring, it is ideal to hold at
least three discussions at any one site, one with women/mothers, one with adolescent girls and
one with adolescent boys. It is important not to mix these groups (i.e. not to have boys and
girls together or older women and girls together) to enable all participants to speak freely.
• Participants in the Focus Groups can be selected by the following methods:
• Local community leaders or others who have knowledge of the beneficiary population can
nominate participants for the Focus Group Discussions.
• Participants can be selected from already existing groups (e.g. Mothers/Women’s groups,
Parent Teacher Committees/School Management Committees, Student Groups, etc.)
• If a list of beneficiaries is available at the site, names can be selected at random.
• Tips for Focus Group Discussions:3
• Arrival in the field and getting ready for data collection.
• Introduce yourself to the camp management/security personnel and ask for permission
for the field work, and if required, show relevant documents/ correspondence.
• Identify a group of 6-9 persons from among the affected populations- ask the local
leaders/elders to nominate 6-9 persons to represent the entire population in the
camp/community. Sometimes there are more people interested to be part of the group
discussion, but it should not be more than 11 persons in a group.
• A group should consist of homogeneous people representing a particular segment of
population: male, youth, women (general and specific like pregnant).
3 Reference (adapted version): Krueger Richard A., 2002. Designing and Conducting Focus Group Interviews,
University of Minnesota.
14
• For the youth group, it is important to have separate group discussions with youth men
and youth women.
• It would be useful to do two FDGs, preferably one each for male and female groups, and
cover youth groups intermittently where needed
• Remember that the quality and details are important so it is good to have few detailed
FGDs than having many of them with no comprehensible information.
• Before the selected people are assembled for the FGD, ensure they meet the profile of the
intended group, otherwise adjust till satisfied. Conducting the FGD with a non-
representative group is of little use
• Starting data collection/Focus Group Discussion:
The Moderator
• The first 3-5 minutes are critical—this is the time when the moderator must create an
atmosphere and set the tone of the discussion.
• Tell the purpose, outline and timing of the focus group thanking for their participation.
Also ask for concern if there is any.
• Be a good listener and encourage participants to speak freely and state their opinions and
ideas.
• Uses probes and clarifying questions such as:
o ‘Did I understand you correctly…’ and then repeat a summary of what was said.
o "Would you explain further?"
o "Would you give an example?"
o "I don't understand……"
o “Can you talk about that more?”
o “Help me understand what you mean”
• It is important to develop consensus in the group.
The Notetaker
• Time management is important to ensure quality participation of respondents- the
discussion should last between 1 to 1.5 hours.
• Captures all the discussion as well as important quotes and key points that highlight
particular point of view.
• Do not participate in the discussion, however, help the moderator if further
probing/details required- or ask questions when invited by the moderator.
• Debrief with the moderator at the end of every FGD to make sure that all the key aspects
of the discussion are captured as required.
• Transfer the data from your notebook to the FGD note taking template and get the
moderator feedback if he/she also agrees to what you have captured and transferred into
the given template.
• Your note should SPEAK to the reader—record the way that it is very much self-
explanatory. Incomplete sentences and acronyms/other short forms are not helpful.
• While reporting, NEVER copy and paste a completed soft copy for the next group
discussion- ALWAYS use blank template
• Always submit the handwritten hard copy along with the soft copy for the report writer
to cross check and get back to you if needed.
Other things to remember
• A moderator must tactfully deal with challenging participants. Here are some appropriate
strategies:
o Self-appointed experts: “Thank you. What do other people think?”
o The dominator: “Let’s have some other comments.”
o The rambler: Stop eye contact; look at your watch; jump in at their inhale.
o The shy participant: Make eye contact; call on them; smile at them.
o The participant who talks very softly: Ask them to repeat their response more
loudly.
15
IX. Reporting
• Short Summary Report of Each Visit (within two weeks)
• A short Summary Report should be uploaded into eTools. Any urgent issues arising during
the monitoring visit will be reported to Programme Section Focal Points immediately. The
short summary reports should follow the template that has been formulated by UNICEF.
An English version of all the data collection instruments will also be attached.
• Monthly Analytical Reports
• Monthly Monitoring Reports containing all data gathered (and updated into eTools) with
analysis and recommendations produced during the month, covering all visits undertaken
during the time period is submitted to PME.
• Comprehensive Report
• A Comprehensive Report should be turned in at the end of 6 months and 12 months
(2.5-year LTA Contract).
X. Meetings
• Field Office Meetings
• Regular meetings (monthly basis or as needed) between respective PRT and UNICEF
Focal Point in field office for direct feedback / discussion related to UNICEF
interventions in that state/region.
• Regular Meetings at UNICEF Country Office
• Regular meetings (monthly basis or as needed) between Project management team and
UNICEF programme staff in Yangon on key findings, issues and trends.
• De-brief Meeting/Lessons Learnt
• A de-brief meeting with the entire project management team and UNICEF towards the
end of 6-8 months to consolidate experiences and identify progress, main challenges and
lessons learnt.
16
Annex 6. Programme Achievements vs. Targets
Table 2: Myanmar HAC 2021 programme targets and achievements
UNICEF and IPs Cluster response
SECTOR INDICATORS
Targets Total results % Targets Total results %
# children aged 6-59
months with SAM 15.807 3.888 25% 15.821 3.888 25%
admitted for treatment
# children 6-59 months
receiving multiple 226.973 148.294 65% 227.092 148.294 65%
micronutrient powders
NUTRITION
# of mothers, fathers and
other caregivers of
children (0-23 months)
135.648 25.402 19% 135.743 28.533 21%
reached with messages on
breastfeeding in the
context of COVID-19
# children 9 to 18
months vaccinated against 17.000 4.835 28% N/A N/A
measles
HEALTH
# affected population
accessing primary health 154.000 148.528 96% N/A N/A
care services
# male and female
accessing a sufficient
quantity of safe water for
437.500 227.013 52% 872.121 525.089 60%
drinking, cooking and
personal
hygiene
WATER, # male and female
SANITATION accessing appropriately
98.500 108.484 110% 872.121 325.325 37%
AND HYGIENE designed and
PROMOTION managed latrines
# male and female
reached with critical
WASH supplies
557.500 629.639 113% 1.022.495 662.771 65%
(including
hygiene items) and
services
# children, adolescent
boys and girls and male
and female caregivers 135.000 56.623 42% 168.000 111.095 66%
accessing mental health
and psychosocial support
# women, girls and boys
CHILD
accessing GBV risk
PROTECTION 33.000 11.781 36% 34.500 12.768 37%
mitigation, prevention or
response interventions
# boys and girls, men and
women accessing
80.500 42.527 53% 80.500 179.851 223%
explosive weapons-
related risk education
# of targeted girls and
boys (3-17) supported to
access quality and
EDUCATION inclusive pre- 87.100 77.758 89% 273.590 107.921 39%
primary/primary and
post primary learning
opportunities
17
UNICEF and IPs Cluster response
SECTOR INDICATORS
Targets Total results % Targets Total results %
# of male and female
volunteer
teachers/facilitators who
have completed trainings 1.010 883 87% 5.791 2.001 35%
to provide quality and
inclusive education to
children
# households benefiting
from social assistance
measures to respond to
SOCIAL POLICY 500.000 251.300 50% N/A N/A
COVID-19 and
humanitarian crises
with UNICEF support
# male and female
sharing their concerns
AAP (NOTE:
and asking
C4D/RCCE
questions/clarifications to 52.000 4.270 8% N/A N/A
included in
address their needs
sectors)
through established
feedback mechanisms
Source: UNICEF Myanmar HAC 2021
Table 3: Myanmar HAC 2022 programme targets and achievements: December 2022
UNICEF and IPs Cluster response
SECTOR INDICATORS Total
Targets Total results % Targets %
results
# of children aged 6–59 Girls 2.544 7% 2.544 6%
months with SAM 37.503 39.477
admitted for treatment Boys 2.190 6% 2.190 6%
# of primary caregivers Women
69.785 19%
of children aged 0–23 (PLW)
291.068 65.2684 22% 363.835
months receiving ICYF
NUTRITION Men 5.804 2%
counselling
# of children aged 6–59 Girls 129.663 20%
months receiving
multiple micronutrient 529.215 2.965.9926 560% 661.519
powders and vitamin A Boys 127.816 19%
supplementation5
# of children 9–18
months vaccinated 760.000 15.279 2%
against measles
# of children and
women accessing
primary health care in 158.951 458.141 288%
HEALTH7
UNICEF-supported
facilities
# of pregnant women
receiving HIV testing
75.000 N/A N/A
and post-test
counselling8
4 The disaggregation of this data is not yet available.
5 UNICEF supported the nationwide vitamin A supplementation campaign reaching more than two million children aged 6-59 months.
6 Ibid.
7 Health data were updated and reflected based on the people reached during the reporting month. Partners reported the number of people reached
quarterly or bi-monthly based on the connectivity and data availability.
8 HIV testing and post-test counselling data are not available due to limitation of data accessibility.
18
UNICEF and IPs Cluster response
SECTOR INDICATORS Total
Targets Total results % Targets %
results
# of males and females
accessing a sufficient
quantity of safe water 434.468 427.717 98% 1.163.474 773.047 66%
for drinking, cooking
and personal hygiene
# of males and females
WATER,
using safe and
SANITATION 271.632 236.864 87% 701.921 440.855 63%
appropriate sanitation
AND
facilities
HYGIENE
# of people reached
PROMOTION
with handwashing
635.683 243.624 38% 548.070 520.577 95%
behaviour change
programmes
# of males and females
reached with critical 998.710 594.699 60% 1.317.325 980.972 74%
WASH supplies
# of children, Girls 86.135 28%
adolescent boys and girls
Boys 78.843 26%
and male and female
caregivers accessing Women 303.000 28.700 9% 348.000 253.096 73%
mental health
and psychosocial Men 13.003 4%
support
# of women, girls and Girls 9.301 7%
boys accessing gender-
based violence risk Boys 7.911 6%
mitigation, prevention Women
133.000
10.216 8%
150.000 39.6 92 26 %
and/ or response
interventions Men - 0%
# of people who have Girls 5.662 4%
access to a safe and
accessible channel to
CHILD report sexual Boys
148.000
5.193 4%
170.000 32.4 37 19 %
PROTEC- exploitation and abuse
TION by aid workers Women 12.153 8%
Men 6.844 5%
# of children who Girls 2.000 70% 122
r
m
ec
a
e
n
i
a
v
g
e
e
d
m
i
e
n
n
d
t
i vidual case 2.850 4.400 5.3 88
%
Boys 2.519 88%
# of children in areas
affected by landmines Girls 32.740 8%
and other explosive
weapons provided with 386.485 444.000 364 787 82%
relevant prevention
and/or survivor- Boys 30.172 8%
assistance interventions
Women 26.875 7%
Men 16.145 4%
# of children accessing
formal and non-formal
EDUCATION9 1.151.160 567.287 49% 1.326.250 527.79510 40%
education, including
early learning
9 Education Cluster results are reported quarterly. The Education Cluster checked the Q2 data for Yangon and Shan and the errors were corrected
in the Q3 report.
10 Ibid.
19
UNICEF and IPs Cluster response
SECTOR INDICATORS Total
Targets Total results % Targets %
results
# of children receiving
individual learning 1.078.000 159.911 15%
materials
# of children/
adolescents accessing
18.000 29.698 165%
skills development
programmes
# of households
reached with UNICEF
SOCIAL
funded multipurpose 90.000 8.809 10%
POLICY
humanitarian cash
transfers
AAP (NOTE: # of people with access
C4D/RCCE to established Women 16.000 53%
30.000
included in accountability
sectors) mechanisms Men 13.661 46%
Source: UNICEF Myanmar HAC 2022, Humanitarian Performance Monitoring (HPM) as of December 2022.
20
Annex 7. Workshop Agenda
Evaluation of UNICEF’s response to L2 emergency in Myanmar
Introduction
This workshop is designed to give participants a chance to review and discuss preliminary findings
and emerging conclusions (which may end up as recommendations in the report) in a plenary session
before breaking into small groups to assess the relevance and feasibility of the emerging conclusions
and provide participants with an opportunity to suggest actionable recommendations. Group work
will be followed by another plenary session where groups will present the results of their discussions.
Objectives:
• Review and validate provisional findings and emerging conclusions;
• Provide team members with perspectives from UNICEF and their partners on priorities, gaps
in the findings and how the outputs of this review can be made more useful to different
categories of key stakeholders; and
• Help ensure that the recommendations in the report, once the report is drafted, are relevant
and practical.
Agenda
Topic Format
Workshop open and introduction of participants Plenary
Introductory session:
Objective•s of the review
Plenary
Presentati•on of provisional findings and emerging conclusions
High-leve•l feedback and questions of clarification
Break
Instructions for the Working Groups. Participants will fill in the templates
provided to respond to the following questions:
Are the em1.erging conclusions relevant? Working
Are there 2an.y important emerging conclusions that appear to be missing that are of Groups
a higher priority than one of the existing ones?
Can you su3.ggest recommendations and operational guidance to make your suggested
recommendations relevant and achievable (realistic)?
Lunch Break
Working Groups (continued) WG
Report back from selected groups Plenary
Break
Report back from selected groups (continued) Plenary
Workshop close and participant evaluations Plenary
21
Annex 8. Key Reference Documents
The following list of documents were consulted to inform the drafting of the evaluation report. It is
presented by order of author (alphabetical) and then year (ascending). In addition to the list below, a range
of sitreps, emails, presentations, partner reports and other relevant documents were also consulted.
AVA (2020) Myanmar Conflict Analysis: Prepared for the UN Resident Coordinator’s Office.
Baker, J. & Salway, M. (2016) Development of a proposal for a methodology to cost inter-agency
humanitarian response plans. IASC.
Beck, T. (2006) Evaluating Humanitarian Action using the OECD-DAC Criteria. ALNAP.
DARA (2018) Evaluation of the Rapid Response to Population Movement (RRMP) Mechanism based on
Performance. UNICEF Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Government of Myanmar (2020) Myanmar 2019/20 Social Welfare Budget Brief, Ministry of Social
Welfare, Relief and Resettlement
Humanitarian Needs Overview – Myanmar 2022.
IASC (2022) Guidance on the Provision of Overheads to Local and National Partners.
IASC (2022) Peer-2-Peer Support Project Mission Report: Myanmar.
International Crisis Group (2022) Myanmar’s Coup Shakes Up Its Ethnic Conflicts.
International Labour Organisation (2022) ILO Brief: Employment in Myanmar in 2021: A rapid
assessment, January 2022
Myanmar Information Management Unit (2022) Climate, Environmental Degradation and Disaster Risk
in Myanmar: a MIMU Analytical Brief (May 2022).
Myanmar UNHCR displacement overview 05 Dec 2022
OCHA (2022) Humanitarian Needs Overview – Myanmar 2022.
OCHA Myanmar via the ReliefWeb dataset
OECD (2021), Applying Evaluation Criteria Thoughtfully, OECD Publishing, Paris,
https://doi.org/10.1787/543e84ed-en
Peersman, G. (2014) Evaluative Criteria. Methodological Briefs. Impact Evaluation No. 3. UNICEF.
Schenkenberg E., Wendt K., Thomas M., Ballarin F. and Stoianova V. (2022) The 'CLARE II' Evaluation
and the Review of the Global Education Cluster Co-Leadership. UNICEF.
Turner, R. Baker, J., Dr. Zaw Myo Oo, Naing Soe Aye (2008) Inter-Agency Real Time Evaluation of the.
Response to Cyclone Nargis. IASC.
UN News (2021). Security Council appeals for end to violence in Myanmar.
UNDP (2021) Impact of the twin crises on human welfare in Myanmar, November 2021
UNICEF (2014) Guidelines: Monitoring and Reporting Mechanism on Grave Violations against Children
in Situations of Armed Conflict.
UNICEF (2015) UNICEF Procedure for Ethical Standards in Research, Evaluation, Data Collection and
Analysis.
UNICEF (2019) Evaluation of the Coverage and Quality of the UNICEF Humanitarian Response in
Complex Humanitarian Emergencies.
UNICEF (2019) Guidance and Procedural Note on Managing Real-Time Evaluations Plus (RTE Plus).
UNICEF (2020) Core Commitments for Children in Humanitarian Action.
22
UNICEF (2020) Internal Audit of the Republic of the Union of Myanmar Country Office.
UNICEF (2020) Strengthening UNICEF’s Humanitarian Action. The Humanitarian Review: Findings
and Recommendations.
UNICEF (2022) Update of the Common Country Analysis: Information Request for UNICEF.
UNICEF Myanmar, Myanmar Humanitarian Situation Report #10 – 30 November 2022.
United Nations Myanmar (2022) Country Results Report 2021: UN in Myanmar. April 2022.
World Bank indicators (2022)
Myanmar Inter-Censal Survey (2019) https://www.dop.gov.mm/en/publication-category/2019-inter-
censal-survey
World Bank (2021) Myanmar Economic Monitor, July 2021.
https://pubdocs.worldbank.org/en/525471627057268984/Myanmar-Economic-Monitor-July-2021
World Bank indicators; 2019 Myanmar Inter-Censal Survey, https://www.dop.gov.mm/en/publication-
category/2019-inter-censal-survey
Myanmar 2019/20 Social Welfare Budget Brief, Ministry of Social Welfare, Relief and Resettlement
Climate, Environmental Degradation and Disaster Risk in Myanmar: a MIMU Analytical Brief (May
2022).
WHO Health Emergency Dashboard, accessed on 13/12/2022.
UNICEF Myanmar (2022), Myanmar Humanitarian Situation Report #10 – 30 November 2022.
UN News (2021). Security Council appeals for end to violence in Myanmar.
https://news.un.org/en/story/2021/11/1105642
URD and GPPI (2010) IASC Cluster Approach Evaluation, 2nd Phase: Myanmar country study.
23
Annex 9. Evaluation Matrix
The evaluation questions (EQ) and sub-questions in the matrix below are based on the ToR for this evaluation. A minor addition to the sub-questions was to better
reflect the importance of gender and advocacy. The sub-questions under Coordination were also expanded to better reflect the different levels of both internal and
external coordination. These changes were discussed and agreed by UNICEF during a presentation to the Reference Group.
Relevance (EQ 1)
The relevance questions examine to what extent the strategy and programme design transitioned to the changed situation by responding to needs of different
groups within affected communities while using UNICEF’s comparative advantage and ensuring the response was designed based on sound analysis and a
risk management strategy that mitigated challenges while allowing UNICEF to continue operating at an optimal level.
These relevance questions will require investigation into the relevance and appropriateness of UNICEF’s strategy and programme to mitigate challenges and
bottlenecks to meet the needs of the most vulnerable in a rapidly changing context.
The team proposes to address these questions through using the indicators, judgement criteria (JC) and data sources listed below.
Evaluation questions Indicators & JC Data sources
EQ 1. How relevant and appropriate was UNICEF’s response?
1.1. Taking the emergency context into consideration and within • Evidence of needs assessments (overall, sectoral, • UNICEF response plans
the parameters of UN engagement, to what extent did differentiated by group like gender, age, disability, and strategies
UNICEF’s response identify and respond to the immediate etc.) conducted and used. • UNICEF guidance and
needs of women, men, boys and girls of different ethnicities, standards that links to the
• Evidence of UNICEF reaching the most vulnerable
risk of exposure to violence, disability status, and CCC, Sphere, etc.
groups (e.g., communities in hard-to-reach areas;
geographical areas? • Needs assessments and
persons with disabilities; unaccompanied/separated
• To what extent were enablers identified and leveraged? analyses, including conflict
children; pregnant women etc.?).
• To what extent were bottlenecks identified and strategies analysis and relevant
to overcome them established? • Relevance of programme/project design for meeting guidance for staff.
assessed needs, including optimising UNICEF’s • KIIs with UNICEF staff
comparative advantage and approaches to overcome
bottlenecks.
24
Evaluation questions Indicators & JC Data sources
• KIIs with implementing
1.2. How were the humanitarian needs of the population • Evidence of extent to which communities’ views
partners and community
prioritized and addressed? are collected and used in planning and
members.
• The degree that the beneficiaries been involved in the adjustments; and populations involved in needs
• Monitoring and lessons-
identification of needs, the design and implementation of assessment, delivery, and management of
learned reports
the L2 emergency interventions. assistance.
• Survey results.
• How does the interventions align with UN framework
prevailing in Myanmar?
1.3. To what extent has the Country Office been able to respond • Evidence of analysis that led to timely
and adapt to changes in national needs, rights, and priorities adaptation of its approach in response to
or to shifts caused by the crisis and the major political changes in the operating environment.
changes?
• Extent of compliance with relevant guidance
• What was the quality of the response (including
and standards (CCCs, Sphere etc.).
appropriateness, - being in line with the needs of the most
vulnerable and marginalised)? • Use of policy, guidance and standards of
• To what extent have UNICEF’s programmes reflected UNICEF and partners.
applicable standards (CCCs, Sphere) and complying with
the relevant humanitarian action and human rights
principles?
25
Effectiveness (EQ 2)
These effectiveness questions assess UNICEF’s performance based on relevant guidelines and standards within the limitations imposed by the operating
environment. It will require investigation into the extent that UNICEF was able to meet its targets, including AAP, and how successful it was in mitigating
constraints. In the Myanmar context, this question will not only examine assistance delivery in each sector but also the effectiveness of analysis, advocacy
and communication undertaken by UNICEF. This question will also examine timeliness in the sense of whether actions and interventions took place at the
“right time”, which is different from the assessment of timeliness under efficiency, which measures how quickly the action occurred. This question also
examines the influence of the L2 declaration on UNICEF’s response.
The team proposes to address these questions through using the JCs, indicators, and data sources listed below.
Evaluation questions Indicators & JC Data sources
EQ 2. How effective was the UNICEF response?
• Extent of compliance with relevant guidance and • KIIs with UNICEF staff
2.1. To what extent has the UNICEF response met its program
standards (CCCs, Sphere etc.). • KIIs with implementing
targets as specified in the Humanitarian Action for Children?
• Appropriateness of targets versus needs over time partners
What could be done to accelerate response in future.?
broken down by areas and demographics. • UNICEF AAP guidelines,
• To what extent has UNICEF’s intervention contributed
• Evidence that different needs defined by different community engagement
to an enabling environment for the human rights of
groups (gender, age, disability, etc,) were met. strategies, SOPs and action
women and children?
• Evidence of adaptations based on changing needs. plans, complaints/feedback
• Was the ‘Do No Harm’-approach thoroughly followed or
• Qualitative assessment based on the CCC. systems and reports from
have UNICEF interventions put people at additional risk?
• Evidence of unintended outcomes/impacts UNICEF and IPs.
• To what extent was UNICEF’s delivery of services well-
(positive or negative). • HACs, UNICEF sector-
integrated and of high/acceptable quality as defined in the
specific strategies
CCC?
• HRP
• To what extent have the services and goods provided
• Monitoring reports, supply
been adequate, accepted and used by the affected
data, studies, evaluations,
population?
lessons learned.
• Consistency of design and implementation with
2.2. To what extent have principles of Accountability to Affected • Survey results.
UNICEF’s AAP benchmarks.
Population (AAP) including UNICEF guidance on AAP
• Qualitative assessment of performance of UNICEF
been followed?
and IP AAP systems.
26
Evaluation questions Indicators & JC Data sources
• To what extent has UNICEF engaged with affected
populations to collect their feedback on services and good
provided and to what extent has their feedback being
taking into consideration in adopting the response?
• Analysis of planned versus actual delivery timelines.
2.3. What are the major external and internal factors influencing
• Perceptions of partners and communities on
the achievement (or not) of Emergency Programme results?
assistance delivery.
What influence are these factors having on achievement (or
not) of Emergency Programme outcomes?
• Type of support and scale provided after the L2
2.4. What influence did the declaration of a L2 emergency have
declaration in terms of quantitative data and
on UNICEF’s response? What were the advantages and/or
qualitative perceptions.
disadvantages? Was the L2 emergency declared at the right
• Timeliness of decision-making based on analysis.
time?
• Extent to which disaggregated data was collected and
2.5. To what extent are human rights, equity concerns and gender
used.
equality consistently integrated in all aspects of emergency
• Application of gender and equity in strategies and
programming and implementation?
project implementation.
27
Coherence/ Connectedness (EQ 3)
The coherence/connectedness evaluation questions cover a variety of issues from preparedness to connectedness with the Nexus, all within the UNCT
Myanmar engagement guidelines which provides guidance for UNICEF and other UN agencies on engagement with the authorities. These questions will
involve investigation into how UNICEF has integrated preparedness and Nexus components into the design of their strategies, programme and projects
and how these have been implemented in practice, including capturing any examples of learning and good practice. Given the limitations on supporting
institutions at a national level, the team will mainly focus on assessing how prepared systems have been strengthened at a community level and within
CSOs.
The team proposes to address these questions through using the JCs, indicators, and data sources listed below.
Evaluation questions Indicators & JC Data sources
EQ 3. How coherent and connected has the UNICEF response been?
• Programme design and implementation contains • HACs
3.1. To what extent have the linkages between relief, recovery,
Nexus components. • UNICEF sector/cluster-
development, and peacebuilding (the triple nexus) been
• Evidence of capacities built, and systems specific strategies
integrated in the programming, planning of UNICEF’s
strengthened at a community level. • HRPs
response?
• KIIs with UNICEF staff,
• Evidence of how UNICEF’s preparedness
3.2. To what extent did the preparedness measures implemented staff from other UN
contributed to the response.
prior to the crisis facilitate UNICEF's emergency response? agencies, implementing
• Evidence of emergency response capacities built, and partners and cluster
3.3. To what extent have UNICEF’s activities contributed to
systems strengthened at a community level. members
strengthening Myanmar’s institutional emergency response
• Preparedness and response
capacity?
plans.
• Evidence of complementarity and support to the UN
3.4. How has UNICEF aligned with the overall framework of
engagement framework in Myanmar.
UN engagement in the country?
• Sharing of relevant lessons learned and guidance.
28
Efficiency (EQ 4)
These efficiency questions should allow the team to assess how quickly UNICEF was able to respond through a combination of quick response, the quality
of preparedness and use of innovative solutions. These questions should also provide insights into how quickly UNICEF has been able to transition
between development and emergency programming. It is noted that this question needs to not only take the financial and technical transition into
consideration, but also human resources, supply and other operational aspects into the assessment procedure.
The team proposes to address these questions through using the JCs, indicators, and data sources listed below.
Evaluation questions Indicators & JC Data sources
EQ 4. Was UNICEF’s response efficient?
• The timeliness of UNICEF’s response, including the • Emergency preparedness
4.1. How timely have UNICEF’s efforts to scale up the response
supply chain, based on organisational and sectoral plans and SOPs
capacity been?
benchmarks. • Strategies.
• The timeliness of expectations of UNICEF staff, IPs • KIIs with UNICEF staff
and affected communities. • KIIs with implementing
• Comparison of the efficiency of UNICEF’s response partners and other
compared to other humanitarian agencies. humanitarian agencies and
• Examples of how preparedness measures influenced donors.
4.2. To what extent the preparedness activities (including
the efficiency of the response. • Document review (SOPs,
supplies) have fed into the emergency response. What could
• Contributions of supply to preparedness guidelines, monitoring
have been improved and done differently?
reports, CCCs, supply
• Qualitative assessment of the relevance of the
4.3. Were there any innovative approaches that improved targets)
innovation to the stated problem or opportunity.
efficiency (conversion of UNICEF inputs into outputs for • Survey results
the population) and to what extent? • Project designs including
• Time taken for changes in programme and project innovative elements.
4.4. Is a transition from development programming &
design based on need.
Implementation to emergency programming &
implementation taking place?
29
Coordination (EQ 5)
These coordination evaluation questions will allow the team to explore three facets of coordination which will have influenced the role of UNICEF in this
response, internal coordination, UNICEF’s lead agency role for several clusters and Reference Groups/Strategic Advisory Groups and finally their
coordination role as a major humanitarian agency in the UNCT and more broadly the extent their positioning in the international humanitarian system
draws upon their comparative advantage.
The team will investigate these questions by assessing indicators relating to the of functioning of internal coordination, cluster capacities and the extent that
UNICEF was able to optimise their comparative advantage within the international humanitarian system. The questions reflect those in the ToR except that
the team has proposed adding a question to better understand how UNICEF is coordinating and positioning itself within the international humanitarian
system.
The team proposes to address these questions through using the JCs, indicators, and data sources listed below.
Evaluation questions Indicators & JC Data sources
EQ 5. How did UNICEF coordinate internally and externally?
• Chronology of cluster coordination capacities • KIIs with UNICEF staff,
5.1. Were UNICEF’s resources and staff sufficient to ensure that
(including information management). IPs, cluster members,
it could adequately perform its role as cluster lead/co-lead
• Evidence that adequate capacity was supplied to donors, other humanitarian
during emergency response?
support clusters and Reference Groups/Strategic agencies.
Advisory Groups it leads. • Document review (SOPs,
• Performance of cluster leads based on IASC and CCC guidelines, monitoring
5.2. To what extent did UNICEF cluster leads comply with the
benchmarks. reports, cluster/interagency
responsibilities defined in the IASC and CCC ToR for cluster
• Perception of UNICEF’s lead performance by strategies, monitoring
leads at the country level?
members. reports, lessons learned,
tools to support internal
• Influence of inter-unit coordination mechanisms.
5.3. How well was UNICEF able to coordinate multi sectorial
coordination).
• Coherence of different sectoral activities towards
responses? • Survey results
common objectives.
• Evidence of use of coordinating tools
5.4. To what extent did the internal coordinating tools and
• Influence of UNICEF tools on internal coordination.
mechanisms facilitate UNICEF’s emergency response?
30
Evaluation questions Indicators & JC Data sources
• The design and implementation of UNICEF’s strategy
5.5. How well did UNICEF coordinate with other humanitarian
reflects actions consistent with the organisation’s
actors? Did UNICEF’s position itself within the international
comparative advantage.
humanitarian system optimise its comparative advantage?
• UNICEF’s role and influence within the UNCT in
Myanmar.
• Assessment of UNICEF coordination role by other
humanitarian agencies.
Coverage (EQ 6)
These questions address the fundamental question of whether UNICEF was able to fulfil its humanitarian mandate by providing supporting to those most
in need regardless of gender, ethnicity, risk of conflict, age, socioeconomic, disability status or geographic location.
The team will address these questions by looking at how UNICEF and its partners disaggregated data and how they made decisions to prioritise and deliver
assistance based on need and vulnerability.
The team proposes to address these questions through using the JCs, indicators, and data sources listed below.
Evaluation questions Indicators & JC Data sources
EQ 6. What coverage did UNICEF achieve?
• Assessment and monitoring data are sufficiently • KIIs with UNICEF staff
6.1. To what extent did UNICEF assistance reach/was accessible
differentiated to distinguish different groups. • KIIs with implementing
to affected populations in different areas?
• UNICEF and partners periodically reviewed and partners
updated priorities based on assessment/monitoring • Document review (SOPs,
assessment and monitoring data and lessons guidelines, monitoring
learned. reports)
• Evidence that coverage was equitable and, if not, • Mapping of UNICEF
whether justification exists to explain why it was not interventions (geographical,
feasible. ethnicity, etc.)
31
Evaluation questions Indicators & JC Data sources
• Analysis focusing on
coverage and equity issue.
• Survey results
Protection (EQ 7)
These protection questions will allow the team to better understand how UNICEF has been able to provide protection to the affected population, more
generally but also specific to PSEA. The Monitoring and Reporting Mechanism (MRM) on children and armed conflict was developed to help UNICEF
country teams strategically engage with parties to a conflict to address grave violations against children and this issue needs to be examined in a context of
increased armed conflict. When addressing these questions, the team will review the quality and use of the systems themselves in addition to evidence of
outputs and outcomes.
The team proposes to address these questions through using the JCs, indicators, and data sources listed below.
Evaluation questions Indicators & JC Data sources
EQ 7. To what extent did UNICEF provide protection to the targeted community in line with its mandate?
• Evidence from monitoring and community feedback
7.1. To what extent did UNICEF assistance provide protection • KIIs with UNICEF staff
about protection issues for different groups within
to the target population (such as protection from armed • KIIs with implementing
communities (gender, age, disability, etc.)
elements operating within the project area, or providing partners
• Quality and use of protection monitoring and
security within a displaced persons/refugee camp)? • Document review (SOPs,
community feedback mechanisms.
policies, guidelines,
monitoring reports)
• UNICEF Myanmar MRM
• Extent to which MRM principles have been
7.2. To what extent where the MRM principles and obligations
database
integrated into design and implementation of
adhered to?
UNICEF projects
32
Evaluation questions Indicators & JC Data sources
• Evidence of application of MRM principles. • Survey results
Examples of good practice.
• To what extent were guidelines and principles
7.3. To what extent did UNICEF and implementing partners
relevant to PSEA and Child Safeguarding evident in
follow the PSEA guidelines, CP in Emergency and Child
the design, implementation, and monitoring of
Safeguarding principles?
UNICEF interventions.
• Quality and evidence of use of PSEA and child
safeguarding monitoring and community feedback
mechanisms.
33
Annex 10. People reached vs. targets as of December 2022
Table 4: Overview of the number of people reached by UNICEF as of December 2022
UNICEF and IPs
SECTOR INDICATORS
Targets Total results %
# of children aged 6–59 months with SAM Girls 2.544 7%
37.503
admitted for treatment Boys 2.190 6%
# of primary caregivers of children aged 0–23 Women (PLW) 22%
NUTRITION 291.068 65.26811
months receiving ICYF counselling Men
# of children aged 6–59 months receiving multiple Girls 560%
micronutrient powders and vitamin A 529.215 2.965.99213
supplementation12 Boys
# of children 9–18 months vaccinated against
760.000 15.279 2%
measles
# of children and women accessing primary health
HEALTH14 158.951 458.141 288%
care in UNICEF-supported facilities
# of pregnant women
75.000 N/A N/A
receiving HIV testing and post-test counselling15
# of males and females accessing a sufficient
WATER, SANITATION AND
quantity of safe water for drinking, cooking and 434.468 427.717 98%
HYGIENE PROMOTION
personal hygiene
11 The disaggregation of this data is not yet available.
12 UNICEF supported the nationwide vitamin A supplementation campaign reaching more than two million children aged 6-59 months.
13 Ibid.
14 Health data were updated and reflected based on the people reached during the reporting month. Partners reported the number of people reached quarterly or bi-monthly based on the connectivity and data availability.
15 HIV testing and post-test counselling data are not be available due to limitation of data accessibility.
34
# of males and females using safe and appropriate
271.632 236.864 87%
sanitation facilities
# of people reached with handwashing behaviour
635.683 243.624 38%
change programmes
# of males and females reached with critical
998.710 594.699 60%
WASH supplies
Girls 86.135 28%
# of children, adolescent boys and girls and male Boys 78.843 26%
and female caregivers accessing mental health and 303.000
psychosocial support Women 28.700 9%
Men 13.003 4%
Girls 9.301 7%
# of women, girls and boys accessing gender- Boys 7.911 6%
based violence risk mitigation, prevention and/or 133.000
response interventions Women 10.216 8%
Men - 0%
Girls 5.662 4%
# of people who have access to a safe and
CHILD PROTECTION accessible channel to report sexual exploitation 148.000
Boys 5.193 4%
and abuse by aid workers
Women 12.153 8%
Men 6.844 5%
# of children who received individual case Girls 2.000 70%
2.850
management
Boys 2.519 88%
# of children in areas affected by landmines and
other explosive weapons provided with relevant
Girls 386.485 32.740 8%
prevention and/or survivor- assistance
interventions
35
Boys 30.172 8%
Women 26.875 7%
Men 16.145 4%
# of children accessing formal and non-formal
1.151.160 567.287 49%
education, including early learning
EDUCATION # of children receiving individual learning
1.078.000 159.911 15%
materials
# of children/ adolescents accessing skills
18.000 29.698 165%
development programmes
# of households reached with UNICEF funded
SOCIAL POLICY 90.000 8.809 10%
multipurpose humanitarian cash transfers
AAP (NOTE: C4D/RCCE included # of people with access to established Women 16.000 53%
30.000
in sectors) accountability mechanisms
Men 13.661 46%
Source: UNICEF Myanmar HAC 2022, Humanitarian Performance Monitoring (HPM) as of December 2022.
36
Table 5 – Nutrition: achievement rate on total results by geographical areas
# of children aged 6–59 months
# of children aged 6– # of primary caregivers of
receiving multiple micronutrient Subtotal per
Geographical areas 59 months with SAM children aged 0–23 months %
powders and vitamin A area
admitted for treatment receiving ICYF counselling
supplementation
Ayeyarwady 445.306 43 7.778 453.127 15%
Bago 408.245 408.245 13%
Chin 9.155 1 4.895 14.051 0%
Kachin 80.678 12 12.703 93.393 3%
Kayah 4.193 58 525 4.776 0%
Kayin 79.600 30 6.098 85.728 3%
Magway 123.009 123.009 4%
Mandalay 223.671 223.671 7%
Mon 162.208 162.208 5%
Rakhine 511.173 4.313 24.549 540.035 18%
Sagaing 18.010 15 83 18.108 1%
Shan 336.398 19 1.129 337.546 11%
Tanintharyi 29.280 29.280 1%
Yangon 535.066 243 7.508 542.817 18%
Subtotal per indicator 2.965.992 4.734 65.268 3.035.994
Source: UNICEF Myanmar Humanitarian Performance Monitoring (HPM) database, as of December 2022.
37
Table 6 – WASH: achievement rate on total results by geographical areas
# of males and
# of males
females accessing a
and females
sufficient quantity # of males and females # of people reached with
reached with Subtotal per
Geographical areas of safe water for using safe and appropriate handwashing behaviour %
critical area
drinking, cooking sanitation facilities change programmes
WASH
and
supplies
personal hygiene
Ayeyarwady 0 0%
Bago (East) 5.058 200 5.113 5.058 15.429 1%
Bago (West) 0 0%
Kachin 56.735 64.211 20.828 24.192 165.966 11%
Kayah 75.647 41.111 9.769 88.521 215.048 14%
Kayin 50.890 29.713 59.907 76.074 216.584 14%
Mon 15.608 2.007 15.608 15.608 48.831 3%
Nay Pyi Taw 0 0%
Rakhine 69.370 55.200 39.019 235.864 399.453 27%
Shan (East) 0 0%
Shan (North) 17.736 14.215 12.426 36.631 81.008 5%
Shan (South) 1.734 6.375 3.480 11.609 23.198 2%
Tanintharyi 5.108 1.024 5.108 5.108 16.348 1%
Yangon 55.549 450 5.883 12.500 74.382 5%
Chin
71.255 19.991 64.157 81.208 236.611 16%
Sagaing
Magway
3.027 2.367 2.326 2.326 10.046 1%
Mandalay
Subtotal per indicator 427.717 236.864 243.624 594.699 1.502.904
Source: UNICEF Myanmar HPM database, as of December 2022.
38
Table 7 – Education: achievement rate on total results by geographical areas
# of children accessing formal # of children receiving
# of children / adolescents accessing Subtotal per
Geographic areas and non-formal education, individual learning %
skills development programmes area
including early learning materials
Chin 137.026 44.787 5.777 187.590 25%
Kachin 55.491 10.169 4.674 70.334 9%
Kayin 114.499 37.333 4.300 156.132 21%
Nay Pyi Taw 40.321 1.877 1.428 43.626 6%
Rakhine 78.742 33.508 7.150 119.400 16%
Shan 83.443 22.787 1.643 107.873 14%
Yangon 57.765 9.450 4.726 71.941 10%
Subtotal per indicator 567.287 159.911 29.698 756.896 100%
Source: UNICEF Myanmar HPM database, as of December 2022.
Table 8 – AAP: achievement rate on total results by geographical areas
Geographic areas # of people with access to established accountability mechanisms %
Chin 4.724 16%
Kachin 7.848 26%
Kayah 0 0%
Kayin 0 0%
Rakhine 17.069 58%
Shan 20 0%
Subtotal per indicator 29.661 100%
Source: UNICEF Myanmar HPM database, as of December 2022.
39
Table 9: Health: achievement rate on total results by geographical areas
# of children 9–18 # of children and women
Geographic areas months vaccinated accessing primary health care in Subtotal per area %
against measles UNICEF-supported facilities
Ayeyarwady 0 N/A 0 0%
Bago 0 589 589 0%
Chin 0 4.362 4.362 1%
Kachin 2.199 158.273 160.472 21%
Kayah 0 1.965 1.965 0%
Kayin 0 13.628 13.628 2%
Magway 0 N/A 0 0%
Mandalay 0 N/A 0 0%
Mon 0 1.966 1.966 0%
Rakhine 9.301 83.444 92.745 12%
Sagaing 0 48.233 48.233 6%
Shan 3.779 131.306 135.085 18%
Tanintharyi 0 765 765 0%
Yangon 0 13.610 13.610 2%
Subtotal per indicator 15.279 458.141 473.420
Source: UNICEF Myanmar HPM database, as of December 2022.
40
Annex 11.Project sample analysis overview
During the inception phase, 15 projects have been purposely selected by the team based on a database provided by the MCO listing their active and completed
programme documents (PDs), humanitarian programme document (HPDs), and small-scale funding agreements (SSFA). The database contained 96 projects covering
the period from January 2021 to July 2022. The sample was selected according to an analysis of the overall projects’ portfolio and defined jointly with UNICEF’s
review to ensure a reasonably representative cross-section of the UNICEF response. To balance the sample representativeness, the selection was made based on the
following five criteria:
a. Funding scale and sectoral distribution: the projects were selected based on the distribution of funding across UNICEF’s various response areas, i.e.,
Health, Nutrition, Child Protection, WASH, Education, and Social Policy and Child Rights Monitoring (SPCRM), being the main sectors of interventions.
Further, the sample included examples that illustrate how UNICEF has addressed Communication for Development (C4D), gender and multi-sectoral
interventions. Based on the database, the total budget allocated to the UNICEF during the scoping period for this evaluation was approximately USD 50
million (without counting staff salaries both from the Myanmar CO as well as the surge that has supported the response)
b. Geographical area, to represent diverse areas of intervention (urban/peri-urban vs rural, hard to reach areas16, etc.)
c. Temporal coverage, to cover different phases of the response (2021, 2022)
d. Partner diversity, to select diverse implementing partners (international NGOs, national NGOs, local CSOs)
e. Project status, to include both active and completed operations.
The 15 projects selected as a representative sample are listed in Table 9 below. Table 10 shows their performance where achievement rates were calculated as follows,
based on the number of targets attained by each project:
Met (>100%)
Good progress (>50%)
Limited progress (20-
49%)
Constrained <20%
No progress (0%)
16 See Error! Reference source not found. at Annex 7.
41
Table 10: Selected sample of projects
# UNICEF Locations Title Year Start End Partner Sector Total Budget
Office
1 Taunggyi Multiple17 Enhancing awareness on nutrition, MNCH, 2021 06/07/2022 05/04/2023 PARAMI C4D MMK
immunization related practices including DEVELOPMENT 362.419.000
prevention and mitigation of the impacts of NETWORK PDN
COVID-19 in remoted areas, self-administered
(National IP)
region and connected areas at (6) townships in
Southern Shan State.
2 Maungdaw Multiple18 Strengthening Child Protection Project (SCPP) 2021 01/09/2021 31/10/2022 COMMUNITY AND Child USD 1.222.118
FAMILY SERVICES protection
INTERNATIONAL
(International IP)
3 Yangon Multiple19 Children's equitable access to justice in Myanmar 2021 01/12/2021 30/11/2022 LEGAL CLINIC Child MMK
MYANMAR protection 765.536.000
(National IP)
4 Yangon Multiple20 Protection of Violation of the Right of the 2022 01/04/2022 30/09/2022 Nyein Chan Metta Child MMK 82.838.000
Children through Faith Network (Religions for Peace- protection
Myanmar)
(CBO)
5 Hpa-An Multiple21 Improved access to child protection, health & 2022 01/04/2022 30/09/2022 SUWANNIMIT Child MMK 85.750.000
nutrition emergency services for IDPs in conflict FOUNDATION Protection
affected areas in Kayin State, Mon State, Bago
(CBO)
(East) Region
17 Hopong, Hsihseng, Kalaw, Nyaungshwe, Pinlaung, Taunggyi
18 Rakhine, Maungdaw, Buthidaung, Maungdaw, Kyauktaw, Pauktaw, Ponnagyun, Rathedaung, Sittwe
19 Ayeyarwady, Kachin, Kayah, Kayin, Rakhine, Shan (North), Yangon
20 Kayah, Southern Shan and Kachin States
21 Taungoo, Hpapun, Kawkareik, Myawaddy, Thaton
42
# UNICEF Locations Title Year Start End Partner Sector Total Budget
Office
6 Naypyitaw Multiple22 Providing learning opportunities to children 2021 25/11/2021 30/06/2023 KARUNA MISSION Education MMK
SOCIAL SOLIDARITY 4176446677 +
KMSS 845248 USD
supplies
(National IP)
7 Yangon Multiple23 Capacity building to NGO partners on Non- 2021 22/07/2022 21/07/2023 MYANMAR LITERACY Education USD 230366 +
Formal Education_Bring Back Learning to RESOURCE CENTRE 4956 for supply
Children MLRC
(National IP)
8 Hpa-An, Multiple24 Bring Back Learning to Children Program 2022 22/06/2022 21/06/2023 WORLD VISION Education USD 845.379
Maungdaw INTERNATIONAL
(International IP)
9 Naypyitaw, Multiple25 Establishing eLMIS for Vaccine and Public 2021 15/02/2021 31/12/2022 CLINTON HEALTH MULTI- USD 1.622,448
Yangon Health Commodities ACCESS INITIATIVE SECTOR
INC
(International IP)
10 Yangon Multiple26 Improving access to Integrated Nutrition and 2021 10/06/2022 31/12/2022 MYANMAR HEALTH MULTI- MMK
Health services for IDPs, conflict-affected and ASSISTANTS SECTOR 1.840.932.723
hard-to-reach communities in Rakhine State ASSOCIATION MHAA
(National IP)
11 Hakha, Multiple27 Enhancing the capacity of First Aid responder 2021 01/01/2021 31/01/2022 KARUNA MISSION MULTI- MMK
Lashio, volunteers for effective and timely delivery of life SOCIAL SOLIDARITY SECTOR 2.462.491.786
22 Zalun, Labutta, Danubyu, Chin, Falam, Tedim, Tonzang, Hakha, Thantlang, Matupi, Kanpetlet, Mindat, Kachin, Taungdwingyi, Ann, Kale, Shwebo, Pekon, Pindaya
23 Chin, Kachin, Kayah, Kayin, Mon, Rakhine, Shan (South)
24 Hlaingbwe, Chauk, Aungmyaythazan, Buthidaung, Maungdaw, Taikkyi, Thanlyin
25 Ayeyarwady, Bago (East), Bago (West), Chin, Kachin, Kayah, Kayin, Magway, Mandalay, Mon, Nay Pyi Taw, Rakhine, Sagaing, Shan (East), Shan (North), Shan (South), Tanintharyi, Yangon
26 Mrauk-U, Kyauktaw, Minbya, Pauktaw, Rathedaung, Sittwe
27 Hinthada, Thantlang, Mindat, Demoso, Hpruso, Loikaw, Gangaw, Kale, Tachileik, Hsipaw, Kyaukme, Manton, Namtu, Hseni, Lashio, Kutkai, Muse, Mongnai, Kyethi, Laihka, Loilen, Nansang, Hopong, Hsihseng, Taunggyi
43
# UNICEF Locations Title Year Start End Partner Sector Total Budget
Office
Taunggyi saving interventions KMSS
(National IP)
12 Naypyitaw Hlaingtharya Humanitarian cash transfers for pregnant women 2021 10/06/2021 31/12/2021 TERRE DES HOMMES Social Policy USD 490.540
and mothers with children under 2 years in LAUSANNE and Child
Hlaing Thar Yar Township, Yangon Rights
(International IP)
Monitoring
13 Sittwe Kyaukpyu WASH Emergency Response to vulnerable 2021 11/12/2019 31/05/2021 COMMUNITY WASH MMK
population affected by conflict in Central DEVELOPMENT 260.439.540
Rakhine ASSOC
(CBO)
14 Hakha, Multiple28 Lifesaving WASH intervention program for IDP 2021 15/08/2021 15/05/2022 KARUNA MISSION WASH MMK
Taunggyi at three Townships in Kayah State and COVID- SOCIAL SOLIDARITY 1.057.347.550
19 Intervention Programme at six townships in KMSS
Chin state and Magway region
(National IP)
15 Yangon Hlaingtharya Emergency Drinking Water Distribution in 2021 01/10/2022 31/12/2022 WaterAid WASH USD 241.195
Hlaing Thar Yar Township, Yangon, Myanmar
(International IP)
28 Hakha, Thantlang, Matupi, Kanpetlet, Demoso, Hpruso, Loikaw, Gangaw, Pekon
44
Table 11: Project sample performance analysis
# Title Emergency Target <100% >50% 20- <20% Achieved/ % achieved/ Project TPM assessment
49% target) target progress
1 Enhancing awareness on Y 29 11 8 1 9 18 38% Limited TPM report: N/A.
nutrition, MNCH, progress
The project was characterized by
immunization related
good engagement with the
practices including
community participating to its
prevention and mitigation
awareness sessions, particularly
of the impacts of COVID-
regarding those on COVID-19,
19 in remoted areas, self-
nutrition and maternal and child
administered region and
health. Its implementation was
connected areas at (6)
challenged by cash withdrawal
townships in Southern Shan
issues with the bank; in fact, the
State.
first DCT cash withdraw was not
undertaken until mid-June.
2 Strengthening Child Y 18 2 5 11 0 16 11% Constrained TPM assessment on supplies
Protection Project (SCPP) distribution: Act. 1.2 somewhat
implemented; Act. 4.3 not
implemented at all.
During project's implementation,
gradual changes and instabilities
in the local socio-political and
administrative context led to
limitations of outdoor presence
and therefore, delayed
implementation of some project
activities; threats of COVID-19
infections resulted in restricted
movement and gathering in big
groups.
3 Children's equitable access Y 12 7 4 0 1 5 58% Good TPM report: N/A.
to justice in Myanmar progress
The project provided legal-aid
services to children, through
both awareness sessions on child-
rights violations and provision of
litigation services through Legal
Clinic Myanmar (LCM). LCM
45
# Title Emergency Target <100% >50% 20- <20% Achieved/ % achieved/ Project TPM assessment
49% target) target progress
found that, for political-related
cases, the court gave punishment
to the accused person without
having concrete evidence.
Moreover, they also noted that
there are signs that accused
children got tortured during
interrogation and detention.
4 Protection of Violation of Y 13 4 3 2 4 9 31% Limited TPM assessment on supplies
the Right of the Children progress distribution: Mostly
through Faith Network implemented.
The main challenges/bottlenecks
faced during project's
implementation were related to
unfamiliarity with the FACE
system; moreover, the IP Portal
responsible staff was not able to
attend the IP Portal training
initially conducted by UNICEF
as they were busy with other
work.
5 Improved access to child Y 19 5 2 2 10 14 26% Limited TPM report: N/A.
protection, health & progress
The project was focused on CP
nutrition emergency
services, including awareness
services for IDPs in conflict
sessions and distribution of CP
affected areas in Kayin
kits which was however limited
State, Mon State, Bago
by supply distribution issues.
(East) Region
6 Providing learning Y 19 4 6 3 6 15 21% Limited TPM assessment on supplies
opportunities to children progress distribution: Fully implemented.
Major challenges have been
identified in relation to political
conflict and COVID-19
pandemic, that have resulted in
some activities planning being
postponed and rescheduled.
46
# Title Emergency Target <100% >50% 20- <20% Achieved/ % achieved/ Project TPM assessment
49% target) target progress
Moreover, limited cash
withdrawal to spend for the
activities due to the unstable
political situation delayed the
implementation
7 Capacity building to NGO N 3 3 0 0 0 0 100% Targets met TPM report: N/A.
partners on Non-Formal
The project’s planned activities
Education; Bring Back
could be implemented despite
Learning to Children
the political crisis, financial risk
and travel restrictions were still
happening everywhere. The
activities included reading groups
and clubs for children, as well as
parental education workshops.
Some challenges were identified
in relation to COVID-19
pandemic third-wave, frequent
interruption of electricity and
slow internet connection which
slightly slowed the
implementation of training
activities.
8 Bring Back Learning to Y 4 4 0 0 0 0 100% Targets met TPM assessment on supplies
Children Program distribution: Fully implemented.
The project met all target
outputs, some challenges were
however identified: e.g.,
procurement process was delayed
due to the need of aligning the
sourcing available at the field
level with UNICEF
requirements.
9 Establishing eLMIS for N 12 0 0 0 0 12 0% No progress TPM report: N/A.
Vaccine and Public Health
The project was mainly affected
Commodities
by continued negotiation with
47
# Title Emergency Target <100% >50% 20- <20% Achieved/ % achieved/ Project TPM assessment
49% target) target progress
DoPH to get official approval for
vaccine and public health
commodities eLMIS system
development. The partner,
Clinton Health Access Initiative,
found that communications
channels could not be maintained
with both the programmatic level
and the central level of MoHS.
There were also delays in
preparing the data visualization
tools; there is ongoing discussion
with mSupply Foundation for
sharing sample data of mSupply
stores so that the visualization
tools and related modules can be
explored. The timely
implementation of the project
was affected by these issues along
with the much volatile and
uncertain situation.
10 Improving access to N 27 3 20 0 4 24 11% Constrained TPM assessment on supplies
Integrated Nutrition and distribution: Fully
Health services for IDPs, implemented/Mostly
conflict-affected and hard- implemented
to-reach communities in
The COVID-19 pandemic
Rakhine State
affected project's implementation
and the implementing team,
restricting the outreach
implementation and gathering of
people. Another main challenge
was constituted by difficulty in
travels, including travel approval
delays, the presence of
checkpoints and security issues in
project's implementation area.
11 Enhancing the capacity of Y 29 0 3 0 0 29 0% Constrained TPM report: N/A.
First Aid responder – No
48
# Title Emergency Target <100% >50% 20- <20% Achieved/ % achieved/ Project TPM assessment
49% target) target progress
volunteers for effective and progress The project is currently ongoing,
timely delivery of life saving overall progress is still to be
interventions monitored.
12 Humanitarian cash transfers N 17 12 5 0 0 5 71% Good TPM report: N/A.
for pregnant women and progress
The implementation of the
mothers with children
project started only in June 2021
under 2 years in Hlaing
due to the political context;
Thar Yar Township,
challenges were also observed
Yangon
with delayed cash transfers
transactions. The partner, TdH,
also found that transaction
delays, frequent changing of
phone numbers/SIM cards by
beneficiaries, damage to SIM
cards and accidental deletion of
SMSs from Wave Money due to
limited digital knowledge of
beneficiaries have affected
project's implementation.
13 WASH Emergency N 13 11 0 2 0 2 85% Good TPM assessment on supplies
Response to vulnerable progress distribution: Fully implemented.
population affected by
Due to COVID-19 pandemic
conflict in Central Rakhine
quarantine period, activities were
slightly slowed down. Moreover,
as of March 2021, most of the
activities were placed on hold
except health promotion and
maintenance of water supply
activities because CDA had not
received fund supply from
UNICEF.
14 Lifesaving IDP WASH Y 8 4 3 0 1 4 50% Good TPM report: N/A.
intervention program in progress
The project focused on the
three townships in Kayah
provision of essential WASH
State and COVID-19
services (construction of hand
Intervention Programme at
49
# Title Emergency Target <100% >50% 20- <20% Achieved/ % achieved/ Project TPM assessment
49% target) target progress
six townships in Chin state washing stands, latrines,
& Magway region distribution of hygiene kits, waste
bins and hand sanitizer, and
COVID-19 materials). Major
challenges identified by the
partner, KMSS, were movement
restrictions, restrictions on
transportation and restrictions on
humanitarian assistance.
Y 9 5 4 0 0 5 56% Good TPM report: N/A.
progress
Most targets achieved in July
2022, including the core activity
Emergency Drinking Water of the project that is distribution
15 Distribution in Hlaing Thar of safe drinking water. A
Yar Township, Yangon, monitoring tool for water
Myanmar distribution was also developed
along with the feasibility study of
pre-existing/new water supply
systems.
50
Annex 12. CCC29 Assessment Matrix
Qualitative assessments for each CCC Commitment and Benchmark are shown below based on an analysis of data source from community FGD, key informant
interviews, field observations and secondary data. Relevant Key Questions from the Evaluation Matrix area also shown. Scores are out of a maximum of 10.
2. PROGRAMME COMMITMENTS
2.1. Overarching commitments
COMMITTMENTS BENCHMARK NARRATIVE/FINDINGS EQ SCORE
Commitment 1: UNICEF, at CO/RO/HQ level, actively Internal coordination within the UNICEF CO was good, EQ.3 7
contributes to intersectoral coordination and with regular meetings and information sharing among the EQ.5
Support the leadership and coordination
ensures that sectors/clusters under its leadership Sections. CO also actively participated in the UNCT.
of humanitarian response, along with
are adequately staffed and skilled.
national and local stakeholders, and in Several integrated Sectoral HPDs were signed with partners
compliance with humanitarian in CP and Nutrition, Health, CP and Education. UNICEF
principles. CO Field Operations & Emergency Section has closely
coordinated with 7 FOs across Myanmar for oversight the
programme/ project implementation and monitoring.
UNICEF RO provided coordination, leadership, and
technical support to the UNICEF CO during the emergency,
including ensuring that UNICEF staff focused on the L2
response, supporting and monitoring a work plan for the L2
emergency and providing HR support. The work plan did
not include cluster leadership.
Although the L2 declaration was delayed, RO support was
relatively good. UNV support was not that effective based on
their lack of contextual knowledge.
29 Version 2022.
51
2.1.1. Preparedness
COMMITMENTS BENCHMARK NARRATIVE/FINDINGS EQ SCORE
Commitment 1: All COs, ROs and HQ meet the Minimum UNICEF CO provided the basic supplies. Before 2021 all EQ.3 6
Preparedness Standards (MPS) as per the Sections from the UNICEF CO has conducted a “Risk
Improve humanitarian response
UNICEF Procedure on Preparedness for Assessment” and prepositioned the stocks for the emergency
through investing in preparedness with
Emergency Response and the Guidance Note on supplies. Yangon CO and other areas procure as needed, after
a focus on enabling effective and timely
Preparedness for Emergency Response in the military takeover UNICEF used “Note for the Record”
response, reducing costs and reaching
UNICEF. and able to distribute some supplies to UNICEF none
the most vulnerable.
registered partners.
Emergency preparedness was mainly for natural disasters.
UNICEF CO did not consider the possibility of the military
takeover and did not make necessary preparations for
displacement, difficult access and imposition of restrictions on
visas and import permits.
2.1.2. Coordination
COMMITMENTS BENCHMARK NARRATIVE/FINDINGS EQ SCORE
Commitment 1: UNICEF, at CO/RO/HQ level, actively Internal coordination among the Sections at the UNICEF CO EQ.5 8
contributes to intersectoral coordination and was strong and adequate, having meetings and information
Support the leadership and
ensures that sectors/clusters under its leadership sharing among the Sections. Several integrated Sectoral HPDs
coordination of humanitarian response,
are adequately staffed and skilled. have signed, for example CP and Nutrition, Health, CP and
along with national and local
Education. UNICEF CO Field Operations & Emergency
stakeholders, and in compliance with
Section has closely coordinated with 7 FOs across Myanmar
humanitarian principles.
for oversight the programme/ project implementation and
monitoring.
UNICEF RO provided technical support to UNICEF CO
during emergency period such as assignment of UNV and
Cluster Coordinator. A useful example was the assignment of
permanent Education Cluster Officer in last 3 months, after
that NRC and ADRA (Myanmar staff) lead the Education
Cluster. Regarding the Health & nutrition RO practiced 2 ways
to support, they guided for life saving intervention and cross
52
COMMITMENTS BENCHMARK NARRATIVE/FINDINGS EQ SCORE
border support.
CO also received strategic support from UNCT. Although RO
supports were not excellent it was good, able to team up the
CO. UNV supports were not much effective based on their
lack of contextual knowledge and experiences in
communication with local people.
UNCIEF facilitated and shared the information among other
organizations and response was quick There were some
NGOs/INGOs/CSOs regularly attending the meetings.
Cluster coordination meetings were held bi-monthly since
monthly meeting.
UNICEF’s IPs received information about 4Ws such as who
did what, where and UNICEF shared this information to all.
UNICEF was able to understand where the gaps were and
avoid overlapping.
UNICEF allocated sufficient resources and technical support
team to coordinate at a national level, though at regional level
support was sporadic. For example, UNICEF allocated the
focal point for each township and conducted coordination
meetings. UNICEF coordinated with other humanitarian
agencies to not overlap the target villages and activities.
2.1.3. Supply and logistics
COMMITMENTS BENCHMARK NARRATIVE/FINDINGS EQ SCORE
Commitment 1: All COs, with the support of ROs/HQ, ensure Procurement was a key part of UNICEF’s response, but EQ.4 3
that life-saving supplies and essential household UNICEF faced significant challenges trying to procure
Ensure the timely delivery and
items are delivered to affected populations, supplies and deliver them to communities in need, notably in
distribution of supplies and essential
partners and/or point-of-use promptly. insecure areas. The supply chain was starting to recover after
household items to affected
restrictions imposed by COVID-19 pandemic. When the
populations, partners and/or point-of-
military takeover happened the borders with China were still
use.
closed. The scope for local procurement was reported to be
53
COMMITMENTS BENCHMARK NARRATIVE/FINDINGS EQ SCORE
very limited.
Before 2021 all Sections from the UNICEF CO conducted a
“Risk Assessment” and prepositioned the stocks for the
emergency supplies. Yangon CO and other areas procure as
needed, after the military takeover UNICEF used “Note for
the Record” and able to distribute some supplies to UNICEF
none registered partners.
After the military takeover UNICEF CO decided to use an
alternative approach with INGOs, NGOs, UNICEF’s
program team closely worked with NGOs to provide the
supplies. In the beginning UNICEF faced very restricted for
supply. In May 2021 the authorities began to tightly control
the import of medical supplies, late May 2021 Ministry of
Health (MOH) controlling import of all medical supplies, it
must cross the MOH, don’t endorse any supplies since May
2021. Together with UNHCR, WFP, OCHA and UNFPA,
UNICEF used the Common UN Approach for the 6
townships in the Southern Shan State, able to distribute in
Shan south, Pharkant (Kachin state). Common UN Approach
was useful but takes time (5 to 6 months).
Project staff buying and transporting non-food items such as
water pipe for the affected population area, collaborating with
local people to buy and transport such item was an excellent
conflict-sensitive approach. For example, carrying water pipe
becomes high-level risk because armed group also made
bombs with water pipe. This approach as mentioned above
reduces that risk.
In some project areas UNICEF supplies were delayed due to
transportation constraints.
54
2.1.4. Humanitarian access
COMMITMENTS BENCHMARK NARRATIVE/FINDINGS EQ SCORE
Commitment 1: All COs, with the support of ROs/HQ: Access was the most significant challenge faced by EQ.6 7
humanitarian agencies in Myanmar. Many inefficiencies were
Seek to establish and maintain • Establish internal coordination mechanisms
caused by the challenging operating environment including
humanitarian access, so that all affected which define roles, responsibilities,
access to affected populations, lack of import permits, visas for
populations can safely and consistently processes, and tasks related to humanitarian
international staff, movement permits for staff and security
reach assistance and services. access
restrictions imposed by the UN. UNICEF was nevertheless
• Identify and equip relevant staff with perceived as being able to scale up its response relatively rapidly
requisite knowledge, skills, materials, and in a difficult operating context.
tools on principled humanitarian action and
operating in complex and high threat UNICEF regularly participated in an interagency access
environments (including civil-military working group and trained staff in humanitarian access.
coordination, negotiations for access and UNICEF identified partners from the ground such as CBOs
humanitarian advocacy) and CSOs who were able to better access affected
communities, including the communities in the hard-to-reach
• Seek engagement with all parties to conflict,
areas and remote areas, such as Mone Koe township in Shan
and other stakeholders, as necessary and
North, newly affected areas such as Sagaing and Magwe
feasible to earn and maintain access to and
Regions.
for the populations in need
• Proactively pursue acceptance among Based on the capacities and working experiences, some
communities and stakeholders UNICEF FO staff were not ready to make decisions on the
• Engage in coordination mechanisms to ground.
establish and maintain principled
On the other hand, UNICEF established strong coordination
humanitarian access, in collaboration with
mechanisms with other UN Agencies, NGOs, INGOs, CSOs
UN Agencies, national and local authorities
within existing coordination mechanisms such as the HCT,
and CSOs, within existing coordination
UNCT, SMT and the cluster/ sector coordination
mechanisms such as the Humanitarian
mechanisms.
Country Team (HCT), the United Nations
Country Team (UNCT), the Security
Management Team (SMT), and the
cluster/sector coordination mechanisms.
55
2.1.5. Protection from Sexual Exploitation and Abuse (PSEA)
COMMITMENTS BENCHMARK NARRATIVE/FINDINGS EQ SCORE
• Every child and adult in humanitarian
Commitment 1: UNICEF implemented PSEA for the affected communities, EQ.7 7
contexts have access to safe, child- and
providing awareness raising in host and camp communities, to
Deliver on UNICEF’s commitment to gender-sensitive reporting channel(s) to inform them about the reporting channels, linking Case
protection from sexual exploitation and
report SEA Management to the PSEA and GBV and encouraged partners
abuse.
• Every survivor is promptly referred for to develop a PSEA Policy if they did not already have one.
assistance in line with their needs and wishes
All IPs’ staff and community volunteers were informed with
(such as medical care, mental health and
safeguarding policy and all involved actors were made aware of
psychosocial support, legal assistance, such PSEA through given awareness. All staff and volunteers
reintegration support), as part of UNICEF’s also signed compliance policy for PSEA. Some UNICEF IPs
gender‑based violence (GBV) and child assigned PSEA focal, for example, UNICEF’s partner KMSS
protection programmes assigned two focal persons for PSEA.
• The prompt, safe and respectful Some UNICEF’s partners had their own PSEA policies and
investigation of SEA cases, is consistent with reporting channels and train their staff and community
the wishes and best interest of every volunteers.
survivor.
UNICEF assigned focal points and joined PSEA Coordination
Meeting and Maungdaw Interagency Group. The introduction
of a mobile application course on the prevention of sexual
exploitation and abuse to CP AoR partners has increased
reporting on PSEA. Taking part in the inter-cluster
coordination group led by OCHA, UNICEF facilitated the in-
country inter agency PSEA network with the United Nations
Population Fund (UNFPA).
2.1.6. Accountability to affected populations (AAP)
COMMITMENTS BENCHMARK NARRATIVE/FINDINGS EQ SCORE
Commitment 1: All COs, with the support of ROs/HQ, establish Affected communities did not participate in the development EQ.2 6
processes to ensure that affected and at-risk of supply distribution plans, but they did participate in
Ensure that affected children and
populations, including children and women: distribution of supplies by community volunteers.
families participate in the decisions
that affect their lives, are properly UNICEF put in place an Accountability to Affected
56
COMMITMENTS BENCHMARK NARRATIVE/FINDINGS EQ SCORE
informed and consulted, and have • Participate in humanitarian planning processes Populations (AAP) framework covering WASH, Health and
their views acted upon. and in decisions that affect their lives Nutrition, Child Protection, Education, and Social Policy,
starting with partners in Rakhine State. Building partner
• Are informed about their rights and
capacity in collecting communities’ feedback was a key
entitlements, expected standards of conduct by
component of the AAP framework. Ongoing technical support
UNICEF personnel, available services, and
and capacity building will be provided to partners by UNICEF,
how to access them through their preferred
where there was an identified need. Working with other
language and methods of communication, as implementing partners, UNICEF will work to implement the
per the Sphere standards AAP framework in other states and regions.30
• Have their feedback systematically collected
In some areas partners did not put complaint box due to
and used to inform programme design and
security issues. Some local communities were not familiar with
course correction.
using a complaint box. Partners shared the contact information
• Have access to safe and confidential complaint where and who they can call and inform about their further
mechanisms. needs, and complaints. There was a struggle to get AAP
functioning well.
As part of COVID-19 prevention, UNICEF has collaborated
with the WHO to continuously monitor people’s reactions and
responses to COVID-19 information and vaccination on social
media, using the data analysis tool. Findings were shared in the
risk communication and community engagement working
group to develop myth-busting infographics and music
videos.31
Due to the security situation in Myanmar throughout 2021,
many partners did not have regular access to project locations,
thus having less capacity to seek feedback and inputs from
beneficiaries. To address these challenges, the C4D team
worked to develop AAP indicators to be included in all new
programme documents, which will allow data and information
to be collected from partners’ reports. The data collection for
30 Sitrep: No.2 2021
31 Sitrep No.4 2021
57
COMMITMENTS BENCHMARK NARRATIVE/FINDINGS EQ SCORE
AAP takes place on a quarterly basis and 4,270 pieces of
feedback were recorded throughout 2021 across Kachin,
Rakhine, Chin and Shan states and then analysed and shared to
the respective programmes for follow-up.32 A regular data
collection process on AAP was continuing in Kachin, Chin and
Rakhine States with the support of UNICEF field offices.
A training module on AAP was developed in English and
Myanmar. Training contents include basic concepts and
principles of AAP, integration of AAP in the ways it works and
AAP in action. HPDs also include AAP indicators such as
number of complaints, established feedback mechanisms, and
number of people having access to the established
mechanisms. AAP training was provided to some partners
initially such as MAM staff in Khamti, Sagaing region, PDN
staff in Taunggyi Shan State.
The AAP dashboard was updated in the third quarter of 2022
with partners’ contributions. The analysis and findings from
the feedback received from the communities were compiled
and will be shared with the AAP task force members to
determine the use of the feedback within their respective
sections and field offices.33
32 Sitrep No.4 2021
33 Sitrep No.10 2022
58
2.2. PROGRAMME APPROACHES
2.2.1. Quality of programmes
COMMITMENTS BENCHMARK NARRATIVE/FINDINGS EQ SCORE
Commitment 1: All COs, with the support of ROs/HQ, design and UNICEF's humanitarian strategy in Myanmar was aligned EQ.4 7
implement results-based humanitarian responses with the Humanitarian Needs Overview, the Humanitarian
Design and implement high quality
that are informed by humanitarian principles and Response Plan, and Clusters and programme priorities. In
programming.
human rights, meet global norms and standards, and response to the political crisis and its impact, four clusters
contribute to strengthening local capacity and were activated on 21 August 2021, namely Nutrition, Food
systems. Security, Education and Protection. UNICEF was leading
three clusters and one Area of Responsibility (AoR).
UNICEF leads the Nutrition and WASH Cluster, while co-
leading both the Education Cluster and the Child Protection
AoR with Save the Children. UNICEF continues to work in
coordination with the Myanmar Humanitarian Country
Team, while collaborating with UN agencies and INGOs to
efficiently coordinate and deliver life-saving services. In
addition to taking part in the Inter-Cluster Coordination
Group led by OCHA, UNICEF facilitated the in-country
interagency PSEA network with UNFPA and was an active
participant in the Access Working Group. Through nine
offices across Myanmar, UNICEF ensures monitoring of its
programme implementation and coordinates its activities in
Yangoon and Nay Pyi Taw, Lashio and Taunggyi in Shan,
Sittwe and Maungdaw in Rakhine, Myitkyina in Kachin,
Hakha in Chin and Hpaan in Kayin.34
An AAP mapping exercise was initiated for each UNICEF
programme section and the information collected will inform
the plan for mainstreaming AAP and providing
contextualized support. A technical working group for the
accountability and quality assurance initiative will be
34 Sitrep No.9 2021
59
COMMITMENTS BENCHMARK NARRATIVE/FINDINGS EQ SCORE
established at national level, with the aim of providing the
information and protocols to allow national WASH partners
to manage the response in a way that maximized quality and
accountability in real time. A self-paced AAP training was
designed and developed by the national AAP working group.
The modules were created in Burmese and work was being
done on the digital course planning. UNICEF provided
support in reviewing and testing the digital course plan and
the recording of audio files.35
2.2.2. Multisectoral and integrated programming
COMMITMENTS BENCHMARK NARRATIVE/FINDINGS EQ SCORE
Commitment 1: All COs promote multisectoral and integrated UNICEF CO promoted integrated programming during the EQ.6 8
programming, as well as geographic convergence, L2 emergency period. Multisectoral projects have been
Foster multisectoral/integrated
when designing and implementing programmes implementing such as Child Protection (CP) and Nutrition,
programming and geographic
and partnerships. Child Protection and Health, Humanitarian Cash Grant with
convergence at all phases of the
CP. UNICEF CO ensured to integrate protection components
programme cycle.
in each sector. For example, Explosive Ordnance Risk
Education, PSEA, MHPSS, GBV was integrated across all
relevant sectors of its humanitarian response.
UNICEF extended the geographic coverage during the L2
emergency response to newly affected areas of Saging, Gangaw
and Saw townships of Magway.
2.2.3. Equity
35 Sitrep No.4 2022
60
COMMITMENTS BENCHMARK NARRATIVE/FINDINGS EQ SCORE
Commitment 1: All COs develop context-specific approaches for UNICEF gave priority to vulnerable groups including child EQ.1 8
reaching the most vulnerable groups and balance headed households, women headed households, households
Target and reach the most
coverage, quality and equity in their humanitarian with many children, households with person of disability,
disadvantaged children and their
response planning. household with old age people. Assistance was provided
communities with humanitarian
according to the household list, ensuring no one was left
assistance, protection and services.
behind. In this regard, UNICEF collaborated with the
Committee of the Camp Coordination and Management
(CCCM) for the IDP camps and village/ward administrators
for the host communities in identifying the most vulnerable
groups enable to access the humanitarian assistances. UNICEF
respects rights of people, no discrimination and open to
participate and speak out. Affected population received the
assistance according to the list, identified by UNICEF’s
partner.
UNICEF gave priority to IDPs since they were crisis affected
persons who just moved to the IDP camps, considering the
vulnerabilities such as how extant their needs and gaps, how
the other organizations have provided assistance, and whether
they were vulnerable compared to other camps. They also
considered most disadvantage children and their communities
when hygiene kits were distributed, giving prior to the women
headed households, houses with persons of the disabilities,
houses with many children. They discussed with the village
volunteers, checked the data provided by the local
communities.
Some partners practised their own Equity and Equality
principle, which UNICEF considered before signing contracts
to assess their ability to apply principles like gender, Child Safe
Guiding policy and recruitment.
61
2.2.4. Linking humanitarian and development
COMMITMENTS BENCHMARK NARRATIVE/FINDINGS EQ SCORE
Commitment 1: All COs, with the support of ROs/HQ, design and UNICEF designed the programme from short term emergency EQ.3 6
implement risk-informed and conflict-sensitive humanitarian assistance towards the long-term development
Foster coherence and
humanitarian programmes that build and and peace, UNICEF sectoral projects of health, education,
complementarity between
strengthen national and local capacities and child protection and WASH designed for longer term NEXUS
humanitarian and development
systems from the start of humanitarian action to approach.
programming.
reduce needs, vulnerabilities of and risks to
One example of this was after parents were exposed to CP
affected populations; and contribute to social
awareness, they were observed to reduce their physical
cohesion and peace, where relevant and feasible.
punishments to their children. Along with the Education
intervention, children enhanced their knowledge by learning
aids in the Open Learning Centre and other alternative forms
of learning while government schools were closed. There was
no specific social cohesion and peace enhancement
information.
2.2.5. Environmental sustainability and climate change
Not applicable in this emergency.
COMMITMENTS BENCHMARK NARRATIVE/FINDINGS EQ SCORE
Commitment 1: All COs, with the support of ROs/HQ, design No specific information related to environmental sustainability N/A
humanitarian programmes that integrate and climate change was apparent.
Incorporate environmental
environmental and climate risk, prioritise
sustainability into the design and
approaches that minimize harm to the
delivery of UNICEF’s humanitarian
environment and contribute to building resilience,
action and strengthen
whenever relevant and feasible.
communities’ resilience to climate
change.
62
2.2.6. Localisation
COMMITMENTS BENCHMARK NARRATIVE/FINDINGS EQ SCORE
Commitment 1: All COs, with the support of ROs/HQ, invest in Since the military takeover, CO shifted their programme EQ.3 8
strengthening institutional and technical capacity towards the purely humanitarian response and shifted its
Invest in strengthening the capacities
of local actors to deliver principled humanitarian modality to localization, identified CBOs and CSOs across
of local actors (national and local
response. Myanmar for humanitarian access. UNICEF enhanced the
authorities, CSOs and communities)
capacities of CBOs/ CSOs in line with its system, principles,
in humanitarian action.
and guidelines.
UNICEF gained new partnership with local CSOs/ CBOs,
build their capacities as most of them have low capacities,
CSOs accessed in-person training in some locations and when
in-person training cannot provide UNICEF mix in-person and
online training, for example, UNICEF provided a ToT to
Suwannimit Foundation (SNF) and they provided the in-
person training to their IPs.
2.2.7. Community engagement for behaviour & social change
COMMITMENTS BENCHMARK NARRATIVE/FINDINGS EQ SCORE
Commitment 1: All COs, with the support of ROs/HQ, design and UNICEF L2 Emergency response mainly focused to link with EQ.3 6
implement humanitarian programmes with a long term project. While communities have tension and stress
Implement community engagement
planned and resourced component on community on sudden COVID pandemic and political changes, they put
for behaviour and social change in
engagement for behaviour and social change. their anxieties on their children with abusive punishment.
collaboration with national and local
Awareness raising sessions on Child Rights, Child Protection,
actors.
GBV, MHPSS, and PSEA reduced the stress of affected
communities, changed their behaviours of violence and abuse.
Parents seemed to reduce harsh physical punishments to their
children after accessing the CP awareness.
In addition, UNICEF WASH intervention changed the
communities' attitudes in terms of hygiene and sanitation
practice, a hand-washing behaviour-change programme has
reached 185,700 people (61,300 children).
Seven separate COVID-19 prevention messages were
63
COMMITMENTS BENCHMARK NARRATIVE/FINDINGS EQ SCORE
translated into 16 ethnic languages, with a total of 564,800
posters printed and distributed in Kachin, Shan, Kayin and
Chin states through implementing partners. These reached
more than 4.5 million people. UNICEF also translated 11
separate messages promoting vaccination against COVID-19,
into 22 ethnic versions. It also translated a home-care
animation video into 18 ethnic versions which were shared
with WHO, UNOPS and risk communication and community
engagement partners including ethnic health organizations.
In addition, with partners’ support, the social behaviour change
communications (SBCC) activities were carried out at
community level to increase awareness of COVID-19
prevention and promotion of COVID-19 vaccination in
Special Region (2) in Wa Region and Special Region (4) in east
Shan State, and reached nearly 50,000 people. A similar project
was being carried out in partnership with the Parami
Development Network (PDN) in six townships of southern
Shan State. It aims to reach more than 40,000 people through
SBCC intervention, with community mobilization activities to
promote awareness of, and good practices on, MNCH,
nutrition, Expanded Programme on Immunization, COVID-
19 prevention and the promotion of vaccination.36
UNICEF continued to provide cash transfer support to 7,000
programme participants (2,171 girls, 2,387 boys, 802 children
with disability, and 1,640 pregnant women). A total of 1,168
social and behaviour change communication (SBCC) sessions
were provided for pregnant women and caregivers. As
community outreach activities were prioritized for SBCC
sessions, more than 91 per cent of the sessions were conducted
with home visits, with the rest conducted by tele messaging.
The programme has been implemented with partners, civil
36 Sitrep No.1 2022
64
COMMITMENTS BENCHMARK NARRATIVE/FINDINGS EQ SCORE
society organizations and non-governmental organizations as
part of the humanitarian and development nexus. Therefore,
the programme will continue to focus on strengthening
community structures and documenting good practices.37
2.2.8. Humanitarian cash transfers
COMMITMENTS BENCHMARK NARRATIVE/FINDINGS EQ SCORE
Commitment 1: All COs, with the support of ROs/HQ, promote UNICEF Social Policy and Child Rights Monitoring (SPCRM) EQ.2 8
the use of unconditional and unrestricted Section worked with the International NGO Terres des
Promote unconditional and
humanitarian cash transfers, whenever relevant Hommes (Tdh) to implement the social protection assistance
unrestricted humanitarian cash
and feasible. such as Maternal and Child Cash Transfer (MCCT) project in
transfers.
2021 and 2022. This was a follow-on project from the
Humanitarian Cash Transfer (HCT) project. Cash assistant of
40,000 kyat per month was provided to pregnant women and
under 2 years children in Peri Urban area of Yangon such as
Hlaingtharya, Shwepyithar, Dago Myothit (North) and North
Okkalapa.
UNICEF continued to provide cash transfer support to 7,000
programme participants (2,171 girls, 2,387 boys, 802 children
with disability, and 1,640 pregnant women).38
37 Sitrep No.11 2022
38 Sitrep No.11 2022
65
2.3. SECTORAL COMMITMENTS
2.3.1. Needs assessments, planning, monitoring and evaluation
STRATEGIC RESULT: Children and their communities benefit from appropriate and timely humanitarian action through needs-based planning and results-based
management of programmes.
COMMITMENTS BENCHMARK NARRATIVE/FINDINGS EQ SCORE
Commitment 1: Disaggregated data (by age, gender, disability, UNICEF CO conducted phone surveys, collecting data for EQ.2 7
location and other context‑specific humanitarian assessment. First round will be available in
Equity-focused data
considerations) is collected, analysed and December 2022. Panel survey, interviewing 6,400 households 6
Disaggregated data is collected, disseminated in all assessment, planning, times until end of 2023.
analysed and disseminated to monitoring and evaluation activities.
understand and address the diverse
needs, risks and vulnerabilities of
children and their communities.
• Needs assessments and analysis are,
Commitment 2: UNICEF conducted needs assessments prior to provide EQ.1 8
whenever possible, conducted as joint
humanitarian assistance to the affected communities. They had
Needs assessment interagency exercises, and start within 72 several meetings with their IPs in terms of partners’ Needs
Coordinated, timely and impartial hours of a sudden onset crisis, and at least Assessment and further suggestions to identify needs of affected
assessments of the situation, annually for protracted humanitarian communities for further humanitarian assistance. In addition,
humanitarian assistance and situations UNICEF conducted “Disability Assessment”, ensuring for
protection needs, vulnerabilities and • Needs assessments and analysis are child- disability inclusion in all humanitarian assistances.
risks are undertaken and gender-sensitive, meet interagency
standards and use pre-crisis data and
feedback from affected populations
• Planning is informed by evidence, including
Commitment 3: UNICEF CO closely coordinated with FOs to support the EQ.4 6
needs assessments, vulnerability analysis, pre-
affected populations, CO received the monthly reports from the
Response planning crisis data, learning from FOs, developed the priority list, vulnerable persons were first
Response plans are evidence‑based evaluations/reviews, partner dialogue and priority and new vulnerable people who fled from fighting, who
and consistent with interagency feedback from affected populations houses have burned were given second priority.
planning. They address coverage, • Indicators and targets are identified,
quality and equity, adapt to evolving including high frequency indicators •
needs, ensure conflict sensitivity and Ongoing needs assessment and monitoring
link humanitarian and development
66
COMMITMENTS BENCHMARK NARRATIVE/FINDINGS EQ SCORE
programming plans are in place and reviewed twice a year,
addressing coverage, quality, equity and “do
no harm”
• Humanitarian and development
programming are linked through
preparedness, system strengthening,
resilience and transition planning
• Progress against targets is regularly reported,
Commitment 4: UNICEF set up a reporting mechanism for the monitoring EQ.2 6
including through high frequency indicators
purpose. CO received Annual and Quarterly report from each
Monitoring EQ.6
• Structured field monitoring, including FOs and IPs.
The humanitarian situation and the partner dialogue and feedback from affected
CO staff conducted Joint Monitoring with Field staff on project
coverage, quality and equity of the populations, is undertaken in line with the
implementation including to get feedback from affected
humanitarian response are monitored UNICEF Field Monitoring Guidance
communities. FOs also carried out the regular and ad-hoc field
to inform ongoing corrective action
monitoring visits, sometimes joint inter-agencies visits. UNICEF
and future planning processes.
commissioned to Mekong Economics to conduct the Third
Party Monitoring (TPM) to some projects in Rakhine, Kachin
Kayin State, Shan (South & North) and Chin State.
UNICEF partners noted they did not receive any feedback from
TPM on their findings. End-users monitoring was limited due to
security constraints, only receive their reports, most supplies
were distributed to the IDPs, TPM cannot go to the IDP camps
as they need permission to the DFA. UNICEF could only do 3
times of un-officially distribution and received the permission for
the selected areas.
• Evaluations of humanitarian responses are
Commitment 5: UNICEF commissioned an evaluation of their L2 Emergency EQ.1 7
used for organizational learning,
Response covering the period from Feb 2021 – Dec 2022
Evaluation accountability and performance Military takeover and the evaluation process was on-going. The EQ.2
UNICEF’s contribution to improvements to enhance the systems, main purpose of the L2 Evaluation was to promote learning
humanitarian action is systematically policies and programmes of UNICEF and its from the response and adopt a more integrated strategy, blending
and independently assessed through partners the strengths of MCO programmes being implemented during
credible and utilisation focused • Evaluative exercises, such as after-action the emergency while taking into consideration the preparedness
evaluations, interagency evaluations reviews, lessons learned exercises and and response capacity of the MCO. The evaluation will also
and other evaluative exercises, in line focus on providing a preliminary assessment of UNICEF’s
operational peer reviews, are undertaken
67
COMMITMENTS BENCHMARK NARRATIVE/FINDINGS EQ SCORE
with the UNICEF evaluation policy early for rapid onset emergencies, or response to the Myanmar crisis regarding its relevance,
and procedures. incorporated into regular strategic planning effectiveness, efficiency, coverage, coherence, coordination, and
for protracted responses, to inform protection, with a specific focus on its adaptivity to changing
corrective action conditions and how it has responded to humanitarian needs
within the framework of the Core Commitments for Children in
Humanitarian Action whilst re-engaging on socio-economic
resilience and recovery simultaneously.
2.3.2. Health
STRATEGIC RESULT: Children, adolescents and women have access to life-saving, high-impact and quality health services.
COMMITMENTS BENCHMARK NARRATIVE/FINDINGS EQ SCORE
Commitment 1: UNICEF actively contributes to the interagency UNICEF Health sector can change from development program EQ.5 6
and intersectoral coordination mechanisms. to the emergency response despite of facing several challenges in
Leadership and coordination
importing medicines. UNICEF Health intervention was
Effective leadership and integrated with other sectors such as Nutrition, WASH and
coordination are established and Education. UNICEF led the Health & Nutrition Cluster in many
functional. emergency areas.
Activities in non-government-controlled areas in Kachin and
Northern Shan have been carried out with limited-service
interruptions due to armed conflicts and COVID-19 and security
travel restrictions. A biannual Vitamin A supplementation
campaign scheduled in February 2021 has been postponed due
to instability and protests in country.39
• At least 90% of pregnant women and
Commitment 2: In Kayah, UNICEF and its implementing partners have EQ.2 6
adolescent girls receive scheduled antenatal
delivered 81 community health worker kits, 4 primary health care
Maternal and neonatal health care36 (ANC) in line with coverage of 4+ facility newborn kits and essential newborn resuscitation EQ.6
Women, adolescent girls and ANC visits equipment to support the health services in the area. These
39 Sitrep No.2 2021
68
COMMITMENTS BENCHMARK NARRATIVE/FINDINGS EQ SCORE
newborns safely and equitably • At least 90% of pregnant women and supplies were also planned to be distributed to the conflict-
access quality life-saving and high- adolescent girls receive skilled attendance at affected area of Kayin to support ethnic health organizations
impact maternal and neonatal health (EHO) and health care providers with much-needed health
birth including essential newborn care, with
services. services.40
desired quality
• At least 80% of mothers and newborns receive
early routine postnatal care within two days
following birth
• At least 80% of small and sick newborns have
access to inpatient level 239 special newborn
care within two hours of travel time.
• At least 80% of the targeted children and
Commitment 3: Health & Nutrition Section previously worked with Ministry of EQ.2 4
women receive routine vaccinations, including
Health (MoH) for immunization, nutrition, maternal and
Immunization in hard-to-reach areas childcare, it has changed to immunization to the Ethnic health EQ.6
Children and women receive routine • At least 95% of the targeted population are organization (EHO) areas. UNICEF developed 2 border areas
and supplemental vaccinations. reached during vaccination campaigns cold chain but cannot conducted direct contact to EHO but
conducted to reduce risk of epidemic-prone KNU. Another modality was UNICEF contacted with UNOPS
outbreaks and provide the cold chain system to other areas, established
more than 17 cold chain sides.
• Children and adolescents have safe and
uninterrupted access to health services through UNICEF could not extend the COVID19 vaccination campaign
functional health facilities, school and in EHO areas due to restrictions. Due to transportation
community-based activities and at the challenge for medicines, activities were delayed, and UNICEF
household level covered only a small portion of these areas. There was limitation
in communication due to using online platform, limitation in the
• Children and adolescents receive quality, age-
field level, supplies come from Yangon CO (procured from
and gender‑appropriate prevention, diagnosis
other country) and not allowed to procure the medicines locally.
and treatment for common causes of illness
and death Vaccines for routine immunization program was running out in
ethnic areas since November 2021, same situation in the SAC
controlled areas. SAC Ministry of Health did not give permits for
the booster (Moderna, Pfizer) and the vaccines were out of date
40 Sitrep No.4 2022
69
COMMITMENTS BENCHMARK NARRATIVE/FINDINGS EQ SCORE
• Children, adolescents and caregivers have and project was largely suspended.
access to psychosocial support
Although the childhood routine immunization programme was
almost completely disrupted, some immunization activities were
ongoing in limited areas in Rakhine, delivered through EHOs.
While the expanded programme on immunization (EPI) staff
were participating in the CDM and vaccine stocks remain
inaccessible under the control of the de facto authorities,
UNICEF has been successful in procuring BCG, MR, OPV, JE,
Td vaccines to reach 80,000 children and 80,000 women in 37
townships and was in the process of establishing partnerships to
reinforce immunization activities in 37 townships, working
closely with NGOs and EHOs. Since these townships have
historically been hard to reach and have reported low coverage
for routine immunization, UNICEF was seriously concerned
that they may see outbreaks of measles, diphtheria and polio,
adding urgency to the response. Continuation of immunization
activities in these areas was critical to prevent the spread of
disease and increased mortality.41
• Children and adolescents have safe and
Commitment 4: Until April 2022, UNICEF and its partners have provided 25,328 EQ.2 5
uninterrupted access to health services through
people with primary health care services across Rakhine, Kachin,
Child and adolescent health functional health facilities, school and Shan, Kayin, Chin and Yangon peri-urban area, and 1,594 EQ.6
Children and adolescents safely and community-based activities and at the children aged 9 to 18 months were vaccinated against measles in
equitably access quality life-saving household level Rakhine, Kachin and Shan. UNICEF continued providing
and high-impact child health • Children and adolescents receive quality, age- partners with supplies including 60 first aid kits, 52 inter-agency
services. and gender‑appropriate prevention, diagnosis emergency health kits, and essential medicines. The stock was
estimated to cover the needs of approximately 26,000 children.42
and treatment for common causes of illness
and death During community FGDs, it was found that children and
adolescent girls have received sanitary pads among other WASH
41 Sitrep No.2 2021
42 Sitrep No.4 2022
70
COMMITMENTS BENCHMARK NARRATIVE/FINDINGS EQ SCORE
• Children, adolescents and caregivers have related assistance.
access to psychosocial support
• At least 70% of UNICEF supported facilities
Commitment 5: UNICEF continued to implement its health programme through EQ.2 6
have adequate cohort of staff appropriately
partnerships in Rakhine, Kachin, Shan, Kayin, Chin, Kayah and
Strengthening of health systems trained for providing basic health services Yangon peri-urban area. Since the beginning of 2022, 29,762 EQ.5
and services
• At least 70% of UNICEF supported facilities people received primary health care services in these areas.43 EQ.6
Primary health care continues to be apply Quality of Care (QoC) or clinical audit 9,084 children under the age of 7 and 1,007 pregnant women in
provided through health facilities standards for reproductive, maternal, newborn, peri-urban Yangon benefited from primary health care services
and community-based service child and adolescent health and nutrition care through the “Bright Start: Mobile-based health microinsurance”
delivery mechanisms (RMNCAHN) pilot programme.44
• At least 70% of UNICEF supported facilities
and/or frontline workers submit data in real Regarding the Health HPD local partners bought some
time for the health management information medicines locally and other basic hygiene items were allowed by
system (HMIS), reproductive, maternal, the UNICEF supply section standard. UNICEF used SSFA 6-
newborn, child and adolescent health and month contracts with partners for immediate response to the
displaced population.
nutrition care (RMNCAHN) service mapping
and for meeting the International Health Capacity-building remains a priority in affected areas, and
Regulations (IHR) guidelines primary health care training has been provided to Kayin EHO
• All subnational storage points report no stock staff, with 54 people trained on providing essential health
outs of the key health products services, including HIV care.
Continuing its effort to expand access to oxygen care, UNICEF
and its partner KMSS have started to install oxygen plants in
Hinthada and Kalay. In Loikaw, there were challenges in
implementing the plant due to the conflict, causing the
groundwork to be put on hold. In Taunggyi, necessary actions
were being made to obtain approval for the installation, while
43 Sitrep No.3 2022
44 Ibid
71
COMMITMENTS BENCHMARK NARRATIVE/FINDINGS EQ SCORE
UNICEF was working on dispatching the plant.45
Across the country, access to health care services continued to
be affected by the conflict. In response, UNICEF supported the
implementation of health care programmes in Sagaing, Rakhine,
Kachin, Shan, Kayah, Kayin, Chin, Mon, Bago, Tanintharyi and
Yangon peri-urban areas. A total of 38,891 people received
primary health care services through mobile and fixed clinics
operated by implementing partners. UNICEF has ensured the
provision of health supplies to its implementing partners where
feasible as, in some areas, transport of medical supplies was on
hold due to access restrictions.46
• Children, their caregivers and communities are
Commitment 6: Working with partners, UNICEF has also provided EQ.1 6
aware of available health services and how and
handwashing facilities and personal protective equipment (PPE)
Community engagement for where to access them as well as promoted community health awareness raising through EQ.2
behaviour and social change
• Children, their caregivers and communities are distribution of risk communication and community engagement EQ.7
At-risk and affected populations engaged through participatory behaviour (RCCE) material.47 Affected communities also accessed to the
have timely access to culturally change interventions hygiene awareness through UNICEF WASH sector
appropriate, gender- and • Adolescents have access to information on intervention.
age‑sensitive information and health, including sexual, reproductive and
interventions, to improve preventive
mental health
and curative health care practices.
45 Sitrep No.4 2022
46 Sitrep No.11 2022
47 Sitrep No. 4 2021
72
2.3.3. HIV/AIDs
STRATEGIC RESULT: Vulnerability of children, adolescents and women to HIV infection is mitigated, and the care and treatment needs of those living with HIV
are met.
COMMITMENTS BENCHMARK NARRATIVE/FINDINGS EQ SCORE
• HIV prevention services are available and UNICEF conducted assessments after the military take-over to
Commitment 1: EQ.3 5
used, including information on post-rape care, understand how hard it was to access HIV services. UNICEF
Prevention and testing HIV post-exposure prophylaxis and sexually was able to cover only 30% of the target population. EQ.7
Children, adolescents and women transmitted infection (STI) treatment UNICEF was partnering with INGOs and NGOs to provide
have access to information and • Confidential and voluntary HIV testing is greater access to HIV testing services among pregnant women
services for HIV prevention, available and used and lactating women, especially in the IDP community. Training
including HIV testing. sessions for implementing partners on the prevention of mother-
to-child transmission of HIV were held with the participation of
Commitment 2: • HIV and AIDS care and treatment services, 25 health care providers, followed by a practical session on the EQ.3 5
including antiretroviral treatment, are available HIV testing service. More training was expected to be organized
Access to HIV treatment and accessed by 90% of children, adolescents for other implementing partners to ensure capacity EQ.7
Children, adolescents and women and women living with HIV, both newly reinforcement.48
living with HIV access sustained identified and those previously known to be
care and treatment services living with HIV
• Services for prevention of mother-to-child
transmission of HIV (PMTCT) are available
and used by pregnant and lactating women,
including 90% accessing HIV testing and 90%
of those found to be positive accessing lifelong
antiretroviral treatment
• At least 90% of children, adolescents and
women who start treatment access continuous
treatment and are retained in care
48 Sitrep No.3 2022
73
COMMITMENTS BENCHMARK NARRATIVE/FINDINGS EQ SCORE
• Children, their caregivers and communities are
Commitment 3: Kayin EHO staff, with 54 people trained on providing essential EQ.1 5
aware of how and where to access services for
health services, including HIV care.49
Community engagement for HIV prevention, care and treatment EQ.2
behaviour and social change
• Children, their caregivers and communities are EQ.7
At-risk and affected populations engaged through participatory behaviour
have timely access to culturally change interventions on HIV prevention, care
appropriate, gender- and and treatment
age‑sensitive information and
interventions, to improve
prevention practices, care and
treatment
2.3.4. Nutrition
STRATEGIC RESULT: Children, adolescents and women have access to diets, services and practices that improve their nutritional status
COMMITMENTS BENCHMARK NARRATIVE/FINDINGS EQ SCORE
• Nutrition cluster/sector coordination and
Commitment 1: UNICEF Nutrition Cluster consisted of a national cluster and EQ.5 7
leadership functions are adequately staffed and
six subnational clusters. The national Cluster was led by
Leadership and coordination skilled at national and sub-national levels UNICEF and has established a Strategic Advisory Group (SAG)
Effective leadership and • Core leadership and coordination and two Technical Working Subgroups (TWG). One of these
coordination are established and accountabilities are delivered subgroups deals with Infant and Young Child Feeding and the
functional. Integrated Management of Acute Malnutrition (IYCF/IMAM)
and the second was Assessment and Information Management.
This was co-chaired by NGO partners to provide technical
guidance and capacity-building among the cluster members. The
southeast cluster (Kayin, Mon, Tanintharyi, Bago (East) and
Kayah) was going to be upgraded from nutrition working group
to a subnational nutrition cluster given the increased needs and
the number of partners in those areas. UNICEF, in collaboration
49 Sitrep No.4 2022
74
COMMITMENTS BENCHMARK NARRATIVE/FINDINGS EQ SCORE
with the Global Nutrition Cluster (GNC) and other nutrition
partners, has developed an emergency response and
preparedness plan with a focus on risk analysis, capacity
mapping, and contingency planning.50
• Relevant data and evidence on the type,
Commitment 2: The Nutrition cluster was challenged by lack of funding, for EQ.1 5
degree, extent, determinants and drivers of
example, for the Northern Shan State humanitarian response
Information systems and maternal and child malnutrition and of the plan required 61 million USD but funding gap was 46.7%, not EQ.3
nutrition assessments
groups most at risk are available. only NSS but across Myanmar.
Monitoring and information systems • Multisectoral data and evidence guide timely
Comprehensive surveys and assessments could not be carried
for nutrition, including nutrition decision-making, support monitoring, and
out in the country and UNICEF took steps to rectify this.
assessments, provide timely and enable course correction of preparedness and Nevertheless, UNICEF was organizing widespread screening
quality data and evidence to guide
response and active case finding of children in need through mid-upper
policies, strategies, programmes and
arm circumference screening. The Nutrition Cluster was
advocacy
supporting a cross sectoral multi-sector needs assessment
(MSNA) and crucial questions for the remote survey across the
country have been designed. The results of the screening and
MSNA will be shared once completed.51
• Caregivers of children aged 0-23 months are
Commitment 3: UNICEF, in close collaboration with its national and EQ.3 5
supported to adopt recommended infant and
international nutrition implementing partners, improved
Prevention of stunting young child feeding (IYCF) practices, nutrition essential service coverage including severe acute EQ.7
wasting micronutrient
including both breastfeeding and malnutrition (SAM) treatment admissions, infant and young
deficiencies and overweight in
complementary feeding child feeding (IYCF) counselling, and multiple micronutrient
children aged under five years
• Children aged 0-59 months have improved supplementation.
nutritional intake and status through age-
Children aged under five years Security concerns and restrictions remain the main challenge in
benefit from diets, practices and appropriate nutrient-rich diets, micronutrient the transportation of nutrition supplies to Chin, Kayah and
services that prevent stunting, supplementation, home-fortification of foods Sagaing regions. For timely response and contingency planning,
wasting, micronutrient deficiencies UNICEF has pre-positioned nutrition supplies, such as ready-
50 Sitrep No.9 2021
51 Sitrep No.4 2022
75
COMMITMENTS BENCHMARK NARRATIVE/FINDINGS EQ SCORE
and overweight and deworming prophylaxis, according to to-use therapeutic food (RUTF) or vitamin-A and multiple
context micronutrient tablets at its field office in Taunggyi, Shan which
would cover nutrition needs for estimated 1,600 6-59 months
children and 1,700 pregnant and lactating women.52
• Children in middle childhood have access to
Commitment 4: UNICEF and its partners reached a total of 10,887 children aged EQ.3 5
community- and school-based package of
6–59 months (5,446 boys and 5,441 girls) and 1,649 pregnant and
Prevention of undernutrition, interventions that includes at a minimum: iron lactating women with preventive nutrition services, such as the EQ.6
micronutrient deficiencies, and
supplementation, deworming prophylaxis distribution of multiple micronutrient powders and multiple
anaemia in middle childhood and
nutrition education, counselling, and support, micronutrient tablet supplementation. Those services were
adolescence
according to context. provided in Rakhine, Kachin, Kayin, Shan, Yangon,
Children in middle childhood (5-9 • Adolescent girls and boys have access to Ayeyarwaddy and Kayah, despite the continuous challenges of
years) and adolescent girls and boys community- and school-based package of access, travel, and supply transport. In addition to the targeted
(10-19 years) benefit from diets, interventions, UNICEF supported the vitamin A
interventions that includes at a minimum: iron
practices and services that protect supplementation campaign, reaching 2,705,986 children aged 6–
and folic acid supplementation, deworming
them from undernutrition, 59 months.53
prophylaxis, nutrition education, counselling
micronutrient deficiencies and
and support, according to context
anaemia
• Pregnant women and breastfeeding mothers -
Commitment 5: Security concerns and restrictions remain the main challenge in EQ.3 6
with special attention to pregnant adolescent
the transportation of nutrition supplies to Chin, Kayah and
Prevention of undernutrition, girls and other nutritionally at‑risk mothers – Sagaing regions. For timely response and contingency planning, EQ.6
micronutrient deficiencies, and
have access to a package of interventions that UNICEF has pre-positioned nutrition supplies, such as ready-
anaemia in pregnant women and
includes at a minimum: iron and folic to-use therapeutic food (RUTF) or vitamin-A and multiple
breastfeeding mothers
acid/multiple micronutrient supplementation, micronutrient tablets at its field office in Taunggyi, Shan which
Pregnant women and breastfeeding deworming prophylaxis, weight monitoring, would cover nutrition needs for estimated 1,600 6-59 months
mothers benefit from diets, nutrition counselling, and nutrition support children and 1,700 pregnant and lactating women.54
practices and services that protect
them from undernutrition,
micronutrient deficiencies and
52 Sitrep No.4 2021
53 Sitrep No.11 2022
54 Sitrep No.4 2021
76
COMMITMENTS BENCHMARK NARRATIVE/FINDINGS EQ SCORE
anaemia through balanced energy protein
supplementation, according to context
• All children aged under five years in affected
Commitment 6: Representative surveys and assessments could not be carried out EQ.3 6
areas are screened regularly for the early
in the country. Nevertheless, UNICEF was organizing
Nutrition care for wasted detection of severe wasting and other forms of widespread screening and active case finding of children in need EQ.6
children Children aged under five
life‑threatening acute malnutrition and are through mid-upper arm circumference screening. The Nutrition
years benefit from services for the
referred as appropriate for treatment services Cluster was supporting a cross sectoral multi-sector needs
early detection and treatment of
• All children aged under five years suffering assessment (MSNA) and crucial questions for the remote survey
severe wasting and other forms of
life-threatening acute malnutrition in from severe wasting and other forms of life- across the country have been designed. The results of the
screening and MSNA will be shared once completed.55
early childhood threatening acute malnutrition in affected areas
benefit from facility- and community-based UNICEF partners have provided nutrition services in Rakhine,
services that provide effective treatment Yangon, Kachin, Kayin and Shan. A total of 28,226 children
assuring survival rates >90%, recovery rates were screened for malnutrition. A total of 168 children with
>75% and default rates <15% severe acute malnutrition (SAM) were admitted for treatment,
and 4,654 children and 2,381 pregnant women received
micronutrient supplements. For the first quarter of 2022, only
1,146 children suffering from SAM were reached, out of the
annual target of 37,501.56
UNICEF supported its partners in reaching 603 children aged
6–59 months (294 boys and 309 girls) suffering from severe acute
malnutrition. Similarly, UNICEF has been supporting 306
children aged 6–59 months (164 boys and 142 girls) who were
moderately malnourished by providing a simplified treatment
that includes the provision of ready-to-use therapeutic food.
Additionally, a total of 8,765 primary caregivers (579 males and
8,186 females) with children aged under two were provided with
55 Sitrep No.4 2022
56 Ibid
77
COMMITMENTS BENCHMARK NARRATIVE/FINDINGS EQ SCORE
infant and young child feeding (IYCF) services.57
Commitment 7: National and sub-national systems delivering UNICEF Nutrition sector developed an online tool to assess the EQ.3 6
health, water and sanitation, education, child and capacity of partners to implement and scale-up nutrition specific
System strengthening for EQ.6
social protection are supported to: interventions across the country. Capacity assessment results will
maternal and child nutrition
inform the development of a capacity building strategy for sector
• align their policies, programmes and practices
Services to prevent and treat partners.
with internationally agreed standards and
malnutrition in children, adolescents
UNICEF’s partners have made significant improvements to
and women are provided through guidance on nutrition
preventive nutrition services, having provided multiple
facility- and community-based • deliver evidence-based interventions with a
micronutrient supplements to a total of 29,501 children aged 6-
delivery mechanisms in ways that workforce supported in their knowledge, skills
59 months in Rakhine, Kayin, and Yangon (up from the 14,150
strengthen national and sub-national and capacity in nutrition
children reached in the last reporting period). This included
systems
• procure and deliver essential nutrition supplies supplements supplied to 19,525 children in Yangon townships
in a timely manner through facility- and of Hlaing Tar Yar and Dagon Seikkan.58
community-based platforms
UNICEF and partners faced multiple challenges in responding
to nutritional needs, including a lack of technical capacity for
such treatment, limited resources and access constraints.
However, UNICEF, as a technical lead, continues to support
capacity-building; notably with the Integrated Management of
Acute Malnutrition (IMAM) programme. It delivered the second
batch of virtual IMAM training, benefiting 154 participants from
26 organizations. This session provided much-needed support to
partners in strengthening their technical capacity for the SAM
treatment programme. The nutrition programme needs
additional funding to ensure more children were reached with
life-saving interventions, including the treatment of
malnutrition.59
UNICEF used local language to raise awareness in nutrition, for
57 Sitrep No.11 2022
58 Sitrep No.8 2021
59 Sitrep No.4 2022
78
COMMITMENTS BENCHMARK NARRATIVE/FINDINGS EQ SCORE
example, explained to the affected communities in local language
to cultivate highly nutritious and diversify locally available food
such as some seasonal fruits, seeds, beans, infant and young child
feeding practices was trained to CBOs.
In some FOs nutrition didn’t have prepositioning stocks and
nutrition supplies were procured from internal, de facto
government blocked the ways and supplies were delayed both
for the UNICEF and for the cluster.
• Children, adolescents, caregivers and
Commitment 8: Despite transportation challenges in Chin, UNICEF was able to EQ.1 6
communities are aware of available nutrition
distribute nutrition supplies, infant and young child feeding
Community engagement for services and how and where to access them. counselling (IYFC) pamphlets to an estimated 2,500 people in EQ.2
behaviour and social change
• Children, adolescents, caregivers and Hakha. Additionally, World Vision, through its partnership with EQ.3
At-risk and affected populations communities are engaged through UNICEF, has reached 154 caregivers with its newly
have timely access to culturally participatory behaviour change interventions implemented IYCF counselling, providing much needed
appropriate, gender- and to improve their nutritional status. knowledge and skills on recommended feeding practices for
age‑sensitive information and • Caregivers and communities are supported and children.60
interventions that promote the
empowered to prevent malnutrition, as well as A total of 320,563 beneficiaries out of the targeted 1,064,831have
uptake of diets, services and
to identify and refer children with life- been reached with nutrition assistance, representing
practices and contribute to improve
threatening forms of undernutrition approximately 30 per cent of the target. Cumulatively, the cluster
their nutritional status
members have treated 4,483 children (11 per cent of the target)
for severe acute malnutrition, and an additional 246,831 people
(37 per cent of the target) received preventive nutrition
support.61
60 Sitrep No.4 2022
61 Sitrep No.11 2022
79
2.3.5. Child Protection
STRATEGIC RESULT: Children and adolescents are protected from violence, exploitation, abuse, neglect and harmful practices
COMMITMENTS BENCHMARK NARRATIVE/FINDINGS EQ SCORE
• Child Protection Sector/Area of Responsibility
Commitment 1: UNICEF led the CP Cluster in many emergency areas such as EQ.5 7
(AoR) coordination and leadership functions are
Kachin, Lashio (Shan North), Kayah, regular coordination
Leadership and coordination adequately staffed and skilled at national and meeting held for information sharing, sometimes in the camps,
Effective leadership and sub‑national levels engaging in Protection Cluster of Sagaing, regular country task
coordination are established and • Core leadership and coordination force meetings were held.
functional. accountabilities are delivered.
UNICEF extended its AoR to Chin State and Kayah State. One
CP Officer who was a Chin native was assigned in the Chin State
and she led State level CP cluster as a Coordinator while KMSS
CP Program Manager served as Co-coordinator. They organized
a monthly CP team meeting. They invite Chin CSOs for their
monthly meetings.
The Child Protection Area of Responsibility (CP AoR) organized
the collection of 5W inputs (Who does What, Where, When and
for Whom) from partners across the country to track the
progress of delivery against the Humanitarian Response Plan
(HRP) indicators. Following the first-quarter inputs, the system
of collection was streamlined to provide partners with an online
reporting system. A report on gaps in child protection services
and priority funding was presented to a group of donors through
the inter-cluster coordination. This included highlighting the
increased needs in the conflict-affected regions of northwest and
southeast, in addition to the much-needed legal services for
children. The CP AoR reviewed the current MSNA indicators
and questions in support of the cross-sectoral remote survey, and
ensured child labour, MHPSS and early and forced child marriage
were included.62
62 Sitrep No.4 2022
80
COMMITMENTS BENCHMARK NARRATIVE/FINDINGS EQ SCORE
AAP indicators were included in all PDs with partners ensuring
regular monitoring on AAP, UNICEF used feedback mechanism
by setting up channel for complaints such as contact information
sharing, hot lines, getting feedback from the affected
communities by client satisfaction form (legal aid service and
case management), TPM tool and specific program visits to get
feedback from the communities. AAP online system was in
progress too.
The Child Protection Area of Responsibility (CP AoR)
conducted a review of its coordination system across the country,
identifying areas where further support was required, notably in
Chin, Sagaing and Southeast. A TOR to strengthen CP AoR
across the country and creating further accountability and
representation within the cluster system. The benchmark and
strategy were developed through a participatory process
including an initial workshop with partners. ToR for cluster
leadership and co-leadership have been drawn up and
discussed.63
The challenges faced by the CP AoR members were exacerbated
by access restrictions and volatile situations in certain areas.
Despite these challenges, the CP AoR members have reached
80,881 people with child protection assistance and services
during the reporting period. So far this year, a total of 670,809
people were reached, despite the lack of funding. Additionally,
the CP AoR has recruited a permanent dedicated national
coordinator to support and enhance the quality and coverage of
the CP AoR activities nationwide.64
• Mechanisms to assess, analyse, monitor and
Commitment 2: Case management covers nation-wide and during emergency EQ.3 7
report child protection concerns and their root
response. In Chin State, 13 staffs were working on Case
63 Sitrep No.7 2021
64 Sitrep No.11 2022
81
COMMITMENTS BENCHMARK NARRATIVE/FINDINGS EQ SCORE
Strengthening of child causes are established and functional at national Management System (one Program Manager, 2 Case Supervisors, EQ.7
protection systems and local levels 10 Case Officers) and feedback response mechanism, client
Child protection systems are • Mapping of the social service workforce is satisfactory checklist was utilized. In South East it was 65 cases
before the military takeover but was increased to 100 cases
functional and strengthened to conducted, and capacity‑building plans are
through the partners, partnership network was extended, for
prevent and respond to all forms developed accordingly
Mental Health and Psychosocial Support (MHPSS) mobile CP
of violence, exploitation, abuse, • Integrated case management system, including activities was implemented based on the needs of the affected
neglect and harmful practices referral pathways for services and a safe communities, trained the CFS volunteers, awareness pamphlet
information management system, is functional were translated into different languages.
• Families and communities are supported in their
Case Management was linked with the GBV and “Legal Aid
protective functions, with measures in place to
Service”. Under 25 young adults who contacted with the law
mitigate and prevent abuse, neglect, exploitation
were accessed to further social services once they were referred
and violence against children to the case management system.
• Civil registration systems provide accessible and
UNICEF and the International Legal Foundation convened the
safe birth registration and certification for
Community of Practice workshop as a part of capacity-building
children and their families
programme for more than 80 local lawyers, trained on age
verification procedures and the extent to which they can help to
accurately determine the age of a child in conflict with the law.
Since the military takeover, legal aid services and other
humanitarian assistance have been given to 2,933 clients
including 1,485 detained children (48 per cent girls) and 1,448
young people (36 per cent females). Some face migration-related
charges; others were accused of belonging to PDFs. 65
Since the beginning of 2022, a total of 73,056 people (26,522
girls, 25,697 boys, 15,039 women, 5,798 men) were reached
nationally through 28 partners with critical child protection
services including access to mental health and psychosocial
support, gender-based violence risk mitigation, prevention and
response interventions as well as Explosive Ordnance Risk
65 Sitrep No.4 2022
82
COMMITMENTS BENCHMARK NARRATIVE/FINDINGS EQ SCORE
Education (EORE). 66
A total of 429 boys and girls affected by violence, sexual abuse,
physical abuse, and neglect have been provided with case
management support and have received individual care from
UNICEF partners in Kayin, Kayah, southern Shan and Mon
state.67
Child Protection Groups were formed at some IDP camps, for
example there was formative 8 CFSs in Kachin state run by
recruited camp-based volunteers who were supported the
honorarium. CPG was formed with religious leaders, parents,
diverse persons included.
• Family and community support systems are
Commitment 3: UNICEF continued its support for nationwide mental health EQ.3 7
identified and strengthened to provide MHPSS
and psycho-social support (MHPSS) helplines and various
Mental health and psychosocial activities and protection with meaningful remote PSS services in multiple ethnic languages. MHPSS EQ.7
support (MHPSS)
participation of children, adolescents, and services continued to support children, caregivers, frontline
MHPSS needs of children, caregivers workers, survivors of violence and emotional distress, and
adolescents, and caregivers are • MHPSS interventions and referral mechanisms people with severe mental disorders, who were then referred to
identified and addressed through ensure access to support across the IASC expert mental health practitioners for individual counselling and
coordinated multisectoral and MHPSS pyramid of interventions for children, therapy sessions.68 In response to the current crisis, UNICEF’s
community based MHPSS services partner organization Metanoia, deployed an emergency response
adolescents, caregivers, and communities, as per
team to provide psychological first aid to people affected by
the Operational Guidelines on Community-
violence. Psychosocial modules were being designed for children
based Mental Health and Psychosocial Support
and youth to carry out peer group interventions, where they can
in Humanitarian Settings
share their concerns and help each other to identify approaches
• All children, adolescents, and caregivers to releasing stress and anxiety.69
identified through MHPSS service entry points
66 Sitrep No.4 2022
67 Ibid
68 Sitrep No.1 2021
69 Sitrep: 02 2021
83
COMMITMENTS BENCHMARK NARRATIVE/FINDINGS EQ SCORE
(including child protection, education and In Rakhine State, UNICEF worked with its partner CFSI to give
health) as needing specialised mental health life skill training to adolescents who have dropped out of schools
services, are provided or referred to appropriate under the project CHAIRE. Project has achieved over 90% on
services developed indicators by setting up the systematic strategy and
approach despite facing Covid outbreak challenges.
A total of 16,357 children (8,632 girls and 7,725 boys) and 1,805
caregivers were provided with access to mental health and
psychosocial support through in-person and remote approaches
in Kachin, Mandalay and Shan (North and South), through well-
being activities at child-friendly spaces and community centres.
Positive parenting awareness was provided for 1,805 parents and
caregivers (1,406 women and 399 men).70
• Causes of child separation are identified in a
Commitment 4: In northern Rakhine, 26 irregular migrants’ children (3 boys and EQ.1 6
timely manner and actions to prevent separation,
23 girls) travelling by boat were arrested in Mawgyun township
Unaccompanied and separated including use of behavioural change strategies, (Ayeyarwaddy region) and Myaingkalay township (Kayin State), EQ.3
children (UASC)
are promoted and all children were referred by UNICEF to a legal aid partner. EQ.7
Separation of children from • All UASC are identified, are in family-based care Tracing was under way to reunite them with their families.
families was prevented and or in a suitable, safe, UNICEF has also discussed responses to child protection
responded to, and family-based • alternative care arrangement; and are provided concerns associated with irregular migration and the prevention
care was promoted in the child’s of exploitation and abuse measures with the UNICEF
with an individual case management/care plan
best interest Bangladesh team. UNICEF through its implementing partners
• In close coordination with mandated agencies,
supported 75 Rohingya migrant children (60 girls; 15 boys) in
UASC are registered, safely reunified and
2021.71
reintegrated with primary caregivers or other
Child Friendly Spaces (CFSs) run by UNICEF partners covered
family members
to reunification of Unaccompanied and Separated Children
(UASC) to their families, for example, CFS run by the UNICEF
partner Plan International at Maung Ni Pyin village covered
unaccompanied and separated children, alternative family-based
care for unaccompanied and missing children and other children
70 Sitrep No.11 2022
71 Sitrep No.6 2021
84
COMMITMENTS BENCHMARK NARRATIVE/FINDINGS EQ SCORE
in need of care was in place.72
• A mechanism is in place that monitors grave
Commitment 5: MRM for six grave violations mechanism was already in place EQ.2 5
violations against children and informs advocacy
before the military takeover which covers the nation-wide.
Monitoring and reporting on and programmes Country Task Force on Monitoring and Reporting (CTFMR) EQ.7
grave violations
• Where the Monitoring and Reporting was completely stopped after the military takeover, however
In situations of armed conflict, Mechanism (MRM) is activated, UNICEF co- UNICEF provided training (online/ in-person) on MRM to its
grave violations against children chairs the Country Task Force on Monitoring FOs and IPs to do individual MRM. Community strategy for
and other serious rights violations and Reporting or equivalent working group and MRM was developed to adapt online meetings/ training and
and protection concerns are reports to the Security Council Working Group tried to be integrated the MRM with other UNICEF Sections.
documented, analysed and MRM mechanism was also linked to the case management when
on Children and Armed Conflict
reported, and inform children were maimed, if they need MHPSS, etc.
programmatic response and
Previously, MRM monitoring had focused on conflict areas.
advocacy interventions
After the military takeover geographical coverage was expanded
to Kayah, Sagaing, Magway working with different partners and
actors. More information was received, reported and
documented, using for advocacy to try and reduce grave
violations.73
It was difficult to confirm whether MRM was functioning well
due to lack of visibility. The CTFMR platform could work in
sensitive areas such as KoeKant, Wa region. MRM training
increased 53% in 2022 compared to 2021.
In December 2022, a small case review meeting for 107
suspected minors associated with the armed forces was held
between the CTFMR on the six grave violations and the
Committee for the Prevention of Under-aged Recruitment.74
72 Observation to CFS center run by Plan International
73 Sitrep No.1 2021
74 Sitrep No.11 2022
85
COMMITMENTS BENCHMARK NARRATIVE/FINDINGS EQ SCORE
• At-risk children and communities have access to
Commitment 7: UNICEF worked with several NGOs/ INGOs for mine action EQ.2 5
age-appropriate education about the risks of
intervention including awareness session on mine risk education
Mine action and weapons explosive weapons and Explosive Ordnance Risk Education (EORE), for example, EQ.7
The use of landmines and other • Formal/informal injury surveillance systems and UNICEF partner Dan Church Aid provided mine awareness
indiscriminate or illicit weapons by priority-setting mechanisms for mine action sessions covered to many areas in Northern Shan State where
state and non-state actors was intervention, and child-focused victim mine causalities was highest ranking in Myanmar. Mine Risk
prevented and their impact assistance, are in place Awareness started in June 2022 for populations in 6 camps and
addressed average 200 camp communities aware on mine education, how
• Advocacy activities are implemented to promote
to protect themselves. They also discussed upon the needs of
humanitarian mine action and compliance with
more investment in mine victims’ assistance.
international instruments related to explosive
weapons UNICEF originally had two international coordinators, however
they left after the military takeover and human resources have
continued to be a challenge.
Mine Risk Education and EORE were provided to communities
and partners in Rakhine and Southeast. Mine awareness was
provided not only to the partners and affected communities but
to other sub national level INGOs and NGOs in terms of how
to travel safely, together with the DCA, conduct mine action
Area of Responsibility (AOR), mine action partners were
increased as a result, 38 cases of mine victims (>18) since
2021regarding shelling cases.
UNICEF committed to coordinate humanitarian efforts on
mines in Myanmar. UNICEF has brought together more than 40
partner organizations and mine action organizations to advocate
for support to victims and for enhanced Explosive Ordnance
Risk Education to save the lives of children and their
communities.75
The conflict in Myanmar has caused many areas to become
contaminated with landmines and explosive remnants of war,
75 Sitrep No.9 2021
86
COMMITMENTS BENCHMARK NARRATIVE/FINDINGS EQ SCORE
with the number and frequency of casualties propelling Myanmar
into becoming one of the most mine-affected countries in the
world. UNICEF was protecting children from this risk by
ensuring that Explosive Ordnance Risk Education was
integrated across all relevant sectors of its humanitarian
responses.76 The Mine Action AoR (MA AoR) coordination
continues to support partners across the different pillars of mine
action including EORE for everyone. The AoR has developed
an action plan for supporting mine victims including economic
and social benefits for child victims.77
The families of child survivors, particularly those with physical
impairments, face great difficulty in adapting and facing the
future. The Mine Action AoR was therefore advocating for
increased awareness for victim assistance. UNICEF understands
the importance of launching and maintaining a centralized
database for gathering, verifying and reporting information on
mines and explosive remnants of war, casualties and accidents.
There was also a continued need to ensure funding for victims
who need to make long-distance travel for treatment and
emergency care. The AoR has developed an action plan for
supporting mine victims including economic and social benefits
for child victims.78
UNICEF continues to support partners across the different
pillars of mine action including EORE and victim assistance.
Data collection on landmine/ERW incidents and casualties has
significantly improved which helped to provide updated
information for the relevant mine action actors and to support
victim assistance. While the MA AoR has been delivering risk
76 Sitrep No.4 2022
77 Ibid
78 Sitrep No.4 2022
87
COMMITMENTS BENCHMARK NARRATIVE/FINDINGS EQ SCORE
education programmes, victim assistance remains a priority and
the MA AoR has continued to coordinate with other clusters to
support more victims and their families while advocating for
their rights. Members of the MA AoR have continued to
advocate for scaling up the delivery of EORE by all humanitarian
actors who were trained to deliver it.79
• Quality, coordinated, survivor-centred and age-
Commitment 8: UNICEF provided the GBV awareness sessions both to affected EQ.1 6
appropriate response services are timely,
communities from the camps and villages. GBV also accessed by
Gender-based Violence available and used by survivors of GBV the UNICEF IPs and community volunteers, it was linked with EQ.2
Survivors of GBV and their • GBV prevention programmes are implemented the Case Management system to reduce the GBV cases through EQ.6
children can access timely, quality, • Child protection programmes implement actions systematic reporting, accessing, providing necessary services
EQ.7
multisectoral response services that address and reduce risks of GBV including referral pathway.
and GBV is prevented
GBV component was also integrated to other sectors as a cross
cutting issue.
Key activities in 2022 have included the use of social media
platforms and other digital tools to disseminate essential
messages on gender-based violence (GBV). More than 50,000
young people were reached through UNICEF social media, of
which 10,000 were engaged around questions and polls related
to GBV, harmful social behaviours and the negative impact on
adolescents for their future, and child and early marriage.80
• All children have access to safe, accessible, child
Commitment 9: CP sector strengthened the PSEA, included in the HPD, ensured EQ.2 8
and gender-sensitive reporting channels
all its partners complied through awareness-raising and
Protection from sexual EQ.7
• Child survivors of SEA are promptly referred to orientation with affected communities, linked with referral
exploitation and abuse
and access quality, integrated GBV/child system too. Many UNICEF CP partners had their own PSEA
Children and affected populations protection response services and assistance Policy.
are protected from SEA by based on their needs and wishes
UNICEF set up Child Friendly Spaces (CFSs) in IDP camps as
79 Sitrep No.11 2022
80 Ibid
88
COMMITMENTS BENCHMARK NARRATIVE/FINDINGS EQ SCORE
humanitarian workers well as mobile CFSs were accessed by the children from the
camps which covered PSEA. However, CFS buildings were
found to be necessary to improve in line with CFS principle as
many of them were using existing monasteries, government
schools and other houses for CFS activities.
Some partners had a PSEA Policy together with reporting
channel, provided PSEA training to their staff, volunteers.
However, PSEA Policy should review once per two years for
improvement.
• Children, their caregivers and communities are
Commitment 10: UNICEF produced a “justice tip sheet” for children and young EQ.1 8
aware of available protection services and how
people to understand their rights when dealing with law
Community engagement for and where to access them enforcement and how to access free legal assistance. The EQ.2
behaviour and social change
• Children, their caregivers and communities are document has been developed in both English and Myanmar EQ.7
At-risk and affected populations engaged in community led processes designed to languages and has been disseminated widely in collaboration with
have timely access to culturally support positive social norms and practices; Child Protection Working Group members at national and sub-
appropriate, gender- and age- promote gender equality; address the causes of national level – reaching over 30,000 young people and adults in
sensitive information and child protection risks; and increase the focus on Myitkyina and 4 Waingmaw Townships in Kachin.81
interventions, to prevent and
participation of children, adolescents and UNICEF was quite responsive since 2021 first 6 months after
respond to violence, exploitation,
marginalized groups in their communities the military takeover, provided the information and legal
abuse, neglect and harmful
counselling and assistance. Many protests were included very
practices
young child, UNICEF started to distribute key information on
CP, Child Rights, Legal Aids, Justice for Children (J4C) came up
with hotline, MHPSS hot line since covid, reached to more
30,000 children who have been participating in protests in the
first 6 months.
UNICEF and its partners conducted child protection trainings
in camps for internally displaced people (IDP) in Rakhine,
Kayah, south Shan and the southeast, reaching 3,333 people (46
per cent women), including teachers, parents, caregivers,
81 Sitrep No.1 2021
89
COMMITMENTS BENCHMARK NARRATIVE/FINDINGS EQ SCORE
community volunteers and staff from implementing partners.
The topics covered included child protection, Convention on the
Rights of the Children, alternative care, child protection in
emergencies, minimum standards, monitoring and reporting
mechanism of grave violations of child rights and parenting
techniques notably positive parenting skills, diversity and
inclusion.82
UNICEF organized a three-day Explosive Ordnance Risk
Education (EORE) online Training of Trainers (TOT) for
partners, attended by 36 community volunteers (27 females)
from Mon, Kayin and Thanintharyi. An EORE online TOT was
also conducted for 20 participants from agency staff (17 males).
This training will provide tools for trainers including activities
that seek to reduce the risk of injury from EO and to raise
awareness of women, girls, boys and men in addition to
promoting behavioral change.83
UNICEF intervention with IPs against humanitarian responses
ensured the gender equality, equity and disability inclusion in all
their project designs. Emergency response mainly focus to link
with long term project. Parents seemed to reduce harsh physical
punishments to their children after accessing the CP awareness.
2.3.6. Education
STRATEGIC RESULT: Children and adolescents have access to inclusive, quality education and learning in safe and protective environments
82 Sitrep No.4 2022
83 Sitrep No.9 2021
90
COMMITMENTS BENCHMARK NARRATIVE/FINDINGS EQ SCORE
• Education sector/cluster coordination and
Commitment 1: UNICEF CO supported to the Ministry of Education before the EQ.5 8
leadership functions are adequately staffed and
military takeover but now Education sector covered the affected
Leadership and coordination skilled at national and sub-national levels population targeting mainly for the emergency affected
Effective leadership and
• Core leadership and coordination population, so it was more effective, through many challenges
coordination are established and
accountabilities are delivered UNICEF and partners’ capacities have improved within the
functional.
challenges despite of using online platform, networking has
improved too, supported CSOs and NGOs, for humanitarian
point of view beneficiaries’ satisfaction was higher. But there
were set back as UNICEF cannot go to the target locations due
to security concern, however sent third party monitoring to
conduct there, UNCIEF tried to reach the affected areas,
UNICEF Education sector lead the cluster for many years and
still co-leading the education cluster coordination, UNCIEF was
the first response in case of emergency, key source to deliver the
supports in this area, UNICEF improved amid the challenges.
UNICEF continues to co-lead the EiE initiative and was
working to develop a standardised approach to consulting with
communities to better understand their expectations for their
children’s education in the current circumstances, and making
relevant education materials available to meet children’s interim
learning needs and ensure continuity of learning.84
The EiE sector, co-led in Myanmar by UNICEF and Save the
Children International, with participation of international and
national NGOs working on education for children affected by
protracted conflicts, has reached over 29,000 children with
home-based learning. The EiE sector has developed a
standardized tool to facilitate community consultations, designed
to generate understanding of communities’ perspectives
regarding preferred education modalities for their children.85
84 Sitrep No.2 2021
85 Ibid
91
COMMITMENTS BENCHMARK NARRATIVE/FINDINGS EQ SCORE
In collaboration with UNICEF, the Education Cluster
completed the second round of its contingency planning
workshops for six hubs: Chin, Magway, Sagaing, Rakhine,
Kachin, Shan, Kayah, and the southeast (Kayin, Mon, East Bago,
and Tanintharyi). Operational tools such as standard operating
procedures and cluster standards will be completed in early 2023
to roll out the contingency plans. To build on the Education
Cluster’s evidence generation, the cluster has collaborated with
Save the Children to provide opportunities for various small-
scale studies identified, prioritized and implemented by cluster
partners at subnational level. In order to accelerate localization
and effective participation in cluster coordination by local
partners, the Education Cluster was embarking on a strategic
local partner capacity development and support initiative which
will be implemented through 2023.86
• Formal and non-formal education programmes,
Commitment 2: UNICEF was working with national and international NGOs to EQ.1 7
including early learning and skills, are available
provide alternative learning opportunities for 1 million primary
Equitable access to learning and used and middle-school-age children. Support includes providing EQ.2
Children and adolescents have
• Inclusive access to education opportunities is learning materials and assisting children with learning and
equitable access to inclusive and
ensured with a specific attention to girls, language development, while also offering mental health and
quality learning opportunities
children with disabilities, refugees, displaced psychosocial support. UNICEF was also working with national
children and other marginalized or vulnerable and international NGOs to deliver non-formal education to
children 8,000 children who have been out of the formal education system
even prior to the COVID pandemic.87
• Teachers and other education personnel are
trained to provide quality learning UNICEF maintains its efforts in improving access to basic
• Learning is measured to monitor the quality of education services and supporting the most vulnerable children
to continue learning, through a range of formal and non-formal
education
ways. During the reporting period, UNICEF and its partners
supported an additional 54,524 children aged 3 to 17 (28,896
86 Sitrep No.11 2022
87 Sitrep No.1 2021
92
COMMITMENTS BENCHMARK NARRATIVE/FINDINGS EQ SCORE
girls) to access education, including early learning. This was
achieved by providing teaching and learning materials,
rehabilitation and maintenance of learning facilities, capacity
building and incentivization of volunteer
teachers/facilitators/caregivers, and recreational activities.
UNICEF and its partners also provided individual essential
learning packages to 9,306 children, including 4,845 girls. An
additional 2,014 children and adolescents (1,086 girls) were
reached through UNICEF-supported skills development
schemes.88
UNICEF provided ToT to CSOs by UNICEF resource persons
and they replicated to online and in-person training to teachers
and volunteers, INGOs mostly replicated online training and
CSO provided in-persons training, it was found that online
training was low effective, need to find a way to be more
effective, UNICEF suggested to its partners to apply face to face
as much as possible. Training included MHPSS for example,
storytelling, singing, etc.
Interventions by UNICEF and its partners helped an additional
62,583 children (31,456 girls and 31,127 boys) gain access to
formal and non-formal education, particularly early childhood
education, by providing teaching and learning materials,
incentives, psychosocial support and capacity-building for
volunteer teachers/facilitators/ethic language teachers and
caregivers on cognitive development, and social and emotional
learning. UNICEF and its partners distributed individual
essential learning packages to an additional 14,728 children
(7,547 girls and 71,81 boys). In addition, 1,783
children/adolescents (1,127 girls and 656 boys) benefited from
88 Sitrep No.4 2022
93
COMMITMENTS BENCHMARK NARRATIVE/FINDINGS EQ SCORE
skills development interventions.89
• Preventive measures are taken to make learning
Commitment 3: The ongoing conflict and instability continued to disrupt the EQ.1 7
environments safe and accessible
delivery of education activities nationwide, particularly in terms
Safe learning environments EQ.2
• Learning environments are free from sexual of transporting supplies, partners access to communities and the
Children and adolescents have harassment, abuse and violence movement of IDPs. Nonetheless, UNICEF and its partners were EQ.7
equitable access to safe and secure • Preventive measures are taken to make learning preparing for the traditional start of the academic year in June.
learning environments environments healthy and free from disease Education needs remain high nationally, triggered by inadequate
learning materials for children and the need for educators to be
outbreaks
trained on alternative teaching methods. Furthermore, ensuring
safe access to education for all children remains an urgent
priority. With the start of the academic year, UNICEF and
partners will support children to access learning in the
community and at home, as well as at school.90
• Gender- and age-appropriate mental health and
Commitment 4: UNICEF provided training to teachers and volunteers EQ.1 6
psychosocial support programmes are delivered
including the MHPSS. Teachers from Hpa-an received 5 days
Mental Health and in schools and learning environments training in May 2021 about the child focus psychosocial EQ.2
Psychosocial support
support including storytelling, poems, we have to act as per the EQ.7
Mental Health and Psychosocial story.
support for students, teachers and
other education personnel is
available in learning environments
• Education plans, budgets and programmes are
Commitment 5: UNICEF followed an inclusive education approach, ensuring EQ.1 8
informed by risk and conflict analysis
persons with disabilities and IDPs were included. IDPs children
Strengthening of education EQ.2
• Continuity of education for all children is in the villages were also enrolled in the program.
systems
ensured, with a specific attention to girls, EQ.7
Affected village communities were able to access learning aids,
Education systems are risk- children with disabilities, refugees, displaced
and case supports to their children when political situation was
informed to ensure inclusive, children and other marginalized or vulnerable
89 Sitrep No.11 2022
90 Sitrep No.4 2022
94
COMMITMENTS BENCHMARK NARRATIVE/FINDINGS EQ SCORE
quality education and safe and children. Vulnerable groups are factored into hard.
protective learning environments education plans, budgets and programmes
The Education Cluster held its monthly national and subnational
coordination meetings across the country. Cluster partners
finalized the multi-year (2022-2025) Education Cluster strategy
aligned to the Joint Response Framework. The strategy outlines
a common approach for providing a humanitarian response to
support children and youth to re-engage in quality, protective
education. The cluster was strengthening its capacity for
subnational coordination, as 3 dedicated, full-time subnational
coordinators will be on board by early May. This will strengthen
preparedness efforts and quality of the response. The
coordinators were each co-hosted by two organizations,
including a UNICEF and Save the Children co-funded position
for Rakhine coordination and Chin, Magway, Sagaing
coordination. The cluster organized the first meeting between
Education Cannot Wait (ECW) colleagues and education
partners in Myanmar to discuss the development of ECW and
facilitated the first Multi-Year Resilience Programme for
Myanmar.91
• Children, their caregivers and communities are
Commitment 6: UNICEF and partners prioritized the provision of education EQ.1 7
aware of available education services and how
services to children affected by conflict across Myanmar,
Community engagement for and where to access them especially those in the northwest and southeast regions. The
behaviour and social change
• Timely information on social services is available ongoing conflict has resulted in frequent movements of IDPs,
Children and caregivers have through learning environments severely hindering access to the most affected children and their
timely access to culturally • Children, their caregivers and communities are families. UNICEF and partners managed to reach 47,341
appropriate, gender- and age- engaged in preparedness actions and design of children (24,216 girls) aged 3-17 years in Chin, Kachin, Sagaing,
sensitive information on Kayin, Rakhine, Shan and Kayah states through different
the programmes
educational options and other education interventions. A total of 9,986 children (5,211 girls)
social services, and are engaged in received essential learning packages to continue their learning
interventions creating a conducive and 6,048 adolescents/children (2,913 girls) benefited from skills
development interventions. In Shan South and Kayah, early
91 Sitrep No. 3 2022
95
COMMITMENTS BENCHMARK NARRATIVE/FINDINGS EQ SCORE
learning environment learning storybooks, education in emergency supplies, and short-
term open learning materials were provided to a total of 4,320
IDP children (2,080 girls). Similarly, 18,895 (more than 9,000
girls) benefited from education interventions in Chin and
Sagaing.92
2.3.7. WASH
STRATEGIC RESULT: Children and their communities have equitable access to, and use, safe water and sanitation services, and adopt hygiene practices
COMMITMENTS BENCHMARK NARRATIVE/FINDINGS EQ SCORE
• WASH sector/cluster coordination and
Commitment 1: WASH Cluster adequately coordinated and led the functions EQ.5 8
leadership functions are adequately staffed and
together with staffed and skilled at national and sub-national
Leadership and coordination skilled at national and sub-national levels level. It was due to 1) flexibility of the intervention, reduced
Effective leadership and • Core leadership and coordination criteria in FO procurement which was so quickly to purchase the
coordination are established and accountabilities are delivered WASH supplies (low-value purchase) 2) funding allocation for
functional. the FO 3) flexibility of the partners which included the private
sector involvement and partnership. These flexibilities helped
WASH function relatively smoothly after the military takeover.
UNICEF provided the supplies and cluster partners received the
WASH assistance from UNICEF as the last resort. However
according to the UNICEF Stitrep report (May 2022), WASH
interventions planned under the 2022 HRP were severely
underfunded. In Kachin, funding gaps caused some WASH
partners to hand over their wash activities in IDP camps to other
organizations recommended by the cluster. Shortage of
contingency stock to respond to the upcoming monsoon season
will be one of the main challenges, prompting the cluster to
92 Sitrep No.3 2022
96
COMMITMENTS BENCHMARK NARRATIVE/FINDINGS EQ SCORE
update the emergency response plan and contingency stock for
the first quarter of the year. In addition, cluster members were
still affected by restrictions on movements and permits, creating
challenges for operational staff, both national and international,
to obtain travel authorization access to areas where they were
needed. In some locations, cluster members were using a low-
profile approach to implement interventions, although most
partners were still grappling with the problems of limited access,
delays in the transportation of supplies, and insecurity in reaching
affected populations.
The cluster system was activated nationally in mid-2021, because
of the large displacement due to the military takeover. The
WASH Cluster extended its coordination beyond the five
Humanitarian Response Plan locations targeted for 2021, to
include northern Chin, Kayah, South Shan states, Magway,
Sagaing and the southeast region of Myanmar. However, due to
limited funding, the coordination in some locations was covered
by the WASH programme team and other cluster team
members.93
• Quantity of water meets an initial minimum
Commitment 2: UNICEF delivered clean drinking water to 150,343 people EQ.2 7
survival level of 7.5 litres, to at least 15 litres per
affected by the conflict in Chin, Kachin, Kayah, Kayin, Rakhine,
Water supply person per day (Sphere) northern Shan, and Yangon. This includes 28,145 people in the EQ.6
Affected populations have safe • Drinking water supply services meet at least martial law townships receiving purified bottled drinking water
and equitable access to, and use a “basic” level, as per Joint Monitoring through partnerships with Terre des Hommes, Water Aid and
sufficient quantity and quality of Programme (JMP) standards the engagement of private companies.94
water to meet their drinking and • Quality of water meets WHO or national Onset of water shortages was concern especially in Rakhine. To
domestic needs
standards ensure an uninterrupted water supply to the IDPs and host
communities, UNICEF initiated its scarcity response to meet the
daily water needs of 28,078 internally displaced people in
93 Sitrep No.9 2021
94 Sitrep No.3 2022
97
COMMITMENTS BENCHMARK NARRATIVE/FINDINGS EQ SCORE
Pauktaw (23,105 IDPs) in Sittwe, and at Ah Agnu IDP site (4,973
IDPs) in Meybon township. UNICEF WASH Humanitarian
Action for Children appeal remains one-third funded although,
as funding becomes available, priority will be given to life-saving
WASH assistance for an additional 800,000 people living in
protracted camps and temporary displacement sites and host
communities.95
UNICEF continued to help people access water in Hlaing Thar
Yar – Yangon peri-urban township. Since January 2022, more
than 55,000 people have been reached with this water service.
UNICEF and WaterAid Myanmar were jointly supporting the
expansion of water production capacity of four water kiosks
through the provision of generators, water bottles, and additional
tanks with a sustainable business model and cost recovery
mechanism.96
• No-one is practicing open defecation
Commitment 3: Temporary sanitation latrines were constructed in some IDP EQ.2 7
• A maximum ratio of 20 people per functioning camps and host communities, for example; UNICEF partner
Sanitation EQ.6
shared toilet, separated for men and women, KBC and KMSS built temporary sanitation latrines in new IPD
Affected populations have safe with locks, child-friendly features and hand camps in Kachin State, CFSI built 300 household latrines in
access to, and use appropriate washing facilities, is ensured and adapted to Buthidaung and Maungdaw townships which covered a total of
sanitation facilities; and excreta is people with disabilities 2,976 conflict-affected host community members.
safely managed • Sanitation service meets at least “limited” level,
as per JMP standards
• Excreta is safely contained, collected,
transported, treated and disposed of in a way
that safeguards public health
95 Sitrep No.4 2022
96 Sitrep No.11 2022
98
COMMITMENTS BENCHMARK NARRATIVE/FINDINGS EQ SCORE
• Health care and nutrition treatment facilities
Commitment 4: UNICEF has expanded its humanitarian water, sanitation and EQ.2 8
meet at least “basic” JMP service levels for
hygiene (WASH) assistance, focusing on regions with the highest
WASH in health care facilities water, sanitation and hygiene services IDP populations, notably the northwest and southeast. Through EQ.6
and learning environments
• Learning facilities/schools for children, child- new partnerships in Chin, Kayah and the southeast, UNICEF
Affected populations have safe friendly spaces and protection‑transit centres has begun expanding its WASH response with the generous
access to, and use, appropriate have at least “basic” JMP service levels for support of donor partners. Four partnership projects including
WASH services in health care and water, sanitation and hygiene services with KMSS, Ar Yone Oo and the Community Development
learning facilities for children Association have been initiated to deliver life-saving assistance
• Affected populations benefit from hygiene
to an additional 94,000 affected people in Chin, Sagaing, Kayin,
awareness-raising activities and have access to
southern Shan and Kayah. Four more projects were under
hygiene and menstrual health information
development with Mercy Corps, Suwannimit Foundation, Relief
International and Mi Organization for southern Shan and Kayin.
The WASH response includes the provision of safe drinking
water, gender-segregated sanitation services, life-saving WASH
supplies, hygiene behaviour-change programmes and the
provision of WASH services in the health care centres and
temporary learning centres.97
• Periodic risk assessments are conducted and
Commitment 5: UNICEF WASH Sector has humanitarian response plan to EQ.2 7
inform sector policies and preparedness plans
collaborate with other inter-agencies, targeting HAC. WASH was
WASH system strengthening EQ.5
• Capacity development and technical support are not only humanitarian response but capacity building to other
WASH national and local systems provided to all stakeholders at national and sub- government and people but it was only focused on humanitarian EQ.6
are equipped to assess, prevent national levels on linking humanitarian, response after the military takeover, target was also changed as a
and address risks and hazards at development and peacebuilding result, prolonged to semi-urban areas where most vulnerable
service delivery and user level communities live in the most affected areas, communities
become to the WASH target, areas and targets have changed,
more broad areas, modality has changed towards the direct
intervention.
Based on the HAC 2021, UNICEF was providing ongoing
support to ensure continued delivery of needs-based lifesaving
humanitarian WASH services for at-least 100,000 IDPs and
97 Sitrep No.4 2022
99
COMMITMENTS BENCHMARK NARRATIVE/FINDINGS EQ SCORE
conflict-affected communities in Rakhine, Kachin and Northern
Shan. UNICEF currently has six active partnerships with INGO
and NGOs and two contractors in Rakhine, three INGO/NGO
partners in Kachin and three partners in Northern Shan. While
continuing to deliver a humanitarian response, UNICEF also
worked closely with partners and field staff to put in place a
preparedness and response plan to swiftly provide support and
respond in the event of additional disruption of services. Critical
supplies were procured for a target population of 116,000 people.
These supplies will be prepositioned in Yangon and in field
locations to ensure a swift response when needed. Long term
agreements and contracts were being established in order to
deliver clean drinking water by truck, in order to meet needs that
may arise in urban areas including townships of Yangon such as
Hlinethaya, Shwepyitha, Dagon Myothit (South), Dagon Myothit
(North), Dagon Myothit (Seikkan) and North Okkalapa which
were under martial law. Efforts were being pursued to coordinate
with partners and vendors to explore various modalities of
delivery of WASH services to populations in need.98
• Children, their caregivers and communities are
Commitment 6: UNICEF WASH Sector supported handwashing stations, EQ.1 7
aware of available WASH services and how and
handwashing soaps, hygiene kits, water storage buckets, water
Hygiene promotion and where to access them purification sachets and emergency latrines to IDPs and EQ.2
community engagement for
• Children, their caregivers and communities are displaced people to practise the behaviour of hand washing and
behaviour and social change
engaged through participatory behaviour change no one was practicing open defecation. 24 handwashing
At-risk and affected populations interventions communal handwashing stations were installed and 9,590 people
have timely access to culturally • Affected people receive key hygiene were reached with a handwashing behaviour change
appropriate, gender- and programme.99
communication in a timely manner
age‑sensitive information, services
• At least 70% of target population is aware of key Hygiene education sessions were provided in the camps and
and interventions related to
public health risks related to water, sanitation newly displaced people together with the distribution of hygiene
hygiene promotion, and adopt safe
98 Sitrep No.1 2021
99 Sitrep No.11 2022
100
COMMITMENTS BENCHMARK NARRATIVE/FINDINGS EQ SCORE
hygiene practices and hygiene and can adopt measures to reduce kits.
them
WASH Cluster finalized the following key plans during 2021: the
• Handwashing facilities are available as per the menstrual hygiene management guideline, the inclusion tool kit
SPHERE standards including a WASH assessment tool, the standard operation
• Affected populations have access to necessary procedures, WASH designs, and a WASH Cluster and EiE
hygiene items to adequately undertake essential guideline for reopening safe learning spaces in respect of the
daily personal and household hygiene activities MoE COVID-19 school opening guideline.100
• Affected populations benefit from hygiene
awareness-raising activities and have access to
hygiene and menstrual health information.
Women and girls have access to menstrual
supplies and facilities in the community
2.3.8. Social protection
STRATEGIC RESULT:
COMMITMENTS BENCHMARK NARRATIVE/FINDINGS EQ SCORE
Commitment 1: Coordination between the social protection and the UNICEF SPCRM Section collaborated with other sections, for EQ.5 7
humanitarian cash example: humanitarian plus cash grants, gender, MHPSS. It was
Coordination
not included the coordination with other sectors when initial
coordination systems are established and functional.
Effective coordination is response plan has developed, however SPCRM learned from
established and functional. other countries experiences, for example, CP response was
integrated with gender and disability and they are ongoing.
• Technical assistance is provided to existing
Commitment 2: Since April 19th, the enrolment of beneficiaries for the provision EQ.2 7
social protection systems to maintain regular
of emergency medical services in Hlaing Tharyar and Shwepithar
Support social protection social protection programmes, including social has started. After enrolment, beneficiaries become immediately EQ.7
systems
transfer payments eligible to obtain services including i) receiving health
100 Sitrep No.9 2021
101
COMMITMENTS BENCHMARK NARRATIVE/FINDINGS EQ SCORE
Adequate support is provided for • Where appropriate and feasible, multisector information (health education material), ii) medical consultations
the effective functioning of social humanitarian cash transfers are designed to with doctors on call, iii) outpatient referral and iv) cash subsidies
protection systems to cover costs for hospitalization. At the end of the reporting
strengthen and/or build nascent social
period, a total of 191 households had been enrolled, with an
protection systems
additional 560 expected by the next reporting period.101
• Where appropriate and feasible, technical
and/or financial assistance is provided to adjust UNICEF continued to provide the “Bright Start: Mobile-based
and/or scale up social transfers to respond to health microinsurance” pilot programme for primary health care
newly identified needs services in Yangon peri-urban area, Hlaing Thar Yar and Shwe
Pyi Thar townships. As of the end of this reporting period,
services have been provided to 10,091 participants, including
9,084 children under 7 and 1,007 pregnant women. To date,
participants have received 65,034 follow-up and telemedicine
consultation services together with 10,342 prescriptions, 2,599
investigations, 2,098 referrals, and 626 hospital cash grants. In
addition, there were also 388 appointments for outpatient
antenatal care for pregnant women and 1,356 outpatient
appointments for early childhood care for children under 7.102
Brightstart (micro-health programme) started before the military
takeover and it was quickly adapted to the new situation. End of
2021 there were 10,000 registered participants and now looking
at 30,000, participants can dial a number for free (5000) and they
get connected to a family doctor for consultation, costs will be
reimbursed up to certain threshold for treatment in health clinics.
UNICEF supported their income to use for their health, they
were assessable to the Health Micro Insurance (HMI) program
when clinics were not functioning. HMI provides hospital grant,
24 hours tele consultation so benefit for the affected
communities.
UNICEF was re-started to develop joint social protection
101 Sitrep: No.2 March 2021
102 Sitrep No.3 2022
102
COMMITMENTS BENCHMARK NARRATIVE/FINDINGS EQ SCORE
chaired by UNICEF to develop a joint strategy in Aug 2022 with
WFP and UNOPS (LIFT), to produce in Dec/Jan, assuming the
strategy will become a main funding vehicle.
In addition, UNICEF involved with the Cash Working Group
(CWG), provided training to them, shared information. CWG
was chaired by WFP and Mercy Corps.
UNICEF partner Tdh Deputy Country Representative explained
that when health workers were in CDM, Tdh provided initial of
post-natal care and nutrition tablets, de-worming tablets, cure
innutritious kids, while the health system was not well
functioning it was partially have supported the public health
component. He expressed that 5,000 households were in
Hlaingtharya township, Yay Oak Kan village was so hard to
access purified drinking water, they supported quality drinking
water (2021 sept to 2022 April) and that service supported the
affected communities to save their income to use for other social
services.
The Bright Start microinsurance programme continued to
provide mobile-based emergency health care services in
Yangon’s six peri-urban (Hlaing Thar Yar, Shwe Pyi Thar, North
Okkalar, North Dagon, South Dagon and Dagon Seikkan) with
the target of covering 27,500 programme participants. So far, the
programme was able to reach coverage of providing health care
services to 31,196 active participants including 30,480 children
under 5 and 716 pregnant women. Participants have received
49,702 telemedicine consultation services, 1,351 investigations of
antenatal care and 6 medications for pregnant women, plus 29
investigations and 6,247 medications for children under 5. In
addition, the programme was able to provide 2,070 hospital cash
grants for hospitalization of 1,420 pregnant women and 650
103
COMMITMENTS BENCHMARK NARRATIVE/FINDINGS EQ SCORE
children under 5.103
• Scale-up of social transfer programmes includes
Commitment 3: UNICEF conducted the needs assessment before humanitarian EQ.2 7
groups at risk of social exclusion when relevant
response and developed the programme based on needs
Access to social transfers and feasible assessment findings, targeted to the affected population from EQ.7
Support national systems to • Links between social transfers and social Hlaingtharya area those who less/ reduced jobs.
address financial barriers of the services are promoted
Prior to the military takeover, UNICEF had been supporting the
most disadvantaged and • Risk assessments are undertaken to implement
Government of Myanmar to conceptualize, design and deliver
vulnerable families to meet their safest access modality for at-risk groups, flagship social protection programmes, including Maternal and
essential needs
including girls and women Child Cash-Transfer (MCCT) programme, which had been
rolled out in seven States and Regions. The MCCT has provided
pregnant women and lactating mothers with subsidies of 45,000
Kyats (approximately US$ 30), paid on a quarterly basis, to
contribute to improving mothers’ and children’s nutritional
outcomes.104
After the military takeover, responding to the current
humanitarian crisis in peri-urban area of Yangon, UNICEF
Myanmar in partnership with Terre des hommes Lausanne (Tdh
L)was implemented the Humanitarian Cash Transfers (HCT) for
5,075 pregnant women and mothers with children aged under
two years in Hlaing Thar Yar Township, total 2,710 (527
pregnant women and 2,183 children under two years of age) have
been registered in the programme. The registration process was
supported by volunteer Mother Support Group (MSG) on
KOBO collect registration platform. Due to the highly unstable
nature of the political context, the registration process was being
implemented steadily but cautiously.105
In collaboration with communication for development (C4D)
103 Sitrep No.11 2022
104 Sitrep No.1 2021
105 Sitrep No.4 2021
104
COMMITMENTS BENCHMARK NARRATIVE/FINDINGS EQ SCORE
officer, the assessment of the field situation was completed in
order to plan effective and efficient communication. For
humanitarian cash assistance and integrated data management,
the Humanitarian cash Operation and Programme Ecosystem
was deployed and started with the administrative and registration
modules.106
• Social protection system scale-up is informed by
Commitment 4: The Complaint Feedback Response Mechanism (CFRM) for all EQ.2 6
community consultation
implementation, gave hot line numbers and taking action, mostly
Community engagement and EQ.7
• Any changes to procedures and requirements for MCCT program beneficiaries have issues in terms of lost their
AAP
social transfers are communicated to the phones, did not receive the cash assistance, cannot contact to
Communities are consulted and population doctors. Tdh did not put complaint box due to local context,
informed on the planning, design • Mechanisms to seek feedback and redress they formed the Mother Support Groups with the community
and implementation of social grievances are functional volunteers who informed the issues to take actions.
protection programmes
For cash assistance Tdh informed to the beneficiaries when cash
has transferred to them by SMS text messaging, Tdh worked at
the Hlaingtharya since 2016 and recruited the community
volunteers for Maternal and Child Health Program for advocacy
and support to health workers, they were supported in kinds at
first but later became Tdh paid staff (community mobilizer).
2.4. Cross-sectoral commitments
2.4.1. Gender equality and empowerment of girls and women
STRATEGIC RESULT: Children, adolescents and their communities benefit from gender-responsive programmes and services
106 Sitrep No.1 2022
105
COMMITMENTS BENCHMARK NARRATIVE/FINDINGS EQ SCORE
• Programmes are designed to prevent and
Commitment 1: UNICEF CO developed the “Gender Action Plan” up to 2024, EQ.2 7
mitigate the risks of GBV
when military takeover took over the plan and strategy was
Ending Gender-Based Violence EQ.7
• Coordination is established with GBV actors to unable to implemented. SPCRM Section conducted the “Gender
GBV prevention and risk ensure that GBV is mainstreamed in all sectors Programmatic Review” just before the military takeover which
mitigation for all is included in • All sectors’ frontline workers and personnel are was so useful as the Gender Action Plan was re-visited
programmes, with a focus on the trained and equipped with information on strategically, formed the working group with highest program
safety and resilience of girls and available GBV response services and referral management team. Gender Action Plan was approved, and
women. UNICEF can provide gender awareness training to the
procedures to support GBV survivors.
volunteers, regional adviser involved in the implementation and
considered the review program and capacity programs.107
GBV prevention was integrated in other sectors as a cross
cutting, ensured all UNICEF partners and community
volunteers were accessed to GBV awareness, training and have
knowledge on referral system too.
• Organizations representing adolescent girls,
Commitment 2: UNICEF IPs applied the gender equality principle, ensuring EQ.2 7
women’s rights and youth are engaged in
gender balance in recruiting staff/project volunteers, selecting
Community engagement and programme design, delivery and monitoring participants for training and awareness raising sessions and EQ.7
AAP with girls and women
• Women and adolescent girls are equitably women participation in project implementation.
Adolescent girls, women and their represented in community feedback and
UNICEF IPs put gender mainstreaming in all their project
respective organizations are complaints mechanisms
activities such as gender balance in training, staff and volunteer
actively engaged in the design and • Men and boys are mobilized to support and recruitment, created spaces for persons with disabilities and
delivery of programmes
promote gender equality and the rights and persons who live with disabilities to participate in the
engagement of women and girls Assessments. All project activities were based on long-term
aspects, considering the children's future and individual
development since they cannot live as Homeless and vulnerable
status which can create high risk of harms.
The grievance handling has been conducted via the hotlines set
up by UNICEF partners for the cash transfer programme. A
total of 269 complaints were received, recorded and resolved
107 KII Social Policy Specialist, SPCRM – UNICEF CO
106
COMMITMENTS BENCHMARK NARRATIVE/FINDINGS EQ SCORE
under the Complaint and Feedback Response Mechanism. Most
of the feedback and complaints were related to participants
changing the way they can be contacted, to ensure they receive
their cash transfer.108
• Context-specific gender analysis informs the
Commitment 3: SPCRM section developed the Gender Action Plan, formed the 7
design and delivery of programmes in all sectors
working group for that, provided several Gender trainings to its
Gender-responsive
• Planning, monitoring and evaluation of IPs ensuring gender principle was included in the intervention.
programming, including a lens
programmes, as well as reporting, include sex- SPCRM ensured the Gender mainstreaming to all UNICEF
on adolescent girls
and age-disaggregated data and strategic gender Sections intervention during the emergency response.
Analyses, needs assessments, indicators, in accordance with the UNICEF
UNICEF intervention with IPs against humanitarian responses
programming and enabling Gender Action Plan
ensured the gender equality, equity and disability inclusion in all
environments (e.g. partnerships,
• Programmes intentionally promote positive their project designs. Emergency response mainly focus to link
communications) respond to the
behaviour and social change toward gender with long term project. Parents seemed to reduce harsh physical
distinct needs and experiences of
equality, especially by empowering adolescent punishments to their children after accessing the CP awareness.
girls, women, boys and men
girls
• Programmes and enabling environment services
provided and/or supported are gender-
responsive and address the different needs of
girls, boys, men and women
108 Sitrep No.4 2022
107
2.4.2. Disabilities
STRATEGIC RESULT: Children and adolescents with disabilities and their caregivers have inclusive and safe access to humanitarian services and programmes
COMMITMENTS BENCHMARK NARRATIVE/FINDINGS EQ SCORE
Commitment 1: Identification of risks and barriers faced by children UNICEF CO SPCRM Section conducted a “Disability EQ.1 7
with disabilities is included in needs assessments and Assessment” with the trained volunteers, community members,
Inclusive needs assessments, EQ.2
analysis, and incorporated in humanitarian CSOs and persons with disabilities by using the same tools,
planning and monitoring
programme planning and monitoring community volunteers were not paid staff, but just to help the EQ.6
The needs of children with UNICEF by their own commitments, however since UNICEF
disabilities and their caregivers are did not conduct the fully disability program and just added the
identified and reflected in planning disability inclusion in the cash transfer program, training days
and monitoring. were short, did not proper for the community volunteers due to
not enough budget and human resources.
UNICEF provided the 15,000 kyat per under 5 children,
however when the child was identified as disabled cash assistant
has increased 20% more, added another 10,000 kyat. Other
sections from the UNICEF CO conducted the disability
inclusion with their own plan and Social Policy Specialist
(Disability Inclusion) supported them when they asked.
Commitment 2: Benchmark 2: UNICEF practiced a “Disability Inclusion” approach to try and EQ.1 6
ensure that persons with disabilities had access to humanitarian
Inclusive and safe access to • Physical accessibility for children with disabilities EQ.2
assistance, able to participate in all intervention activities, and no
information and services is included in planning and design of gender inequality in the implementation process. EQ.6
Children with disabilities and their humanitarian services and facilities
KMSS collected the data on persons with disabilities and
caregivers have safe access to • Accessibility of communication and information
identified their needs. Volunteer teachers were also trained on
humanitarian programmes for children with disabilities is incorporated in
disabled rights awareness. KMSS made partnership with disabled
planning and design of humanitarian
supporting organizations, for example, Eden Center for Children
programmes
with disabilities as their technical partner on persons with
disabilities.
Commitment 3: Community-based mechanisms/platforms exist for EQ.1 6
the systematic engagement of children with
Participation EQ.2
disabilities
Children with disabilities EQ.7
participate in the design of
programmes and in the decisions
108
COMMITMENTS BENCHMARK NARRATIVE/FINDINGS EQ SCORE
that affect their lives
2.4.3. Early childhood development
STRATEGIC RESULT: Young children have equitable access to essential services and parents and caregivers are supported to engage in nurturing care.
COMMITMENTS BENCHMARK NARRATIVE/FINDINGS EQ SCORE
Commitment 1: Targeted interventions for young children are Difficult access to many areas due to security and permit issues EQ.2 5
integrated into health, nutrition, WASH, child meant that access was limited, which was partially mitigated by
Access to services EQ.6
protection, education, early learning and parenting increased partnerships with CSOs and CBOs.
Young children have equitable and programmes
UNICEF, through its partner KMSS, provided three early
safe access to essential services to
childhood care and development kits and seven recreation kits to
fulfil their developmental needs
nine IDP camps in Mindat, benefiting 720 IDP children.109
Commitment 2: Support to practice nurturing care is available, To alleviate some of the challenges from school closure, EQ.2 5
inclusive and gender sensitive and used by parents UNICEF’s partners provided an orientation session to 209 (66
Support to parents and EQ.7
and caregivers with specific attention to females) volunteer teachers, Early Childhood Care and
caregivers
Development (ECCD) caregivers, and No formal Primary
adolescents and young parents
Parents and caregivers are Education (NFPE) facilitators on short term home-based
supported to practice nurturing learning. Additionally, 2,446 (1,211 girls) children of Grade-1 to
care Grade-4 were also provided with short term home-based
learning by volunteer teachers.110
Commitment 3: Training in ECD and nurturing care is conducted EQ.3 5
with health, nutrition, WASH, child protection and
Capacity-building
education frontline workers and partners
Capacity of frontline workers and
partners in inclusive ECD and
nurturing care is strengthened
109 Sitrep No.8 2021
110 Sitrep No.7 2021
109
2.4.4. Early childhood development
STRATEGIC RESULT: Adolescents have equitable access to services and programmes and are systematically and meaningfully engaged.
COMMITMENTS BENCHMARK NARRATIVE/FINDINGS EQ SCORE
• Age- and gender-responsive services and
Commitment 1: U-reports were an effective way of engaging adolescents, 5
programmes addressing the priority needs of
although network connectivity did not allow access to all areas.
Access to information and adolescent girls and boys are available, accessible
services
and used
Adolescent girls and boys have
safe access to gender-responsive
and inclusive services and
programmes that promote their
participation and respond to their
rights and needs
• Training and capacity-building for adolescent
Commitment 2: UNICEF gave life skill training to school dropout adolescents, EQ.3 5
girls and boys, including skills development, are
achieving over 90% on project indicators, however it was not
Capacity development available, accessible and undertaken across easy especially during the COVID19 period to set up the
Adolescent girls and boys have
sectors systematic strategy and approach.
equitable access to capacity-
• Adolescents are supported and promoted as
building opportunities, including
agents of change
skills development to make
informed decisions on issues
related to their lives, and be
effective agents of change within
their communities
• Community-based mechanisms/platforms are
Commitment 3: Adolescent girls and boys were consulted during the later EQ.1 5
functional for the systematic engagement of
phases of the L2 response. It was challenging to engage with
Adolescent engagement and adolescents in the design and implementation of adolescents, or indeed communities in general during the initial EQ.2
participation
programmes phases of the L2 response and continued to be challenging EQ.7
Adolescent girls and boys are where access was difficult.
engaged in the design and
implementation of humanitarian
programmes and peacebuilding
110
COMMITMENTS BENCHMARK NARRATIVE/FINDINGS EQ SCORE
initiatives
2.5. Situation-specific commitments
2.5.1. Public health emergencies (PHE)
STRATEGIC RESULT: Adolescents have equitable access to services and programmes and are systematically and meaningfully engaged.
COMMITMENTS BENCHMARK NARRATIVE/FINDINGS EQ SCORE
• Interagency and intersectoral coordination
Commitment 1: Challenging to engage, notably procurement and distribution of EQ.5 3
mechanisms, including cross‑border, are in place vaccines in the environment.
Coordination and leadership
and allocate clear roles and responsibilities
Effective coordination is across sectors, without gaps nor duplications
established with governments and • UNICEF led sectors are adequately staffed and
partners. skilled at national and sub‑national levels
• UNICEF core leadership and coordination
accountabilities are delivered
• Surge deployments and emergency procedures
are activated on a no‑regrets basis
• In case of the activation of the IASC Protocol
for the Control of Infectious Disease Events,
response modalities and capacities are adapted
and scaled up accordingly.
• Communities are reached with gender- and age-
Commitment 2: UNICEF’s RCCE activities and work with community-based EQ.2 6
sensitive, socially, culturally, linguistically
groups using formats tailored for specific groups, such as
Risk Communication and appropriate and accessible messages on disease people with disabilities, should have been a trusted source that EQ.3
Community Engagement
prevention, and on promotion of continued and increased knowledge of COVID19. The restrictions on
(RCCE) Communities are
appropriate use of health services movement and reliance on other forms of information,
reached with targeted messages on
• Local actors are supported and empowered to including social media, which was often unreliable meant that it
prevention and services and are
raise awareness and promote healthy practices was useful.
engaged to adopt behaviors and
practices to reduce disease UNICEF and their partners communicated relevant messages
111
COMMITMENTS BENCHMARK NARRATIVE/FINDINGS EQ SCORE
transmission and its impact. They • Systems are in place to allow communities to which helped to mitigate the effects of the pandemic.
participate in the design, guide the response and provide feedback for
implementation and monitoring of
corrective action
the response for ongoing
corrective action
• The risk of geographical spread of the outbreak
Commitment 3: Multi-sectoral activities were mobilised to the extent possible in EQ.2 6
and its potential impact are monitored, to
the context.
Strengthened public health inform early response and preparedness in at- EQ.7
response: prevention, care and
risk areas
treatment for at-risk and
• Specific needs and vulnerabilities of children and
affected populations
women are considered in prevention and
Populations in at-risk and affected treatment protocols, including in the design of
areas safely and equitably access patient-centred treatment programmes
prevention, care and treatment, to
• Communities directly affected by the PHE are
reduce disease transmission and
reached with Infection and prevention control
prevent further spread. Specific
(IPC)98 activities, including the provision of
attention is given to women and
critical medical, WASH supplies and services at
children
facility, community and households’ levels and
in public spaces
• Psychosocial support services contributing to
reducing transmission and PHE-related
morbidity are accessible to individuals and their
families directly or indirectly affected by the
PHE
• Children directly affected by the PHE receive an
integrated package of medical, nutritional and
psychosocial care
• Frontline workers at facility and community
level are trained in IPC and provided with
Personal Protective Equipment (PPE) as
appropriate for each situation and role
• Needs assessments are conducted early and
Commitment 4: As described above. EQ.1 6
regularly to ascertain the impact of the outbreak
112
COMMITMENTS BENCHMARK NARRATIVE/FINDINGS EQ SCORE
Continuity of essential services on the population, humanitarian needs, and EQ.2
and humanitarian assistance underlying needs not yet addressed
EQ.6
Essential services and • Essential services and humanitarian assistance in
humanitarian assistance are
Health, WASH, Nutrition, HIV, are maintained
maintained and scaled-up as
and scaled-up as necessary, and communities can
necessary, and communities can
access them in a safe and equitable manner
safely and equitably access them
• Protection services, including case management
and psychosocial support services are accessible
to individuals and their families in a safe and
equitable manner
• Continued and safe access to education is
maintained
• Existing social protection mechanisms are
maintained and expanded as necessary, including
through establishing or scaling up humanitarian
cash transfers
2.5.2. Large-scale movements of refugees, migrants and internally displaced persons
STRATEGIC RESULT: Children, their families and host communities are protected from violence, exploitation, neglect and abuse and have access to services and
durable solutions
COMMITMENTS BENCHMARK NARRATIVE/FINDINGS EQ SCORE
• Interagency and intersectoral coordination
Commitment 1: UNICEF had difficulties in accessing all displaced EQ.5 5
mechanisms, including cross-border, are in place
populations, which saw a significant increase in the wake
Coordination and leadership and allocate clear roles and responsibilities
of the military takeover. UNICEF has increasingly relied
Effective coordination is across sectors, without gaps nor duplications on partners, notably local CBOs and local networks, that
established with UNICEF’s • In situations where the Humanitarian
are able to access hard-to-reach populations to ensure that
participation. Coordination System and Refugee Coordination
their limited assistance was distributed according to need.
Mechanism co-exist, response modalities are
They have been increasingly successful in this quest by
adapted accordingly
adapting their processes for smaller organisations that are
113
COMMITMENTS BENCHMARK NARRATIVE/FINDINGS EQ SCORE
• UNICEF led sectors are adequately staffed and more flexible. However, UNICEF still faced obstacles in
skilled at national and sub‑national levels prioritising its assistance according to need, notably in
• UNICEF core leadership and coordination assessing needs and responding in a timely way to meet
accountabilities are delivered. needs amongst newly displaced populations and their
hosts.
• Best interest procedures are in place,
Commitment 2: UNICEF’s participation in interagency coordination, EQ.2 7
appropriately resourced and monitored
communication efforts and investments in capacity building of
Best interest of the child EQ.7
• All service providers have mechanisms in place partners helped to ensure that children were a focus in
The best interest of the child to identify vulnerable children and children at displaced communities. People with disability were not
guides all actions concerning risk of violence, abuse and exploitation, and sufficiently prioritised.
children, including status refer them to case management processes which
determination procedures and the include best interest procedures
identification of durable solutions
• Personnel in direct contact with children are
appropriately trained and skilled
• Child protection authorities/actors are involved
in determining the best interest of the child as
part of status determination procedures
• Child-friendly reception, accommodation and
Commitment 3: EQ.1 6
care arrangements are available that provide an
Reception, accommodation and adequate standard of living, and support EQ.2
care
families/ siblings to stay together EQ.7
Children and their families have • Child safeguarding and child protection policies
access to safe and age-, gender- and monitoring systems are integrated in all
and disability-appropriate reception centres and locations hosting children
reception, accommodation and and families
care
• Unaccompanied and separated children have
access to alternative care options that meet
minimum standards
• Children have timely access to information
Commitment 4: AAP systems were established by UNHCR and partners in IDP EQ.2 5
about their rights, feedback and complaints
camps which were already existing and some that had been
Access to information and mechanisms, in a language and format that established after new displacements in areas controlled by the EQ.7
meaningful participation
authorities. Coverage was more sporadic in areas where there
114
COMMITMENTS BENCHMARK NARRATIVE/FINDINGS EQ SCORE
Children have timely access to children of various ages and backgrounds can was regular displacement, especially where access was difficult.
child‑friendly information on their understand and use.
rights, available services, public • Children are enabled and supported to
health information, legal and
meaningfully participate in all decisions affecting
administrative processes and
their lives
durable solutions
• In line with UNICEF’s sectoral commitments,
Commitment 5: Services were non-discriminatory, though standards of EQ.2 8
essential services are provided to all children
assistance differed based on accessibility.
Access to services through supporting national planning processes
Children have access to essential and budgets; strengthening systems for service
services, without discrimination, provision; and, where needed, directly providing
regardless of their legal status services across all sectors
• Referral pathways and plans to ensure continued
access to services during a crisis are established
3. OPERATIONAL COMMITMENTS
3.1. Administration and finance
COMMITMENTS NARRATIVE/FINDINGS EQ SCORE
• Financial accountability, internal governance,
Commitment 1: While UNICEF has comparatively strong assessment (needs and EQ.4 7
control mechanisms and risk management are in
risk) capabilities, their budget and financial management systems
Efficient use of resources place and regularly updated do not make it easy to accurately measure results based on costs.
Programmes are delivered through
• Appropriate levels of authority are delegated UNICEF handled two finance accounts: low value procurement
transparent and efficient use of
within the CO to facilitate rapid and flexible (10,000 USD threshold-before USD 2,500) and Petty Cash.
resources.
response at field level These accounts supported to purchase the program stocks in
FOs warehouse, cash on hand for transportation cost, FOs can
more managed the cash at the FO level, CO directly provide the
supplies to our warehouse but during the covid FOs can procure
locally.
115
COMMITMENTS NARRATIVE/FINDINGS EQ SCORE
• Cash replenishment processes are in place and
Commitment 2: Although the L2 declaration has given UNICEF Myanmar more EQ.4 6
alternative options identified
flexibility in how they apply financial, administrative and project
Timely disbursement of funds
• Cash and funds transfer mechanisms are in place management rules, their application seems to be variable. Some
Cash is disbursed to partners and
and cash availability is regularly assessed partners complained that the financial rules for some activities
vendors in a timely manner and in
• Funds are disbursed in a timely manner, for (but not necessarily others) were not sufficiently flexible enough
compliance with established
intended purposes and in compliance with for a dynamic situation. Other partners noted that the
procedures
administrative processes were not always adapted to small CBOs
established procedures
with limited capacity who were managing small grants.
• Staff are provided with adequate resources,
Commitment 3: UNICEF allowed to handle 2 finance accounts: low value EQ.3 7
office space, equipment, transportation,
procurement (10,000 USD threshold-before USD 2,500) and
UNICEF field presence accommodation, security and logistics support Petty Cash. These accounts supported to purchase the program
Safe and conducive working which meet the duty of care principles and stocks in FOs warehouse, cash on hand for transportation cost,
environments and appropriate facilitate the delivery of programmes FOs can more managed the cash at the FO level, CO directly
accommodation are in place to • Practical business continuity plans are in place provide the supplies to our warehouse but during the covid FOs
enable UNICEF field presence and tests are conducted on a regular basis can procure locally.
and programme delivery
For Health HPD local partners were allowed to buy locally
except water purification tablets/water filter which were
dangerous, for example chlorine, but basic hygiene items were
allowed by the UNICEF supply section standard, UNICEF used
6 months SSFA type for the immediate response to the displaced
population, abled to provide the cross border supports, provide
some financial support in Thai baht.
3.2. Human resources
This section covers UNICEF managerial commitments and priorities, for which all UNICEF Divisions and Offices (CO/RO/HQ) are responsible.
COMMITMENTS BENCHMARK NARRATIVE/FINDINGS EQ SCORE
• Experienced and suitable personnel are
Commitment 1: Due to restricted policy of DFA, visa for the international staff EQ.2 4
identified within 48 hours after the sudden onset
was delayed, resulted no international staff came to Myanmar as
Timely deployment EQ.4
SURGE, Kachin FO team mentioned that international staff
Timely deployment of personnel came to Kachin FO but only 3 to 6 months as CP coordinator.
116
COMMITMENTS BENCHMARK NARRATIVE/FINDINGS EQ SCORE
at the onset of emergencies or deterioration of a humanitarian crisis and are Most surge deployments were remote and staff faced challenges EQ.7
enables rapid emergency response. deployed through surge mechanisms. in understanding the context.
• Human resource plans are established for
Commitment 2: Human resources was a critical issue for the ground context, in EQ.3 6
immediate, medium- and longer‑term needs, the CO there were many consultants whereas more locals need
Planning
including scale-up, scale-down and exit to be increased for the field offices, having more international
ROs, COs and field offices are strategies staff was sometimes more burden instead of helpful, they have
adequately staffed to enable different terms of UN Agenda, national staff know the context
ongoing humanitarian response in terms of what to do, where to go, workloads for all national
staff (both CO and FOs) was triple as extend of new intervention
areas followed by new displaced people and it was so exhausting
for them.
It needs more budget and human resources to implement of
activities completely.
On the other hand, UNICEF IPs discussed that UNICEF has
sufficient human resources for external coordination, considered
not to overlap the supports.
• Duty of care measures are in place
Commitment 3: UNICEF established well-being mechanisms, including EQ.5 9
• UNICEF personnel receive information on counselling, town hall meetings, HR support from an early
Well-being
available care/support stage.
Duty of care for UNICEF
personnel is assured
• Personnel complete applicable mandatory
Commitment 4: UNICEF, along with most of the international community, were EQ.3 3
training and have access to supplementary
not prepared for the military takeover and its subsequent
Capacity training/learning on emergency preparedness aftermath. Most UNICEF field staff did not have the capacity to
UNICEF personnel have and response make decisions.
appropriate knowledge of
emergency preparedness and
response
• Standards of conduct are disseminated and
Commitment 5: The L2 response has greatly expanded capacity building EQ.2 7
UNICEF personnel complete applicable
opportunities for national CSOs and CBOs across all themes,
Standards of conduct UNICEF mandatory training sectoral, child protection and working in conflict affected EQ.4
personnel observe organizational
117
COMMITMENTS BENCHMARK NARRATIVE/FINDINGS EQ SCORE
standards of conduct, both as an • Appropriate and timely action is taken in environments.
individual responsibility and an response to any breaches
organizational commitment.
• Leadership promotes a culture that aligns with
These include standards on
the organisation’s standards of conduct
discrimination, harassment, sexual
• Complaint and feedback mechanisms are in
harassment and abuse of
authority, child safeguarding and place and accessible to affected populations and
SEA external stakeholders
3.3. Information and communication technology (ICT)
COMMITMENTS NARRATIVE/FINDINGS EQ SCORE
• All high-risk COs preposition essential, ready-to-
Commitment 1: The challenge of weak or non-existent internet connectivity in EQ.2 6
use emergency ICT kits
the project areas was addressed through the installation of
Timely deployment EQ.4
• Core UNICEF information systems and temporary ICT infrastructure to improve accessibility for
ICT infrastructure and solutions associated infrastructure are in place, including beneficiaries. Efforts were also being made to address challenges
are deployed in a timely manner, secure corporate data connectivity around out-migration of enrolled beneficiaries, or inability to
supporting efficient programme • Platforms, tools and end-user devices are contact beneficiaries through a re-enrolment process.111
implementation and staff security. provided for data collection and analysis and for UNICEF Myanmar in partnership with Terre des hommes
communication with the affected population Lausanne (Tdh L) implemented Humanitarian Cash Transfers
• Shared telecommunications and data (HCT) for 5,075 pregnant women and mothers with children
communications service delivery options are aged under two years in Hlaing Thar Yar Township. To date,
identified with partners total 2,710 (527 pregnant women and 2,183 children under two
years of age) have been registered in the programme. The
registration process was supported by volunteer Mother Support
Group (MSG) on KOBO collect registration platform. Due to
the highly unstable nature of the political context, the registration
111 Sitrep No.4 2021
118
COMMITMENTS NARRATIVE/FINDINGS EQ SCORE
process was being implemented steadily but cautiously.112
• Field ICT personnel are trained and involved in
Commitment 2: UNICEF used online platform to provide the several trainings EQ.3 6
emergency simulation exercises at interagency,
to its partners including ToTs.
Capacity regional and country level
ICT personnel have the capacity
to respond to emergencies in line
with Telecoms Security Standards
and interagency standards
• Technical and organizational safeguards and
Commitment 3: UNICEF practise the data protection policy even before the EQ.2 6
procedures are implemented to ensure proper
military takeover, for example, UNICEF CP Section has the
Data protection data management, data protection and privacy information sharing and data protection SOP in terms of sharing
Data privacy and adherence to data on case management.
protection principles and
standards are ensured while
processing personal and sensitive
data about affected or at-risk
populations
3.4. Communication and advocacy
COMMITMENTS BENCHMARK NARRATIVE/FINDINGS EQ SCORE
Commitment 1: In line with UNICEF’s child safeguarding policy and UNICEF has put in place an Accountability to Affected EQ.2 7
ethical and safety standards: Populations (AAP) framework for health, WASH, nutrition,
Communication
child protection, education, and social policy, starting with
Accurate information on the partners in Rakhine State, AAP training module was developed,
situation and needs of children, and training was provided some of its partners, for example
112 Sitrep No.4 2021
119
COMMITMENTS BENCHMARK NARRATIVE/FINDINGS EQ SCORE
women and their communities and • Communication strategies are implemented in a KMSS and KBC in the Kachin State.
UNICEF’s response are shared in coherent manner at country, regional and global
UNICEF continues to co-lead the Risk Communication and
a timely manner.
levels Community Engagement (RCCE) Working Group, with the
• Information is released rapidly and regularly in objective of sharing information related to COVID-19 and
anticipation of, and during the immediate monitoring social media reports on myths, rumours and
aftermath (within 24 hours) of new emergencies concerns around the COVID-19 vaccine. Frequently asked
or new developments in protracted crises questions and answers, a factsheet for children and training
modules for health workers were being prepared to support
• Key messages and updated facts are regularly
COVID vaccination. In partnership with Parami Development
shared with external audiences through media,
Network (PDN), SBCC interventions have been carried out
digital channels and multi-media assets
through community mobilization activities in six townships of
supporting audience engagement and resource
southern Shan, aiming to reach more than 40,000 people. The
mobilization
activities covered promoting awareness and good practices
around Maternal, Newborn and Child Health (MNCH),
nutrition, the expanded programme on immunization, COVID-
19 prevention and promotion of vaccination. IPC trainings were
also provided for three implementing partner organizations to
strengthen their capacities in community mobilization activities
around MNCH, nutrition, immunization and COVID-19.113
In December 2022, UNICEF continued to disseminate life-
saving messages on maternal and child health, nutrition,
immunization, mental health and psychosocial support, mine-
risk education, child protection and early childhood care and
development through the weekly posts of the “Knowledge Talk”
Viber channel. The channel also marked the International Day
of Elimination of violence against women, World AIDS Day and
International Day of Disabled Persons by creating user-friendly
and interactive messages to raise awareness and encourage the
public to take collaborative actions. The channel has gained more
than 500 subscribers with more expected following the official
launch in early 2023. Orientation sessions for partners were also
113 Sitrep No.4 2022
120
COMMITMENTS BENCHMARK NARRATIVE/FINDINGS EQ SCORE
being organized to boost the number of subscribers.
Communication materials (pamphlets and posters) for maternal,
newborn and child health messages were developed to support
the community mobilization of UNICEF’s implementing
partners. 4,000 maternal, newborn, and child health (MNCH)
handbooks and 13,000 MNCH and nutrition related materials
have been printed. UNICEF partner PDN reached 478 mothers
with information on good nutrition practices, including cooking
demonstrations. In addition, 1,176 mothers and caregivers of
children aged under 2 were reached through awareness, referral
and dialogue sessions on the importance of routine
immunization. A total of 1,084 mothers of children under the
age of five, including pregnant women, were reached through
mothers' group discussions on maternal, newborn and child
health.114
• Advocacy strategies are actioned in a coherent
Commitment 2: Seven separate COVID-19 prevention messages were translated EQ.2 6
manner at country, regional and global levels to
into 16 ethnic languages, with a total of 564,800 posters printed
Advocacy address priority child rights issues and critical and distributed in Kachin, Shan, Kayin and Chin states through EQ.7
Advocacy is conducted at country, programming or policy gaps implementing partners. These reached more than 4.5 million
regional and global levels to • Reliable data and child-specific information are people. UNICEF also translated 11 separate messages
protect the rights of children, regularly collected and used safely and ethically promoting vaccination against COVID-19, into 22 ethnic
women and their communities, to influence decision-makers versions. It also translated a home-care animation video into 18
promote adherence to ethnic versions which were shared with WHO, the United
international laws and standards, Nations Office for Project Services, UNOPS and risk
facilitate principled humanitarian communication and community engagement partners including
access and the delivery of ethnic health organizations. In addition, with partners’ support,
programmes, and promote child- the social behaviour change communications (SBCC) activities
friendly policies and practices were carried out at community level to increase awareness of
COVID-19 prevention and promotion of COVID-19
vaccination in Special Region (2) in Wa Region and Special
Region (4) in east Shan State, and reached nearly 50,000 people.
114 Sitrep No.11 2022
121
COMMITMENTS BENCHMARK NARRATIVE/FINDINGS EQ SCORE
A similar project was being carried out in partnership with the
PDN, in six townships of southern Shan. It aims to reach more
than 40,000 people through SBCC intervention, with community
mobilization activities to promote awareness of, and good
practices on, MNCH, nutrition, Expanded Programme on
Immunization, COVID-19 prevention and the promotion of
vaccination.115
However, it was found that advocacy was not enough for village
communities since their education level was weak. Field
Coordinator from the PDN revealed that Covid awareness
activities were more effective since communities were so worried
and scared so that they shared the information to others, other
information was not shared that much due to weak education of
local communities and short project period. He suggested the
project period should be long term for effective advocacy since
practice upon their skills was so less, only 50% effective.
KMSS field staff discussed that UNCIEF can do a lot during the
military takeover including advocacy, for example; UNCIEF
conducted advocacy campaign, distributed pamphlets during the
protest which reached to many people (10,000 to 20,000), could
support to parents what to do when a child was being detained
by military.
3.5. Partnerships with governments and civil society organizations for programme implementation
COMMITMENTS NARRATIVE/FINDINGS EQ SCORE
• An up-to-date mapping of current and
Commitment 1: Due to Operationalization of UNCT engagement principles EQ.3 5
prospective government and civil society
Guidance for Programme Review (08 March 2021), all activities
Preparedness
with government have stopped. However, in some implementing
115 Sitrep No.1 2022
122
COMMITMENTS NARRATIVE/FINDINGS EQ SCORE
Humanitarian programmes and partners is maintained at country, regional and areas UNICEF FO and CO staff cannot avoid communicating
partnerships are identified in global levels with the government departments, for example; importing the
advance through contingency • Contingency planning and partnerships are health supplies for emergency assistance, to conduct the routine
planning and preparedness immunization for the affected communities including the
established with governments and CSOs in
measures children, visa application for the International staff, etc.
higher-risk countries, with simple activation
protocols for rapid operationalization On the other hand, UNICEF identified local CSOs on the
ground who can work with them in emergency humanitarian
assistance. UNICEF FOs worked closely with CSOs/ CBOs on
the ground in assisting affected communities with supplies and
technical awareness raising sessions.
Good relationship needs at present in working humanitarian
assistance. MoU of majority of the UNICEF partners will be
expired soon so that there was possible risk. New partners need
to register at the government office according to the
“Organization Registration Law” enacted by the State
Administration Council (“SAC”) on 28 October 2022.
• Humanitarian partnerships undergo fast-track
Commitment 2: UN Partnership Portal (UNPP) allowed non-registered EQ.5 7
review and approval procedures
organizations to register online which was very useful and
Simplified procedures
• Humanitarian partnerships with CSOs are supportive to the CSOs/ CBOs. Compared to the past UNICEF
Simplified procedures are used to signed no more than 15 working days after gave more decentralization for emergency response and supply,
establish timely partnership submission of required documents identifying the partners on the ground for SSFA was very
agreements quickly. In addition, UNICEF practised Note for the Record
(NfR) which supported to non-UNICEF partners and enhanced
the private partnership.
Lashio FO discussed about the partnership with local CSOs that
Northern Shan State was diverse with different dialects and
bigger area, they tried to work with local CSOs who understand
the communities, would like to work with CSOs who have same
culture and language with affected communities, they consulted
a lot with local CSOs.
• Funds are disbursed to governments and CSOs
Commitment 3: Timeliness of funding improved over time as UNICEF adapted EQ.4 6
no more than 10 working days after request of
to the situation. UNICEF also increased flexibility. However,
Timely disbursement of funds funds UNICEF partners did not always arrive in time and they must
Disbursement of funds to partners
spend their cash and activities were delayed as a result. They also
123
COMMITMENTS NARRATIVE/FINDINGS EQ SCORE
was timely indicated that UNICEF finance procedure was so rigid, so many
processes and not effective for timely and effectively response.
Partners requested to provide the one budget line for the
emergency usage.
• Appropriate capacity-building, tools and training
Commitment 4: During the L2 Emergency period, UNICEF identified local EQ.3 7
are provided to partners to ensure results-based
CSOs/ CBOs to work with. CSOs/ CBOs had little experience
Technical assistance for quality and quality programming of working with UN Agencies and weren’t familiar with UN EQ.6
and results-based programming
• Opportunities for knowledge exchange are Standards and Procedures. There was a language barrier, and the
Technical assistance and
established to leverage the expertise and capacity majority had no registration. UNICEF provided online and in-
capacity‑building are provided to
of partners person training to them and empowered them.
partners to foster quality
programming UNICEF gave opportunity to local organizations to work with
them, shared technical knowledge was so grateful, it was good
that resources from UNICEF will be left in the communities,
they should work with local organizations more and should
appoint enough UNICEF staff. He also discussed that UNICEF
gave training for individual capacity development, and
awareness, in addition UNICEF was fast in replying.
• Humanitarian partnerships include a monitoring
Commitment 5: Before making HPD UNCIEF made counterchecking on EQ.4
framework, with a special focus on quality
profiles of CSOs whether they have partnership with other UN
Monitoring programming Agencies. Some kind of information sources received from the
Continuous improvement in • Field monitoring missions are conducted to communities on this, but UNICEF directly did the countercheck
programme quality, coverage and support programme implementation quality and in terms of their reliability, how extent they can reach. UNICEF
equity is driven by partner identify areas for programme and partnership practised monitoring mechanism for supply distribution, for
dialogue, feedback mechanisms, improvement in line with the UNICEF Field example, not only one time during the distribution but post
field monitoring and corrective Monitoring Guidance monitoring mechanism of countercheck approach was practised
actions too.
UNICEF put in place the AAP framework for effective
monitoring and feedback mechanism, ensured all of its partners
were accessed to AAP training and well informed of the AAP
principle.
3.6. Resource mobilization
124
COMMITMENTS BENCHMARK NARRATIVE/FINDINGS EQ SCORE
• Multi-year, predictable and flexible funding is
Commitment 1: Given funding shortfalls and the urgent need to deliver critical EQ.4 6
mobilized from private and public sectors to
emergency assistance to newly displaced populations in conflict-
Mobilization of adequate and reduce the gap between humanitarian needs and affected areas in the Southeast Region as well as affected urban
quality resources
the resources available to meet them and peri-urban areas in Yangon, UNICEF's own resources were
Adequate and quality resources are • Funding is secured to support preparedness for mobilized [through Emergency Programme Fund (EPF)—an
mobilized in a timely and faster, timely and more cost-effective responses internal loan mechanism] and were being used for the urgent
predictable manner to support • Internal funding mechanisms (Emergency provision of critical health and WASH services to the most
preparedness and response to vulnerable.116
Programme Fund and Thematic Funding) are
humanitarian and protection
used to rapidly respond and scale up The Nutrition Cluster was among the least funded clusters in
needs, particularly of the most
programmes. Myanmar and efforts were continuing to mobilize more
vulnerable populations.
resources to support the urgently needed humanitarian response.
To date, 9.3 per cent (US$6 million) of the cluster’s requirements
have been mobilized.117
• Strategic investments are made from UNICEF
Commitment 2: UNICEF MCO has included relief, recovery and longer-term 5
thematic pools to support preparedness,
programming in its strategy, but survey respondents and
Linking humanitarian and humanitarian response and activities related to interviewees cautioned that there are significant limits imposed
development resources
system-strengthening and resilience-building by the context and note the difficulty of taking a long-term
Integration of humanitarian and
• Localization of humanitarian and development programming perspective without engagement with
development resources is
programming is supported through multi-year, government structures. UNICEF’s response had greatly
enhanced
predictable and flexible funding. Systems are in expanded capacity building opportunities for national CSOs
place to track, monitor and report on these and CBOs across all UNICEF sectors. This has the potential as
an invaluable investment for Nexus programming once the
investments
situation improves.
• Available resources are allocated based on needs
Commitment 3: UNICEF was perceived both by its peers and by its own staff a EQ.2 6
assessment
relatively risk-averse organisation but the evaluation team
Impartiality and risk-sharing
• Procedures are in place to manage donor observed that following the military takeover, UNICEF was
Resources are allocated
conditions at CO level regularly updating their risk assessments via the risk register
impartially, based on the needs of
116 Sitrep No.4 2021
117 Sitrep No.10 2022
125
COMMITMENTS BENCHMARK NARRATIVE/FINDINGS EQ SCORE
affected populations • Donors are aware of and understand UNICEF where they identified key risks and proposed mitigation
risk management policies strategies. UNICEF trained of field staff to operate in complex,
high-threat environments CHTEs along with the development
of access action plans and a more systematic way of monitoring
access constraints.
3.7. Security management
COMMITMENTS NARRATIVE/FINDINGS EQ SCORE
• SRM process is developed and supports valid,
Commitment 1: UNICEF was not prepared for the military takeover and its EQ.2 8
context-specific and timely risk management
subsequent aftermath and international agencies spent much of
Security Risk Management decisions the first few weeks focused on ensuring the safety and security
(SRM)
• SRM decisions balance security risks with of their staff. UNICEF expanded Third-Party Monitoring to
Security risks that could affect Programme Criticality other areas as their own access became more limited due to
personnel, premises, assets or the security constraints.
ability to deliver emergency
programmes are identified,
assessed and managed, in
compliance with the SRM policy
• Sufficient human, material and financial
Commitment 2: Additional HR support was made available after the military EQ.2 7
resources are allocated, in a timely fashion, to
takeover, including psychosocial counselling for staff. Senior
Adequate resources support the assessment of security risks and management also organized regular town hall meetings with EQ.5
SRM capacity is adequate to implementation of management measures staff to inform and help manage trauma and stress.
manage risks to personnel, assets
and premises and enable the
delivery of programmes
• Collaboration with and support to partners on
Commitment 3: Immediately following the military takeover, the UNICEF EQ.5 8
security matters is effective and is guided by the
Representative took on the additional role of acting Designated
Coordination UN Security Management System (UNSMS) and Official for UN staff security. UNICEF engaged with UN
Active participation in interagency the Saving Lives Together (SLT) framework security system and followed guidance.
security fora at global and national • Active participation to the following fora is
levels ensures that SRM measures, ensured: Security Cell and Security Management
policies and guidelines enable Team at national level, Inter-Agency Security
126
COMMITMENTS NARRATIVE/FINDINGS EQ SCORE
programme delivery by UNICEF Management Network (IASMN) at global level,
and partners and Saving Lives Together (SLT) at global and
national level
3.8. Supply and logistics
COMMITMENTS BENCHMARK NARRATIVE/FINDINGS EQ SCORE
• Emergency supplies are kept available in Supply
Commitment 1: UNICEF's emergency preparedness in MCO focused almost EQ.3 3
Division hubs and/or suppliers’ premises,
exclusively on natural disaster events and significant unplanned
Preparedness and/or at RO/CO level, including in some cases adaptations were required by the new context. UNICEF CO
Supply and logistics preparedness in governments’ or partners’ warehouses usually provided the basic supplies, if CO has no supplies, it
measures are in place at global, • Long-term or contractual arrangements for should be supply by the FO (contingency stocks). Before 2021
regional and country levels, procurement of emergency supplies and logistics all Sections from the UNICEF CO has conducted the “Risk
including prepositioning of services are in place at global, regional and Assessment” and prepositioned the stocks for the emergency
supplies and contractual country levels supplies. Yangon CO and other areas procure as needed, after
arrangements for logistics services the military takeover UNICEF used “Note for the Record” and
• National and local capacity to segment and out-
and more commonly requested able to distribute some supplies to UNICEF none registered
source supply chain services to the private sector
goods partners.
is improved.
In terms of preparedness, UNICEF CO never considered about
the Military takeover despite of considering many scenarios. It
didn’t think in the plan for the supplies whether it will be
sustained or re-packed for the disabilities, access to most remote
areas where most vulnerable groups were located.
UNICEF prepared very well before the military takeover, but
due to political crisis and covid 19 restrictions supplies were not
able to provide in timely manner. For example; supplies cannot
be reached during the crisis especially hard to reach area like
Mone Koe – Northern Shan State where armed fighting were so
severe.
• Financial, material and human resources are
Commitment 2: UNICEF identified several CSOs and NGOs who can distribute EQ.4 3
deployed to support timely delivery of supplies
the emergency supplies to the affected communities in time.
Timely procurement, transport
• Supplies are delivered to country entry points
and delivery of supplies UNICEF Supply and Logistics Section faced huge challenges in
within 72 hours for Rapid Response, and within
127
COMMITMENTS BENCHMARK NARRATIVE/FINDINGS EQ SCORE
Life-saving supplies for children 14 days by air or 60 days by sea for humanitarian first 3 months after the military takeover, SAC controlled all
and communities are delivered to responses medical supplies importation strictly, asked UNICEF
partners and/or point-of-use in a • Supplies are distributed to partners and/or distribution plan, etc.
timely fashion
point-of-use in a timely fashion and the end-user Supply & Logistics faced an in country distribution issue,
monitoring protocols are in place distributed the supplies low profile, UNICEF logo was not
visible, sent the supplies up to the township level (points),
secondary distribution was done by the local NGOs, end-users
monitoring cannot be done due to security issue, only partners’
reports have received, most supplies were distributed to the
IDPs, TPM cannot go to the IDP camps as they need permission
from the authorities,
• Local/regional sourcing is identified and
Commitment 3: Supply timelines for international procurement were around 175- EQ.2 5
prioritised
190 days, whereas lead times for local freight forwarders were
Sustainable procurement, EQ.1
• Sea/road shipments are prioritised for offshore reduced from over 280 days in 2021 to just over 100 days during
supply and logistics
procurement following the first wave of 2022 by means of additional LTAs and more selective EQ.4
arrangements
deliveries procurement. Except for staff who have worked in Rakhine and
Sustainable procurement, supply • In-country logistics service arrangements Kachin who were used to working in a highly restricted
and logistics arrangements (customs clearance, warehousing, transport) are environment, most of the staff, national or international, had no
(contracts, agreements and/or prior experience of working in a context with severe restrictions
identified and established, including
plans) are made available at the on procurement. There was a progressive shift to local
collaboration with partners
onset or deterioration of a procurement in conflict prone regions where possible.
humanitarian crisis
UNICEF FOs can handle two budget lines such as Low
Value Procurement allow USD 10,000 threshold (before USD
2,500 threshold), and Petty Cash for transportation cost.
Although UNICEF CO directly provided the supplies to FOs
warehouse, FOs can procure supply items locally during the
COVID. Due to program stocks in the warehouse and cash on
hand for transportation cost, supply distribution can manage at
the FO level which was fast to deliver the affected communities.
128
Annex 13. List of Persons Interviewed
Key Informant Interviews
Organisation type Organisation name Position M F
UNICEF UNICEF Myanmar Chief of Field Office (Taunggyi) 1
UNICEF UNICEF Myanmar OiC for Field Office (Hpa-an) 1
UNICEF UNICEF Myanmar OiC for Field Office (Chin) 1
UNICEF UNICEF Myanmar OiC for Field Office (Rakhine) 1
UNICEF UNICEF Myanmar OiC for Field Office (Kachin) 1
UNICEF UNICEF Myanmar Chief of Field Office (Lashio) 1
UNICEF UNICEF Myanmar KII with UNICEF FO Lashio 5 1
UNICEF UNICEF Myanmar KII with UNICEF FO Myitkyina 3 3
UNICEF UNICEF Myanmar KII w UNICEF FO Hpa-an 4 4
UNICEF UNICEF Myanmar Former CD (until April 2021) 1
Chief of Advocacy, Comms &
UNICEF UNICEF Myanmar Partnerships 1
UNICEF UNICEF Myanmar Chief Field Operations 1
UNICEF UNICEF Myanmar Deputy Representative 1
UNICEF UNICEF Myanmar Deputy Representative Operations 1
UNICEF UNICEF Myanmar Representative 1
UNICEF UNICEF Myanmar Field Support Officer 1
CP Specialist (Policy, Advocacy &
UNICEF UNICEF Myanmar System Strengthening) 1
CP Specialist (Capacity Building of the
UNICEF UNICEF Myanmar Justice System) 1
UNICEF UNICEF Myanmar SP Specialist (Disability Focal) 1
UNICEF UNICEF Myanmar SP Specialist (Gender Focal) 1
UNICEF UNICEF Myanmar Supply & Logistics Manager 1
UNICEF UNICEF Myanmar Supply and Logistics 1
UNICEF UNICEF Myanmar Procurement Officer 1
UNICEF UNICEF Myanmar Social Change Specialist 1
UNICEF UNICEF Myanmar WASH Officer 1
UNICEF UNICEF Myanmar Section Chief 1
CP Specialist (MRM International
UNICEF UNICEF Myanmar focal) 1
UNICEF UNICEF Myanmar CP Officer (MRM National focal) 1
UNICEF EAPRO Bangkok Education cluster 1
UNICEF EAPRO Bangkok Regional Advisor Planning 1
UNICEF EAPRO Bangkok Regional Chief HR 1
UNICEF EAPRO Bangkok Regional Advisor Emergency 1
UNICEF EMOPS, UNICEF HQ Emergency Specialist (Asia Desk) 1
Chief, EMOPS’ humanitarian field
UNICEF EMOPS, UNICEF HQ support section 1
1.Project Manager (Emergency
Response), 2.Project Coordinator
Suwannimit Foundation (Emergency Response), 3.Staff for Mae
International IPs (SNF) Daw Clinic (Women & Children Health 2 2
129
Organisation type Organisation name Position M F
focus), 4.Staff for Women & Children
Protection)
1.Project Lead (Lab Accex, Electronic
system for early infant diagnosis & viral
load testing), 2.Project Lead
(OpenMRS - Electronic medical record
International IPs Chai system for ART patients) 2
1.M&E Manager, Programme Quality
Assurance, PME focal, 2.Programme
International IPs Wateraid Officer, 3.M&E Officer 1 2
International IPs Terre des Hommes Deputy Country Representative 1
International IPs World Vision Myanmar N/A 1
Community and Family
Services International WASH Officer, Education Officer,
International IPs (CFSI) Protection Officer 3
1.Project Manager (Health), 2. Project
Manager (Nutrition), 3.Project Manager
(Livelihood), 4.Child Protection Case
Officer, 5.Project Coordinator,
National IPs KMSS 6.Director 5 1
1.Branch Humanitarian Coordinator,
2.Project Coordinator, 3.Area
Coordinator, 4.Kutkai Area
National IPs METTA Coordinator 1 3
National IPs METTA National Director 1
1.Project Manager (CP), 2.Project
National IPs KMSS Officer (CP) 1 1
Myanmar Health Assistants
National IPs Association (MHAA) Project Manager, M&E Officer 2
National IPs KMSS Project Manager 1
National IPs KMSS CP Project Manager 1
National IPs KMSS Project Manager 1
Client's Caregiver for Mindat Township
National IPs KMSS (Volunteer) 1
CBOs / CSOs JS Project Officer, Justice Society 1
1.Head of office&Lawyer, 2.Senior
CBOs / CSOs LCM Lawyer, 3.Lawyer 1 5
Parami Development
CBOs / CSOs Network (PDN) Programme Coordinator 1
Parami Development
CBOs / CSOs Network (PDN) Field Coordinator 1
CBOs / CSOs Bawinu Director 1
1.Project Manager, 2.Admin staff,
CBOs / CSOs Aryone Oo 3.WASH Technician, 4.Project Officer 3 1
1.CP Consultant, 2.WASH Officer,
CBOs / CSOs KMSS 3.CP Assistant 1 2
Legal officer, Project manager, Project
CBOs / CSOs Thazin Legal Group officer 3
Community Development
CBOs / CSOs Association (CDA) Project Manager, Project Officer 2
1.CPG member, Spiritual
CBOs / CSOs KMSS Representative), 2.CPG member, 1 2
130
Organisation type Organisation name Position M F
Mothers' Representative), 3.CPG
member, Fathers' Representative)
Other partners UNHCR Senior Field Assistant 1
Other partners USAID BKK Programme team 2 1
Other partners ECHO Myanmar technical team 2 2
Other partners UNOPS Former Head of UNOPs / acting HC 1
Other partners Mekong Economics N/A 1
Consultants - UNICEF Myanmar
Other partners N/A Mgmt Review 2
Other partners Japan Embassy Economic Cooperation Coordinator 1
Other partners DFAT Policy Officer 1
Other partners DFAT First Secretary 1
Total 72 52
Community Focus Group Discussions
FGDs Location M F
FGD with Camp Community KBC 1 Camp, Kut Kai, Shan North 3 4
FGD with young adults who contacted wiht Law Myitkyina, Kachin State 1 4
FGD with Village Community (Aryone Oo Project) Insein village, Kalay township, Chin 6 5
State
FGD with Parents (KMSS Project) Shukhinthar village, Kalay township, 8 1
Chin State
FGD with Village Community (KMSS Project) Letpanchaung village, Kalay township, 3 2
Chin State
FGD with Village Community (KMSS Project) Cing Khua village, Hakha 4 5
FGD with Village Community Hopong township, Shan South 3 2
FGD with Village Community Taunggyi township, Shan South 1 2
FGD with Village Community Farrawn village, Hakha, Chit State 2 4
FGD with IDP Community Thet Kae Pyin Camp, Sittwe 8
FGD with Host Community Taung Pue Village, Pauk Taw 9 4
township, Rakhine State
FGD with Village Community Paya & Line Htaung Villages, Hpa-an 2 4
township
FGD with Village Community Pan Kone Village, Kyeikmaraw 4 3
township, Kayin State
FGD with Village Community Sakta Village, Hakha, Chin State 1 4
FGD with Informal Settlements Community Hlaing Thar Yar Township, Yangon, 2 4
Ward 20
FGD with Informal Settlements Community Hlaing Thar Yar Township, Yangon, 2 5
Ward 2 & 5
Total 51 61
131
Annex 14. Evaluation Ethics
Principle Explanation Considered in the RTE design
Independence Evidence that is objective and credible. The Team Leader is an
Independent from programme design, independent consultant and with
management and implementation. Evaluations full overall editorial control
carried out by knowledgeable experts with high within the parameters of quality
integrity who are independent of those standards. The transparency and
responsible for the design, planning and traceability of evidence will be
implementation of the intervention. ensured - within the boundaries
of ethical standards, below.
Stakeholder engagement to
promote utility will be balanced
with maintaining independence.
Optimize To reduce pressures on busy staff, the The design makes efforts to
transaction evaluation needs to maximize coordination and ensure that data is shared/made
costs information sharing. maximum use of, and that field
time spent with busy field staff
adds value.
Transparency Evaluations will be made publicly available for The evaluation team will develop
sharing lessons more widely and for a communication plan for the
accountability purposes. Disclosure will also evaluation and will engage in its
allow review and test of the analysis and the implementation as required.
methodologies used by other evaluators and
researchers.
Participation Where possible the evaluation and the Different categories of affected
evaluation process must be designed to ensure populations will be engaged in
that direct beneficiaries (women, girls, boys the evaluation process,
and men) of the intervention being evaluated principally through focus group
are consulted and have opportunity to bring discussions.
forward views and suggestions for
improvements.
Interviews/Discussions with children/ minors
The evaluation team used the following approach when interviewing children:
• With support from UNICEF & partners, modalities for engagement with children were agreed
prior to any discussions or meetings with the children themselves;
• The evaluators complied with national legislation regarding age of a child and any other
circumstances that allow for informed consent;
• Assent from the child and consent from his/her parents, guardians or teachers was sought. The
child/minor was given a choice to agree or disagree to participate; and
• The data collection tools were reflective of the children’s capacities and were clearly explained.
132
Annex 15. Interview Guides
The interview guides below are based on EQs in the Evaluation Matrix.
Guidance for team members: This interview guide is not intended to be a questionnaire, rather to be used
as a “checklist” during semi-structured interviews and FGDs to ensure that we are collecting relevant data
as we will need this to build an evidence base to support our conclusions and recommendations under each
key question. It is often useful to ask high level questions such as “tell me about the evolution of the response?
What were the key events/milestones?” and “what have been the particular achievements and challenges with interventions
supported by UNICEF?” and guide the discussion by probing with relevant sub-questions. It is often useful
to ask for concrete examples that help illustrate points made by key informants.
Please also use Table 5 (cross-cutting issues) in this Inception Report as a key reference and ask relevant
questions to ensure that we are paying appropriate attention to important cross-cutting issues, notably AAP,
conflict sensitivity, gender in emergencies, humanitarian principles, persons with disability, youth and
adolescents, and ECD.
We should not expect that key informants will be able to respond to all sub-questions. The main reasons
for first trying to understand the background and experience of the key informant is to give you an idea of
which sub-questions that they should be able to answer. During the latter part of the data collection phase,
we should also be prioritising those questions/sub-questions where the data is still inconclusive.
It is of course essential to respect evaluation norms, ethics and standards and clarify our commitments at
the start of each interview relating to our independence, respect of confidentiality, etc. and ensure that those
being interviewed understand the purpose of the evaluation, how we propose to use the data we collect and
where they will be able to see the report once it is finalised. We should periodically check that we are
following protocols that were designed to assure the individual’s protection and safety and that we are not
violating their privacy or discriminating against them in any way. Please take time to read the United Nations
Evaluation Group (UNEG) Norms and Standards at http://www.uneval.org/, particularly those sections
directly relevant to evaluators.
At the start of each interview or FGD, team members should ensure the individuals being interviewed
understand:
• The purpose of the study.
• Their participation is voluntary and ensure their agreement to informed consent prior to their
participation.
• Their observations and notes we take will not be shared with anyone outside the evaluation team
and they will not be quoted in the report.
The following interview guides, one for key informants and another for community FGD, are based on the
questions in the evaluation matrix.
133
Table 12. Interview Guide for UNICEF staff and Implementing Partners
Key Question Sub Question
Key question 1: Relevance  How did the context and the UN programmatic
How relevant and appropriate was engagement guidelines influence UNICEF’s strategy and
UNICEF’s response strategy and approach?
programme design in reaching the
 Was UNICEF able to adapt its strategies and approach in a
affected populations most in need?
timely way? What steps did UNICEF take to mitigate
bottlenecks and challenges?
 How did UNICEF prioritise needs? Give examples.
 To what extent were affected communities able to input
during the design and implementation of UNICEF
interventions?
 To what extent did UNICEF’s strategy and programme
align with the UN framework in Myanmar?
 To what extent have UNICEF’s programmes reflected
applicable standards (CCCs, Sphere) and compliance with
human rights principles? How has UNICEF tried to
mitigate difficulties faced in complying with these?
Key question 2: Effectiveness  To what extent has the UNICEF response met its program
How effective was UNICEF in targets as specified in the HAC? What have been the major
responding to this L2 emergency? external and internal factors influencing programme results?
 What examples can you cite of good practice and where
could UNICEF have improved? Give examples.
 How has the service/assistance delivery by UNICEF been
received by affected communities? To what extent has their
feedback been taken into consideration?
 How effective have been the AAP systems for
communication and to collect and use feedback? Have you
used UNICEF’s AAP guidelines? If so, how have you used
them?
 To what extent was UNICEF’s delivery of services
consistent with UNICEF’s Core Commitments for
Children in Humanitarian Action? Give examples.
 What influence did the declaration of a L2 emergency have
on UNICEF’s response? What were the main advantages
and/or disadvantages of the L2 declaration? Was the L2
emergency declared at the right time?
 To what extent are human rights, equity concerns and
gender equality have been consistently integrated? Give
examples.
134
Key Question Sub Question
 How effectively has UNICEF managed risk for
communities, partners, and itself? Have there been any cases
where UNICEF interventions have increased risk? What
happened?
Key question 3: Coherence/  To what extent did the preparedness measures implemented
Connectedness
prior to the crisis facilitate UNICEF's emergency response?
3.How coherent and connected has
 How has UNICEF aligned with UN engagement in
the UNICEF response been?
Myanmar?
 To what extent has UNICEF response linked with longer-
term programming (triple nexus)?
Key question 4: Efficiency  How quickly did UNICEF scale-up its response? What
4.Was UNICEF’s response factors influenced its efforts to scale up?
efficient?
 How quickly/efficiently did the transition from
development to emergency programming take place? Could
this transition have been improved and, if so, how?
 How did preparedness play a role? What helped the
response and where could it have been improved?
 Are there examples where UNICEF used innovative
approaches to increase the efficiency of the response? Did
they work? Could they be improved? Were there other
approaches they could have tried?
Key question 5: Coordination UNICEF role in leading clusters and other interagency groups:
5.How did UNICEF coordinate  Did UNICEF allocate sufficient resources and staff to
internally and externally?
ensure that it could adequately perform its coordination
role?118
 To what extent did cluster leads comply with the
responsibilities defined in the IASC and CCC ToR for
cluster leads?
UNICEF external coordination:
 How did UNICEF coordinate with other humanitarian
actors?
 Did UNICEF’s position itself within the international
humanitarian system optimise its comparative advantage?
UNICEF internal coordination (UNICEF key informants only):
118 We should not forget to ask about UNICEF’s lead role in the mine action sub-group in the Protection Cluster. This is an unusual, if logical, role
for UNICEF to fill since the usual lead actors such as UNMAS are not present in Myanmar.
135
Key Question Sub Question
 How did the internal coordinating tools and mechanisms
facilitate UNICEF’s emergency response?
 What measures were taken to coordinate multi-sectoral
projects? Were these sufficient?
 Were there specific problems with internal coordination?
Key question 6: Coverage  To what extent did UNICEF assistance reach/was
6.What coverage did UNICEF accessible to affected populations in different areas?
achieve during the L2 response?
 How did UNICEF and partners decide to prioritise specific
communities, groups and/or individuals?
 Was UNICEF’s coverage adequate? If not, what else could
they have done with the same resources (money, staff, etc.)?
Key question 7: Protection  To what extent did UNICEF assistance provide protection
7.To what extent did UNICEF to its target population?
provide protection to the targeted
 To what extent is UNICEF has been able to protect
community in line with its mandate?
children in conflict situations? Why or why not?
 What measures, if any, has UNICEF taken to prevent sexual
exploitation and abuse (PSEA)? Have these been effective?
Could PSEA be improved and, if so, how?
8.Recommendations for additional  Can you suggest any other people to speak to?
reference materials or key
informants.  Are there any documents you can share that would be
particularly useful to the evaluation team?
136
Annex 16. Ethics review approval letter
137
Annex 17. Terms of Reference
Terme of Reference (ToR)
L2 Emergency
Evaluation of the
UNICEF Myanmar
Annex 17. Terms of Reference
Annex 17. Terms of Reference
INTTeRrOmDUeCToIOfN R eference (ToR)
Terme of Reference (ToR)
UNICEF Myanmar Country Office (CO) is commissioning the Real-Time
Evaluation of UNICEF’s response to L2 emergency declared on 1st July 2021 and
L2 Emergency
Ltrig2g eEredm bey rtghee nmciliyta ry takeover on February 1, 2021. The L2 emergency
Evaluation of the
evaluation will replace the current Country Programme Evaluation which has been
Evaluation of the
paused due to non-engagement with de facto authorities and change of programme
UNICEF Myanmar
UfroNm mIoCstEly uFp sMtreayma ton hmumaarn itarian.
The Country Programme Evaluation (CPE) which is a part of the Costed
Evaluation Plan of the Myanmar Country Office had started in December 2020.
The evaluability assessment and an inception report were drafted by the consulting
firm, but the evaluation was paused following the event of February 2021 due to
following main reasons: first, the need for the office to focus on life saving
priorities; second, non- engagement with de-facto Authorities based on UN non-
engagement guidance; third, the need to cease or delay implementation of many
CIoNuTnRtrOy DPUroCgTraIOmNm e activities (mostly upstream) and evidence generation due to
cINurTreRnOt DcUrisCeTs.I OTNh e CPE focused on systems strengthening and, assessing the
UNICEF Myanmar Country Office (CO) is commissioning the Real-Time
programme implementation during the period of the CP which required
UENvIaCluEatFio nM oyfa UnmNaIrC ECFo’us nrtersyp oOnsfef ictoe L(2C Oem) erisg encocym dmecislsairoendi nogn 1thst eJ ulRy e2a0l-2T1i maned
engagement with government counterparts, various other implementers, and
Etrviaglguearteiodn boyf UthNe ICmEilFit’asr yre stpakoenosve etro oLn2 eFmeebrrgueanryc y 1d,e c2l0ar2e1d. oTnh 1e st LJu2l y e2m0e2r1g eanncdy
beneficiaries as respondents of the Evaluation Questions (EQ), and engagement of
treivgagleuraetdio nb yw iltlh ree pmlaicleit athrye ctaukrreeonvte Cr oounn trFye Pbrrougarrya m1m, e2 E02v1a.l uTathioen Lw2h icehm heragse bneceyn
govt as member of the reference group.
epvaaulusaetdio dnu we itlol rnepolna-ceen tghaeg ecmurernent tw Citohu dnet rfayc tPor aougtrhaomrmitiee sE avnadlu cahtiaonng ew ohfic phr hoagsr abmeemne
pfaruosmed m douset ltyo u npostnr-eeanmga tgoe mhuemnta nwiittahr iadne .f acto authorities and change of programme
With the declaration of state of emergency and L2 corporate emergency, UNICEF’s
from mostly upstream to humanitarian.
oTnghoe inCg oupnrtorgyr aPmrmogersa mhmavee Ebveaeluna tihoena v(iClyP Eaf)f ewctheidc h anisd a dpivaerrtt eodf ttohwe arCdoss tead
hTEuhmvea alnuCaiottauiorninatn rPy rleaPnspr ooogfnr satehm.e mT Mheu ysaE,n vtmhalaeur ao tCfifooincue n (tiCsry Pc oOEn)fs fiiwdceeh rihicnahgd risestd airart eecpdta inirntg DoCfeP cEtehm eefb feCorro t2ss0t et2od0 .
cEoTvnhadeluu eacvttia olLun2a PbRillaientay l o-a fsT steihmsese m MEeynvatan laumnadati roa nnC .o inTucnhetepr ytLi o2On Ef rfveicapelou hratta iwdo nesr tewa rdotreuadlfd ti encdo Dvbeyer c tehomne ebc1oe yrn es2au0rl 2toi0nf.g
iTmfhirpeml ee,mv baeulnutta atbhtiileoi tney v oaasfls uteahstseiom enem nwetra agsne pnda cauyns r eeidnsp cfoeopnlltsoieow nbi nyreg 1Mp 3tohyre at n wemveearner td Coroaf ufFtneetdbr yrb uyOa trfhyf eic2 ce0o 2(n1Ms udClutOien )gt.o
8
Tfifhromell o,L wb2ui ntE gtv hamel uaeaivntai olurnea atwsiooonnu slw:d afasir lsspota, umtsheeede tfn otehleleod w rfeinoqgru ittrhheeme eeovnfetfnsic teo o f tfo tFh eef obrcreuuvasir syeo dn2 0 e2lvif1ae l udsauateivo itnnog
pfopolrlliiocowyr iwitniehgse ; rmese aicti nois n mrde,aa nsnodonants-o: refyni rtgsoat ,gu entmhdeee rntnta ekweedi at hnf o edrve -aftalhucetao t iooAfnuf itochefo trhtioeti epfsro ocbtuarsas ecdote ndo nelim fUee Nrsga evnnioncnyg -
rpeersnipogoraingtiseeemss; e(snLetc1 o)g nuevidde, arnnyo c3en-;-5 t ehyneiragdra,sg .t ehme ennet ewd ittoh cdee-afasect oo Ar udtehlaoyr iitmiesp lbemaseendt aotnio nU Nof nmoann-y
eCngoaugnetmrye nPtr ogguriadmanmcee; atchtiirvdit, ieths e( mneoesdtl yt ou pcsetarseea mor) adnedla ye vimidpenlecme egnetnaetiroanti oonf dmuaen tyo
The main purpose of the L2 Evaluation is to promote learning from the response
Ccouurrnetnryt Pcrriosgesra. mTmhee aCcPtiEvi tifeosc u(mseods tolyn uspyssttreemams ) satrnedn getvhidenenincge agnende, raastisoenss dinuge tthoe
and adopt a more integrated strategy, blending the strengths of MCO programmes
cpurroregnrat mcmrisee s.i mTphlee mCePnEta tfiooncu sdeudr ionng styhsete mpse risotrde ngotfh etnhien g CaPnd w, hasicshes sirnegq utihreed
being implemented during the emergency while taking into consideration the
pernoggargamemmeen t imwpitlhe mgeonvteartinomn endtu rcinogu nttehrep arptse,r iovda rioouf s thoeth eCr Pi mwphleicmh enrteeqrsu,i raendd
preparedness and response capacity of the MCO. The evaluation will also focus on
ebnegnagefeimciaernite s wasit rhe spgoovnedrennmtse onft thceo uEnvtaelrupaatriotsn, Qvuareisotuiosn so (tEheQr ), iamnpdl eemngeangteemrs,e natn od f
providing a preliminary assessment of UNICEF’s response to the Myanmar crisis
bgeonvetf iacsia mrieesm abs erre sopf otnhde erneftse roefn tchee g Erovuaplu. ation Questions (EQ), and engagement of
regarding its relevance, effectiveness, efficiency, coverage, coherence, coordination,
govt as member of the reference group.
and protection, with a specific focus on its adaptivity to changing conditions and
how it has responded to humanitarian needs within the framework of the Core
Commitments for Children in Humanitarian Action whilst re-engaging on socio-
economic resilience and recovery simultaneously.
These Terms of Reference (ToR) set out the pur1p3os e, objectives, methodology and
8
operational modalities for an institutional contra1c3t t o undertake this evaluation. The
8
evaluation is expected to start in April 2022 and is expected to be completed by July
2022.
It will be supervised by an Evaluation Management Team led by the Regional
Advisor, Evaluation (UNICEF EAPRO2) and the Multi-Country Evaluation
Specialist (UNICEF Cambodia, Malaysia and Myanmar).
CONTEXT
UNICEF Myanmar Country Programme (2018-2022) is being implemented under
significant political, economic, and social transition in Myanmar. The opportunities
raised by the Nationwide Ceasefire Agreement in October 2015 and the victory for
Daw Aung San Suu Kyi’s National League for Democracy in the election of
November 2015 are countered by continued military conflict in northern Shan and
Kachin States, and the escalation of conflicts in Rakhine State, including reports of
egregious human rights abuses and restrictions on access for humanitarian agencies.
Coupled with Myanmar’s vulnerability to natural disasters, particularly earthquakes,
floods, and cyclones3, the programming environment for UNICEF is highly
challenging and complex. It is important to mention that the Country Programme
was developed before the escalation of violence in Rakhine state, which led to
around 700,000 Muslims fleeing
139
With the declaration of state of emergency and L2 corporate emergency, UNICEF’s
ongoing programmes have been heavily affected and diverted towards a
humanitarian response. Thus, the office is considering redirecting CPE efforts to
conduct L2 Real- Time Evaluation. The L2 Evaluation would cover one1 year of
implementation of the emergency response by Myanmar Country Office (MCO).
The L2 Evaluation would also meet the requirements of the revised evaluation
policy where it is mandatory to undertake an evaluation of the protracted emergency
responses (L1) every 3-5 years.
The main purpose of the L2 Evaluation is to promote learning from the response
and adopt a more integrated strategy, blending the strengths of MCO programmes
being implemented during the emergency while taking into consideration the
preparedness and response capacity of the MCO. The evaluation will also focus on
providing a preliminary assessment of UNICEF’s response to the Myanmar crisis
regarding its relevance, effectiveness, efficiency, coverage, coherence, coordination,
and protection, with a specific focus on its adaptivity to changing conditions and
how it has responded to humanitarian needs within the framework of the Core
Commitments for Children in Humanitarian Action whilst re-engaging on socio-
economic resilience and recovery simultaneously.
WThitehse t hTee drmecsl aorfa tRioenfe oref nstcaet e(T oof Rem) seertg oenuct yth aen dp uLr2p ocoser,p oobrajetec teivmees,r gmenetchyo, dUoNloIgCyE aFn’ds
oopngeroaitniog napl rmogordaamlimtieess f ohr aavne i nsbteiteunt iohneaal vciolyn traafcfte tcote udn daenrtda ked itvheisr teevda lutaotwioanrd. Ts hae
ehvuamluaantiiotanri aisn e rxepsepcotendse t.o T shtaurst ,i nth Ae porfifl i2c0e 2i2s acnodn sisid eexrpinegc treedd tiroe cbtein cgo mCpPlEet eedff boyrt Jsu tloy
2co0n22d.u ct L2 Real- Time Evaluation. The L2 Evaluation would cover one1 year of
implementation of the emergency response by Myanmar Country Office (MCO).
It will be supervised by an Evaluation Management Team led by the Regional
The L2 Evaluation would also meet the requirements of the revised evaluation
Advisor, Evaluation (UNICEF EAPRO2) and the Multi-Country Evaluation
policy where it is mandatory to undertake an evaluation of the protracted emergency
Specialist (UNICEF Cambodia, Malaysia and Myanmar).
responses (L1) every 3-5 years.
CONTEXT
The main purpose of the L2 Evaluation is to promote learning from the response
aUnNd IaCdEopFt Ma myaonrme airn tCegoruantetrdy sPtrraotgergaym, bmleen (d2i0n1g8 t-h2e0 2s2tr)e nisg bthesin ogf iMmpClOem pernotgerda munmdeesr
bsieginnigfi ciamntp pleomlietinctaeld, e cdounrionmg ict,h aen dem soecrigaeln tcrayn swithioilne inta kMinygan imntaor. Tcohnes oidpeproatritounn ittihees
prariespedar beyd nthees sN anatdio renswpiodnes Ce ecaaspeafciritey A ogf rteheem MenCt Oin. OThceto ebvearl u2a0t1io5n a nwdil lt haels ov ifcotocruys foonr
pDraowvi dAinugn ga pSraenli mSiunua ryK aysi’sse sNsmateionnt aol f LUeNagIuCeE fFo’rs rDesepmooncsrea tcoy tihne tMhey aenlmecatiro cnr isoisf
Nregoavredminbge rit s2 0re1l5e vaaren cceo, uenffteecretidv ebnye csso,n etfifnicuieedn cmy,i lcitoavrye rcaogne,f lcicoth ienr ennocret,h ceorno rSdhinaant iaonnd,
Kanadc hpirno Stetcattieosn, ,a nwdit thh ae espsceacliaftiico fno coufs coonn filtics tsa dina pRtiavkithyi nteo Scthataen, ginincglu cdoinngd irteiopnosr tsa nodf
ehgorweg iiot uhsa hs urmesapno nridgehdts taob uhsuems aanndit arreisatnri cnteioendss owni tahcicne stsh feo frr hamumewanoirtkar ioafn tahgee nCcoierse.
Commitments for Children in Humanitarian Action whilst re-engaging on socio-
Cecoounpolmedi cw riethsi lMienyacne manadr’ sr evcuolnveerrayb siilmityu lttoa nneaotuursalyl .d isasters, particularly earthquakes,
floods, and cyclones3, the programming environment for UNICEF is highly
Tchhaelsleen Tgeinrgm asn odf c Roemfeprleenx.c eI t( Tiso iRm)p soertt oanutt tthoe m peunrptioosne ,t hoabtj etchteiv Ceso, umnetrtyh oPdroolgorgaym amnde
owpaesr adteiovnelaolp medo dbaeliftoierse fothr ea ne sincasltaittuiotino noafl cvoionlternaccte toin u nRdaekrhtiankee tshtaiste e,v waluhaicthio nle. dT htoe
eavroaulunadti o7n00 is,0 e0x0p Mecutesdli mtos sftlaereti ning Aacprroils 2s 0th22e banodrd ies re txop Becatnegdl atdoe bseh cino mApugleutsetd 2 b0y1 7Ju. lTy he country also witnessed exodus
2022. and massacre of Rohingya people even before 2017 as accounted in the Rosenthal
across the border to Bangladesh inR Aepuogruts tth 2a0t1 a7n. Teshteim coatuendt r1y 3a0ls,0o0 w0i tRneoshsiendg yeax oadnuds Bangladeshis departed between
ITt hwei llc obuen sturyp earvlsiose dw ibtny easnse dE veaxluoadtuiosn aMnda nmagaesmsaecnrte Toef aRmo hleidn gbyya tpheeo Rpleeg ieovneanl
and massacre of Rohingya people2 0e1v4en a nbdef ofirres t2 h0a1l7f aosf a2c0c1o5u,n otef dw ihno tmhe mRaonsey nwthearle drowned during their plight by
Abdefvoisroe r2, 0E17v aalusa aticocno u(nUteNdI CinE Fth eE RAoPsRenOth2) ala nRde ptohret tMhautl tia-nC oeustnitmrya teEdv a1l3u0at,0io0n0
Report that an estimated 130,000b oRato; hainngdy ai na nredp rBisaanl golafd eas hpios lidceepmaarnte dk iblleedtw iene na n incident in January 2014, 40
SRpoehciianlgisyt a( UaNndIC EBaFn Cglaamdbesohdiisa , dMeaplaarytseiad anbde tMweyeannm baor)a.t ; and in reprisal of a
2014 and first half of 2015, of wRhoohmin gmyaan wy ewree 1rme3 9 ads rsoacwrneded b yd uthrien ga rtmheyi.r4 plight by
policeman killed in an incident in January 2014, 40 Rohingya were massacred
CONTEXT
boat; and in reprisal of a policeman killed in an incident in January 2014, 40
by the army.4 In November 2020, Myanmar’s leading civilian party called the National League
Rohingya were massacred by the army.4
UNICEF Myanmar Country Profgorar mDmeme (o2c0r1a8c-y2, 0w2o2)n is8 3b%ein og fi mthpel ePmaernliatemde unnt’ds ear vailable seat. In early 2021 the
I s n ig n N if o ic v a e n m t b p e o r l it 2 i 0 ca 2 l 0 , , e M co y n a o n m m i a c r , ’ a s n lcd eoa sud oni c ntirg ay l’ cst i r v aPi n lai s ariln tiai o pmn ae r int n yt M chaay lda le n dbm et aehnr e . TeNxh ape te i o ocptnep adl o tL rot e u a negni u tdi e eo sr se election results and approve
r f a o i r s e D d b em y t o h c e r a N cy a , t i w on o w n id 8 e 3 % Ce a o s f e f t i h rte eh AeP ng a r ree lxi e atm m goe e n nvtet ’ri snn m a O vea cni t lto a;b bhl eoe r w s 2ee 0va 1 te5 .r ,I a tn nh dee amth rlie yl i tv 2air0 cyt 2 o r1 re yft uh fso ee rd to accept the results of the vote
D co a u w n tr A y’ u s n P g a r S l a ia n m S en uu t h K ad y i’ b s e e N n a e ti xao pnn eda c lt toe Lod ek a t o gou ve een rd tfho oer r spD eo e ewl m eecro t c iao rna nnc oy reu snin uc litnt s h ga e ns td eal te aec p-twp ioirdn oe v o ee fm ergency on 1st February 2021.5
November 2015 are countered by continued military conflict in northern Shan and
the next government; however, the military refused to accept the results of the vote
The military takeover of 1st February 2021 has worsened the situation in Myanmar.
Kachin States, and the escalation of conflicts in Rakhine State, including reports of
and took over the power announcing state-wide emergency on 1st February 2021.5
The humanitarian crisis is worsening as a direct consequence of fighting between
egregious human rights abuses and restrictions on access for humanitarian agencies.
The military takeover of 1st Februaarrmy e2d0 2g1r ohuasp ws osprsreenaedd athcreo ssist utahtieo nc oinu nMtryya.n Pmraorv. ision of assistance, in terms of
C Th ou e p h l u ed m w an it i h ta M ria y n a n cr m is a is r’ s is v w ul o n r e s r e a nsb iun ilpi g tp y al is teo sa n daani t r ude r c ast l e c drovis nica ses e tsq e u rhs ea, n vp cea e r bt o iec feu nf l i a g rah lfy tfi en eca gtr et bdh e,q t w uspa e keece n si f,i cally in Kayah, Kachin, Kayin,
a fl r o m o e d d s, g a r n o d u p c s yc sp lo r n ea es d 3 , ac th ro e s s p r t o h g eSr ha c maonu m,n Ci t n rhy gi. n e P, n rSv oai vgr i oasin ino mgn,e n oant f da f Mo ss rai sgt Uwan NacyI e C ,w Ehin Fe r tee i s rh meh sai vg o hy f ly a rtillery and armed conflicts are
s c u h p al p le li n e g s in a g n d a n s d e c rv o i m ce p s l e h x a . v I e t i b s e i e m n po a onfgr f toe a cinnt t eg d t ob, es mtpwe eec nei t fni i o c n athl l tey h aPin te toK hpe al ey C’aso h uD, n Ketfr aey cn h Pcier n o ,F g Korara mcyei msn , e( P DF) and the Myanmar Armed
1S w Ch aoa sun nd , teiCnvgh e l ito nhep , pe Sed ar giob ade in fforgo, r me a n1tsh dt e FM eeba srguc waarl aya yF t2 io0o w2rnch1 e ewosrh f e( e Mvnh i etoAha leFe v nmy). c ila eTitr aht iri nyell reteoR r oy ahk ka aohvnvieden r eb. a er sem tna e t e df,r ec wqouh nei f cnl h itc rtel s ep d ao rrt eto s of people trying to escape the
2 o a Er n oA g Pu o nR in edf g e r7 s 0 b to0 e E, t 0 w as0t e 0A e n sMia a t un h sd e lPi ma P ci e sfi o cf p -l eE l e e A ’ iPn s R gO D c r eoe f fene rs nf lt cioce Et sA F P oa Rnrc edg e i o san as( l PsOoD fcfiic Fae )t eadn dri stkhse, Mwyitahn mOaCr HAArm eesdti mating that more than 400,000
3 Some information on historical events can be found here:
hFttopsr:c//ersel ie(fMweAb.inFt/).s itTes/hreelrieefw heba.ivnte/ fiblese/erensoc uforrcueesnq/tuMreyyanwntmi rdaere%p o2p0reAto%s p2o0lCef o hupnaetrvoye%p 2lbe0pe rteornnye i%dn2igs0 tpot%loa2 c0eeas%dc 2ai0npra entg het%ho2see regions since May 2021. In the
0of%2 0 natural%20disasters.pdf, https://reliefweb.int/map/myanmar/myanmar-natural-disaster-risks-and-past-events-
3c1o-mnafyl-i2c0t1s6 , hatntpds:/ /arselsieofwceiba.tinet/dm arpi/smkysa,n mwasrio/thmu ytaOhnmeCaarsH-tre Acreen tge-nisoattunimr,a l-addtiisisansptgelr ast-cohevamertv eiemnw-to2s8r -ejcu ontenh-2ta0in1n7 u4e0 0to,0 0ta0k e place in various townships as
4 c G o e u rt n Ro t s r e y nt w ha i l, d 2 e 01 9 p . A e o Br p ief l e an d h I a nd v ep e e n b de e n e t I n nq u d ir icy sl p iantsl o ah t c hee es I d n av o inn lvde m t hreneo tg o suf e tlh ae r rU e n gaitti e otda n Nca skt ioss n i sbn inec Mtewy a Menmea any r f rM2 om 0A 2 20F1 10 ., t I oP n 2D0 1 t 8Fh . ea nd Ethnic Armed Organizations
southeast region, displacements (cEoAnOtin)u aer et oin ctraekaes ipngla caec cionr vdainrigo tuos ftioelwd nrsehpioprst sa. sT he Office of the United Nations
clashes and regular attacks betweeHni gMh ACFo,m PmDiFss 1aion3 n 9de Er tfhonr iRc eAfurmgeeeds O(UrNgaHniCzaRti)o ensst imates a total of 166,700 people
(EAO) are increasing according toh afvieel db ereenpo dritssp. lTacheed O acfrfoicses othf itsh aer eUan aist eodf NNaotvioemnsb er 2021, including 84,300 people
High Commissioner for Refugeeisn ( KUaNyHahC, R20) ,8es0t0im paetoepsl ea itno staolu othf e1r6n6 S,7h0a0n ,p 4e9o,5p0le0 people in Kayin, 5,000 people in
have been displaced across this arMeao ans oafn Nd 7o,v1e0m0 bpeer o2p0l2e1 ,i nin cTluandiinntgh 8a4ry,3i.060 T pheeo ptalec tics employed by the Myanmar
in Kayah, 20,800 people in southeArnrm Sehda nF, o4r9c,e5s0 0in pcleuodpel ea rinia lK baoyminb, a5r,d0m00e pnetso, palret iilnle ry shelling of civilian populations
Mon and 7,100 people in Taninaths awryei.l6l Tash es utmacmticasr y eemxepcluotyieodn sb oy f thneo nM-cyoamnmbaatra nt civilians including over 114
Armed Forces include arial bombcahrdilmdreennt.s , artillery shelling of civilian populations
as well as summary executions of non-combatant civilians including over 114
The COVID-19 pandemic has also affected Myanmar. As of 30th January 2022,7
children.
535,080 cases had been recorded with 19,310 deaths and 513,101 recoveries.
The COVID-19 pandemic has alMsoe aasfuferceste tda kMeny abnym thaer .g oAvse ronfm 3e0ntht Jaatn tuhaer eyn 2d0 o2f2 M,7 arch to limit the circulation of the
535,080 cases had been recordevdir uws,i tshu c1h9 ,a3s1 0m odveaetmhse nat nandd 5 t1r3av,1e0l 1r ersetrciocvtieorniess, . have proven effective. Myanmar
Measures taken by the governmenet xapt ethriee nencedd o sf eMcoanrcdh w toa vliem ditu trhineg c Jiurcnuel attoio Nn oovf .t h2e0 21 and the number of cases has
virus, such as movement and travgeol nree sdtoriwctnio wnist,h h aa vdea ilpyr nouvmenb eerf foefc tciavsee. sM toy a1n7m2 oarn 29th January 2022. Furthermore,
experienced second wave during JMunyea ntmo aNr osuvf. f2e0r 2d1is apnrodp tohret ionnuamtebleyr f orof mca tshees has
gone down with a daily number of cases to 172 on 29th January 2022. Furthermore,
Myanmar suffer disproportionate4l Gy efrrto Rmos etnhthea l, 2019. A Brief and Independent Inquiry into the Involvement of the United Nations in
Myanmar from 2010 to 2018.
4 Gert Rosenthal, 2019. A Brief and Independent Inquiry into the Involvement of the United Nations in
Myanmar from 2010 to 2018.
141
141
140
across the border to Bangladesh in August 2017. The country also witnessed exodus
and massacre of Rohingya people even before 2017 as accounted in the Rosenthal
Report that an estimated 130,000 Rohingya and Bangladeshis departed between
2014 and first half of 2015, of whom many were drowned during their plight by
boat; and in reprisal of a policeman killed in an incident in January 2014, 40
Rohingya were massacred by the army.4
In November 2020, Myanmar’s leading civilian party called the National League
for Democracy, won 83% of the Parliament’s available seat. In early 2021 the
1 Counting the period from 1st February 2021 when the military took over.
country’s Parliament had been expected to endorse election results and approve
2s oEAcPio R-eefecros ntoo Emasti cA siima anpda Pcatc ioficf - tEhAeP CROO reVfeIrsD to- E1A9P c Rreigsiiosn acl oOmfficpe ared to the actual spread of
t3 hSoem ne ienxfotr mgaotivone ronn mhisetonricta; lh evoewntse cvane rb,e tfhouen dm hielriet:a ry refused to accept the results of the vote
h
th
ttp
e
s :/
d
/
i
r
s
e
e
lie
a
f
s
w
e
eb
i
.i
n
nt /
i
s
t
i
s
te s
t
/
e
r
r
el
r
ie
i
f
t
w
o
e
r
b
y
.i
.
n
8
t /files/resources/Myanmar%20A%20Country%20prone%20to%20a%20range%2
a0onf%d2 t 0o noaktu roalv%e2r0 dthisaest eprso.pwdfe, hrt tapns:/n/oreulienfwceibn.ignt /smtaapt/em-wyanidmear /emmyaenrmgaer-nnactuyr aol-dnis a1stset r-Frisekbs-ranuda-prays t2-e0ve2n1ts.-5
31-may-2016, https://reliefweb.int/map/myanmar/myanmar-recent-natural-disasters-overview-28-june-2017
UNICEF has been providing multisectoral response in the affected areas.
The military takeover of 1st February 2021 has worsened the situation in Myanmar.
UNICEF’s response areas include health, nutrition, child protection, WASH,
Tedhuec ahtuiomna, naintadr isaonc icarli spiso liisc yw aonrsde hnainsg a cahs iae vdeidre icmt pcoonrtsaenqtu reenscuelt so fs ofi gfahrt9i.n g between
armed groups spread across the country. Provision of assistance, in terms of
sUuNppIClieEs Fa’sn dr esseprovincsees hisa vbea sbeede no anf fethctee dg, usipdeincgif icparlilny ciinp leKs aylaaihd, Kdoawchni n,i nK aCyoinre,
SChoamn,m Cithmine,n tSsa fgoarin Cgh, iladnrden M (aCgCwCay) iwn hHeruem haenaivtayr iaanrt iAllecrtyio ann. dF oalrlomweidn gc othnefl imctisli taarrey
otankgeooivnegr boent w1este Fne bthreu aPrye o2p0l2e’1s, DUNefeICncEeF F ionritcieaste (dP DitsF r)e aspnodn tshee i mMmyaendmiaater lyA brmaseedd
Fono rctehse (MEmAFer)g. eTnhceyr eR heasvpeo nbseee nP flraenq u(EenRtP re).p oFrotsl loowf ipnego ptlhee trdyiencgla rtaot ieosnc apoef tLhe2
emergency on 1st July 2021, UNICEF Myanmar’s regular programme was on hold
conflicts and associated risks, with OCHA estimating that more than 400,000
and resources were diverted towards the implementation of the ERP. In August
countrywide people have been displaced in those regions since May 2021. In the
2021, in line with the humanitarian need and HRP addendum, UNICEF increased
southeast region, displacements continue to take place in various townships as
its HAC appeal to US$74.5 million from an original US$ 61.7 million requested for
clashes and regular attacks between MAF, PDF and Ethnic Armed Organizations
2021. For 2022, UNICEF has launched an appeal of 151.4 million10, an increase of
(EAO) are increasing according to field reports. The Office of the United Nations
over 200% from the revised 2021 HAC appeal to reach 1.75 million people in need
High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) estimates a total of 166,700 people
including 1.15 million children.
have been displaced across this area as of November 2021, including 84,300 people
in Kayah, 20,800 people in southern Shan, 49,500 people in Kayin, 5,000 people in
The 1st February 2020 military takeover and the declaration of L2 emergency on
Mon and 7,100 people in Tanintharyi.6 The tactics employed by the Myanmar
1st July 2020 has changed the focus of UNICEF programme from systems
Astrremnegdth Feonrincegs tinoc lhuudme aanriiatla brioanm baalirgdnminegn tist, atort ilCleorrye s hCeollminmg oitfm ceivnitlisa nfo pro pCuhlailtdiorenns.
aDsu wrinelgl aSs esputmemmbaerry etxoe cuDtieocnesm boef r no2n0-2c1o, mUbaNtaInCtE cFiv ilhiaenasv iliyn cliundviensgte do veinr 1t1h4e
cphreilpdarreant.i on of Annual Work Plan 2022 focusing on 70% HAC activities and
aligning 30% with UNCT framework called UN Socio Economic Response and
The COVID-19 pandemic has also affected Myanmar. As of 30th January 2022,7
Resilience Framework (UNSERRF). While the outcome areas remain the same,
535,080 cases had been recorded with 19,310 deaths and 513,101 recoveries.
some outputs have been modified to make it more effective and in line with
Mhuemasaunrietasr tiaakne snit buya tthioen g aonvder nnemeedns.t at the end of March to limit the circulation of the
virus, such as movement and travel restrictions, have proven effective. Myanmar
experienced second wave during June to Nov. 2021 and the number of cases has
Due to shifting priorities and engagement modalities and in the light of significant
gone down with a daily number of cases to 172 on 29th January 2022. Furthermore,
changes in the Myanmar country context and the operational environment, UNCT
MMyyaannmmaarr susuffffeerr d idspisrporpooprotriotinoantealtye lfyr ofmro mth e the socio-economic impact of the
has decided to postpone the development of United Nations Sustainable
COVID-19 crisis compared to the actual spread of the disease in the territory.8
Development Cooperation Framework (UNSDCF) by one year. To comply with
4 Gert Rosenthal, 2019. A Brief and Independent Inquiry into the Involvement of the United Nations in
the spirit of UN Reform and the UNCT commitment to ensure the sequencing
Myanmar from 2010 to 2018.
between the completion of the UNSDCF and UNICEF CPD, the UNICEF
Myanmar office has placed a request for extension of current Country Programme
2018-2022 until December 2023.
141
5 Myanmar Coup: What to Know About the Protests and Unrest - The New York Times (nytimes.com)
6 Myanmar-Humanitarian-SitRep-28-November-2021.
7 https://www.worldometers.info/coronavirus/country/myanmar/
8 UN Myanmar Framework for the immediate socio-economic response to COVID-19 in Myanmar.
9 See UNICEF Myanmar Humanitarian Situation Report for 1 January - 31 December detailing progress on
140
142
143
socio-economic impact of the COVID-19 crisis compared to the actual spread of
the disease in its territory.8
socio-economic impact of the COVID-19 crisis compared to the actual spread of
aUcNroIsCs EthFe bhoarsd ebr etoen B apnrgolavdideisnhg i nm Auulgtiusesct t2o0r1a7l . Trehspe ocnosuen triny altshoe w aitfnfeecssteedd eaxroedaus.s
the disease in its territory.8
UanNd ImCEasFsa’sc rree ospf oRnoshe inagryeaa sp einocpllued eev ehne ablethfo, rne u2t0ri1ti7o nas, acchcioldu nptreodt einc ttihone ,R WosAenStHha, l
eRU deN upc Ioa CrttE i otF nh ,a ath naand s seb ose ctie ima n l a ptpeo rdl o i c v1y i3 d a0i n n,0d g0 h0m a sRu aol c thi h sie ine cgv tye oad r a ai l m ndr p e o sBp rtao ann ngs tl ear desein ush ltis tsh s edo e fpa a far f 9re .t cetde db eatwreeaesn.
2U0N14IC aEndF ’sfi rrset shpaolnf soef a2r0e1a5s , ionfc lwudheo mh emalathn,y nwuetrreit idorno, wcnheidld dpurrointegc tthioenir, pWligAhStH b,y
UNICEF’s response is based on the guiding principles laid down in Core
bedouact;a taionnd, ainn dr esporciisaall poofl icay panodli cheams aanc hkieilvleedd iimn paonr tainncti dreesnutl tisn s oJa fnaur9a.r y 2014, 40
Commitments for Children (CCC) in Humanitarian Action. Following the military
Rohingya were massacred by the army.4
tUakNeIoCvEerF o’sn r1esst pFoenbsreu arisy 2b0a2se1d, UoNn ICthEeF ginuiitdiaintegd pitrsi nrceispploesn sela iidm mdoedwinat eilny bCasoerde
IConno mNthmoevi temmEembneetrsr g2feo0n2rc C0y,h MiRldyerasepnnom (nCasrCe’s C Pl)e laiandn i Hn(Egu RmciPvan)i.l iiataFnr oipalnlaor wAtyic nctigao llnet.hd Fe t ohldeloe Nwcliaanrtgaiot tinohanel mLoeiflai gtaLure2y
eftaom kre e oDrg vee emn r coo ycn or an 1c sy1 t ,F s t we J b uol rny u a 28r 0 y32 %1 2 , 0 U 2o1fN , tU IhCeN E PI F Ca rE MliFaym a i n nem intita a’sr t ’ e sad vr e iat gislu arbl e als rep p osren oas gte.r a iIm mn m meae erd wliya a t s2e 0l o y2n 1b h ats ohe led d
and resources were diverted towards the implementation of the ERP. In August
coonu nthtrey ’sE Pmaerlrigaemnecnyt hRaedsp boenesne ePxplaenc t(eEdR tPo) .e nFdoolrlsoew einlegc titohne redseuclltasr aatniodn a popfr oLve2
2 tehm0 e 2e 1 nr,ge iex nnt cg liyo n v eo enw r n1it msht J e tun hltye ; h2h0o u2w m1e a,v nUe i r tNa , r tIi hCa e nE m nFi e lMe it d ay raa ynn rmd e faH urs’R es d Pr e a togdu d ale can cre dpp urt mo tgh , re Ua mr N esmI u Celt E sw F oa fsi n toh cnr e e vha o soe tle dd
i aat nns ddH trA oeosCok ua o prvcp eeesr a t l hw t eeo rp Ueo Sdw $iev7 re4 ra .t5 ne ndm o ti u lol n iwo c nainr fdg rs o s m ttaht ea e n -iwm o ipd rile ge ime n m aelne U rtag Stei$ no c 6ny 1 o. o 7fn m t h1 il sel t i oEF n eR b rPe ru.q a uInr e y s At 2 e 0ud 2g 1 fuo .s5 rt
2021. For 2022, UNICEF has launched an appeal of 151.4 million10, an increase of
2021, in line with the humanitarian need and HRP addendum, UNICEF increased
Tiotsvh eHer mA20iCl0i t%aapr ypf retoaakml et ooth vUee rSr e$ov7f i41s.es5td mF 2ei0lbl2iro1un aH rfyAr o2Cm0 a2 pa1np h eoaasrl i wgtoion rraesla eUcnhSe d$1 t6.h71e5.7 sm mituiilllaliitooionnn p r ieenoq Mpuleeys iatnne dmn efaeord.r
i T2n0h c2e lu1 h.d uFin mogr a 2n 10. i 1 t2a 52r i,m a Un il Nl c io rIi nCsi sEc h iFs i lhd war o esr n lsa. e unnincgh eads aan d airpepcet acl oonfs 1e5q1u.e4n mcei lolifo nfi1g0h, atnin ign cbreetawseee onf
aorvmere d20 g0r%ou fpros msp threea rde vaicsreods 2s 0t2h1e H cAouCn atrpyp. ePalr otov irseiaocnh o1f. 7a5s smisitlalinocne p, eino ptleer inm ns eoedf
The 1st February 2020 military takeover and the declaration of L2 emergency on
sinucplpuldieins ga n1d.1 5s emrvililcieosn hcahviled rbeene. n affected, specifically in Kayah, Kachin, Kayin,
1st July 2020 has changed the focus of UNICEF programme from systems
Shan, Chin, Sagaing, and Magway where heavy artillery and armed conflicts are
Tsthreen 1gstht eFneibnrgu atroy h20u2m0a nmitialirtiaarny taalkigenoivnegr iatn dto t hCeo dree cClaoramtimonit mofe nLt2s efmore rCgehnilcdyr eonn.
ongoing between the People’s Defence Forces (PDF) and the Myanmar Armed
D1sut riJnugly 2S0e2p0t emhabse rc htaon geDde ctehme bfeorc u2s0 2o1f , UUNNICICEEFF prhoegarvaimly mien vfersotmed siyns tetmhes
Forces (MAF). There have been frequent reports of people trying to escape the
preparation of Annual Work Plan 2022 focusing on 70% HAC activities and
strengthening to humanitarian aligning it to Core Commitments for Children.
conflicts and associated risks, with OCHA estimating that more than 400,000
aDliugrniinngg 3S0e%pt ewmibthe rU NtoC TD efrcaemmebweor rk2 0c2a1ll,e dU UNNIC SEoFci oh Eecaovniloym iinc vResetsepdo nisne atnhde
countrywide people have been displaced in those regions since May 2021. In the
Rpreespilaiernatcioe nF roafm Aewnnourka l (UWNoSrkE RPRlaFn) .2 W02h2i lefo tchues ionugt coonm 7e0 a%re aHs AreCm aaicnt ivthiteie ss aamned,
southeast region, displacements continue to take place in various townships as
some outputs have been modified to make it more effective and in line with
aligning 30% with UNCT framework called UN Socio Economic Response and
hcluamshaensi taanrdia nre sgiutulaart iaotnta acnksd bneetewdese. n MAF, PDF and Ethnic Armed Organizations
Resilience Framework (UNSERRF). While the outcome areas remain the same,
(EAO) are increasing according to field reports. The Office of the United Nations
some outputs have been modified to make it more effective and in line with
High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) estimates a total of 166,700 people
humanitarian situation and needs.
Due to shifting priorities and engagement modalities and in the light of significant
have been displaced across this area as of November 2021, including 84,300 people
changes in the Myanmar country context and the operational environment, UNCT
in Kayah, 20,800 people in southern Shan, 49,500 people in Kayin, 5,000 people in
hDause dtoe csihdieftdin gto p ripoorsittipeos naen d tehneg adgeevmeelonpt mmeondta liotife sU anndit eidn thNea ltiigohnts o fS suigstnaiifnicaabnlet
Mon and 7,100 people in Tanintharyi.6 The tactics employed by the Myanmar
Dcheavnegleosp imn etnhte CMoyoapnemraatri ocno uFnrtarmy ceownotrekx t( UanNd StDheC oFp)e brayt ioonnea ly eenavr.i rToon mcoenmtp, UlyN wCitTh
Armed Forces include arial bombardments, artillery shelling of civilian populations
thhaes sdpeircitid oefd UtNo Rpoefsotprmon aen dt hthe e dUeNveCloTp mcoemntm oitfm eUnnt ittoed e nNsuarteio tnhse Sseuqsutaeinncaibnlge
as well as summary executions of non-combatant civilians including over 114
bDeetvweeloenp mthene t cCoomoppleertaiotino no Ff rtahmee wUoNrkS D(UCNF SaDnCd FU) NbyI CoEneF yCeaPr.D T, ot hceo mUpNlyI CwEitFh
children.
Mthey asnpmiraitr ooff fiUceN h aRse pfolarcmed a nad r etqhue eUstN foCrT e xctoenmsmiointm ofe ncut rtroe netn Csuoruen tthrye Psreoqgureanmcimnge
2Tb0eht1ew8 C-e2eO0n2 V2tIh Duen -t1ciol9 D mpepacnleedtmieombnei cro 2hf0 a2tsh 3ae. l soU NafSfeDctCeFd Manyda nUmNarI.C AEsF o fC 3P0Dth, Jathneu aUryN 2I0C2E2,F7
5M3y5a,0n8m0a rc oasfefisc eh hadas bpelaecne dr eac roerqdueeds tw foitrh e1x9te,3n1si0o nd oefa tchusr raenndt C5o1u3n,1t0ry1 Prreocgorvaemrimese.
M20e1a8s-u2r0e2s2 t auknetnil bDye thcee mgobveerr 2n0m2e3n. t at the end of March to limit the circulation of the
virus, such as movement and travel restrictions, have proven effective. Myanmar
experienced second wave during June to Nov. 2021 and the number of cases has
gone down with a daily number of cases to 172 on 29th January 2022. Furthermore,
M8 UyNa nMmyaanrm asru Fffraemr edwiosrpkr foopr tohret iimomnaedteialtye sforcoiom-e ctohneo mic response to COVID-19 in Myanmar.
9 See UNICEF Myanmar Humanitarian Situation Report for 1 January - 31 December detailing progress on
8 UN Myanmar Framework for the immediate socio-economic response to COVID-19 in Myanmar.
4 Gert Rosenthal, 2019. A Brief and Independent Inquiry into the Involvement of the United Nations in
9 See UNICEF Myanmar Humanitarian Situation Report for 1 January - 31 December detailing progress on
Myanmar from 2010 to 2018.
UNIUCNEIFC’sE rFe’ssp roenspseo nansed acnluds ctelur’sst erre’ssp roenspseo.n se.
10 10 1M0 1y0a Mnmyaanr mHaAr CH AApCp Aeapl p2e0a2l 22; 0h2t2tp; sh:t/t/pws:/w/ww.uwnwic.eufn.oicregf/.oarpgp/eaaplsp/emalys/anmmyaanr mar
143
143
141
144144
OBJECT OF THE EVALUATION
UNICEF Myanmar humanitarian response to the national emergency from 1st
February will be the object of evaluation. UNICEF strategic priorities are
consistent with inter- agency priorities outlined in the Interim Emergency
Response Plan developed under the leadership of the Humanitarian Country Team
(HCT) and focuses on 1) urban and peri- urban townships in Yangon and
Mandalay which have seen dramatic increases in humanitarian needs due the
impacts of the Covid-19 pandemic and the ongoing situation since 1 February, 2)
scaling up of emergency response in Kayah State, Chin State and other areas where
clashes have driven large-scale displacement, and 3) flexible inter- agency rapid
response in other areas when new emergency needs related to violence, insecurity
and displacement identified.11 UNICEF Myanmar focuses its humanitarian
responses on the following ‘sectoral’ programme components: Health, Nutrition;
WASH; Education; Child Protection; Social Protection & communication for
development. Coordinating role of UNICEF has been important component
which will be part of the evaluation.
PURPOSE, OBJECTIVES AND SCOPE OF THE EVALUATION
Evaluation purpose
The main purpose of the L2 Evaluation is to promote learning from the
response and adopting a more integrated strategy, blending the strengths of
a MCO programmes being implemented during the emergency while
taking into consideration the preparedness and response capacity setup in
the MCO. The evaluation is also focused on providing a preliminary assessment of
UNICEF’s response to Myanmar crisis regarding its relevance, effectiveness,
efficiency, coverage, coherence, coordination, and protection, with a specific
focus on its adaptivity to changing conditions and how it has addressed
marginalization and deprivation.
Evaluation objectives
The evaluation will be formative in nature with primary aim to identify strengths
and weaknesses in UNICEF response (Health, Nutrition, Child Protection, WASH
and Social Policy and Child Rights monitoring) in order to assess the extent to
which the preparedness activities have fed into the emergency response including
recommendations for strengthening and adjusting UNICEF’s preparedness,
ongoing emergency response, recovery, transition and development efforts. The
specific objectives will be to:
5 Myanmar Coup: What to Know About the Protests and Unrest - The New York Times (nytimes.com)
6 Myanmar-Humanitarian-SitRep-28-November-2021.
71 1h thtpttsp:s/:///wrewliewfw.weob.rilndt/osmiteest/erresl.iienfwfoe/bc.iontr/ofnileasv/irreusso/ucroceusn/Mtryy/anmmyaarn%m20aIrn/t erim%20Emergency%20Response%20Plan%202021.pdf
114425
socio--ecoDneotmerimc iimnep act UofN tIhCe ECFO’sV IDr-e1s9p cornissies comvipsareda t o thveis a ctuaisls superse ad ooff
the diseasaep pinr oitpsr itaetrerniteosrsy/.8r elevance, effectiveness, efficiency, coverage,
connectedness and coordination / partnerships.
UNIC- EFA shsaess s bteheen epxrtoevnitd intgo mwuhlitcishe ctUoNraIl CrEesFp oandshe eriend thoep earfafteiocnteadll y araenasd.
UNICEFp’sro grersapmomnsaeti caarlelya,s tion ctlhued er ehveisaeltdh , Cnourter itCioonm, mchitimlde nptrso tfeocrt ioCnh, ilWdrAenS Hin,
educationH, uanmda nsoitcairaila np oAlicctyio ann d(C hCasC as)c;hieved important results so far9.
- Assess the positive aspects of UNICEF response and areas requiring
UNICEFim’s prreosvpeomnesne tsi.s based on the guiding principles laid down in Core
Com-mitmInefnotrsm fo trh Ceh pilldanrennin (gC CanCd) dinir eHcutimona noift aorinagno Aincgt iaocnu. tFe oelmloewrginegn ctyh er emspiloitnasrey
takeover aonnd 1trsta Fnseibtirounairnyg 2 t0o2 r1e, cUovNeIrCy EanFd idneitviaetleodp mitse nret sepfofonrstes immediately based
on th-e EIdmenetrigfeyn lceyss oRness pleoanrnsee d Palnand d(EevRePlo).p Freoclolomwminegn dtahteio ndse cfolarr aotniogno inogf aLnd2
emergencfyu tounre 1 sth Juumly a2n0i2ta1r,i aUnN rIeCsEpoFn Msey aninmtearrv’se nretigounlsa r pFraocgilritaamtem ele waransi nogn haonldd
and resoustrrceensg wtheerne UdiNveIrCteEdF t oMwyaarndms athr’es aimccpoluenmteanbtilaittiyo ann odf t rtahnes pEaRrePn. cIyn t oAwuagrudsst
2021, in lpinaret nweirtsh atnhde dhounmoarns.itarian need and HRP addendum, UNICEF increased
its HAC appeal to US$74.5 million from an original US$ 61.7 million requested for
The evaluation aimed to answer these three overarching learning questions:
2021. For 2022, UNICEF has launched an appeal of 151.4 million10, an increase of
over •200%H ofwro mwe tlhl eh arse vUisNedI C2E02F1 rHesApCon adpepde atol ttoh ere Macyha n1m.7a5r mHiullimonan piteaorpialne i nsi tnueaetdio n?
including 1.15 million children.
• What UNICEF approaches have had the most impact on identifying
and addressing the needs of affected households and population and
The 1st Fwehbartu aarrey t2h0e2 b0a rmriielirtsa riny tthakee roevsepro nansed stoh ef adr?eclaration of L2 emergency on
1st July 2020 has changed the focus of UNICEF programme from systems
• What actions and changes in strategy are required to develop a conflict-
strengthening to humanitarian aligning it to Core Commitments for Children.
sensitive, medium-term programme for affected states of Myanmar?
During September to December 2021, UNICEF heavily invested in the
preparation of Annual Work Plan 2022 focusing on 70% HAC activities and
Key Users and Intended use
aligning 30% with UNCT framework called UN Socio Economic Response and
RThesei lpiernimcea rFy ruasmeresw oofr tkh e( UevNalSuEatRioRnF a)r. eW UhNilIeC tEheF oMuytacnommaer ,a UreNasI CreEmFa EinA tPhRe Osa,m thee,
Msoymaen moaurt UpuNts C hoauvnet rby eTeena mm oanddif idedev etolo pmmaekne t ipt amrtnoerres .e Fffiresctt,i vUeN aInCdE iFn stlianfef wwhitoh
ahruem dairneitcatrlyia no rs iitnudaitrieocntl ya nindv noelevdesd. in this emergency – including those at the field,
national, regional and HQ levels – who will use the results of this evaluation to
finetune and calibrate UNICEF’s humanitarian efforts. Secondly, the evaluation
Due to shifting priorities and engagement modalities and in the light of significant
will also benefit UNICEF staff faced with similar emergencies in the future who
changes in the Myanmar country context and the operational environment, UNCT
may choose to use this evaluation as a reference document and use the results to
has decided to postpone the development of United Nations Sustainable
inform their own strategies. Finally, a sanitized version of this evaluation will be
Development Cooperation Framework (UNSDCF) by one year. To comply with
shared with UNICEF’s donors and implementing partners, and beneficiaries as a
the spirit of UN Reform and the UNCT commitment to ensure the sequencing
mechanism to strengthen accountability and transparency.
between the completion of the UNSDCF and UNICEF CPD, the UNICEF
Myanmar office has placed a request for extension of current Country Programme
2E0v1al8u-a2t0io2n2 S ucnotpiel December 2023.
Thematic scope: All thematic areas – health, nutrition, WASH, education, child
protection, social protection, and communication for development (C4D) -of
interventions will be covered in this evaluation. In addition, coordination role of
UNICEF will also be covered.
8 UN Myanmar Framework for the immediate socio-economic response to COVID-19 in Myanmar.
9W Sehee UreN:I CTEhFe Mgeyoangmraapr hHiucm aarneiata wriainll Sbiteu awtihono lRee pcoorut nfotrr y1 iJnancluuadryi n- g3 1t hDee cpeemrbi-eur rdbeatanil ianrge parso gress on
where UNICEF is supporting humanitarian response programmes
114436
147
UNICEF’s response and cluster’s response.
Timeframe: The evaluation will cover the response starting from 1st Feb. 2021 to
10 10 Myanmar HAC Appeal 2022; https://www.unicef.org/appeals/myanmar
the end of March. 2022.
EVALUATION QUESTIONS AND CRITERIA
Evaluation Criteria
The L2 emergency evaluation prioritises the OECD/DAC evaluation criteria
which includes relevance/appropriateness, effectiveness, efficiency, and
coherence. In addition to OECD/DAC evaluation criteria, the evaluation will
prioritize human rights, equity and gender equality as key criteria to be prioritized
throughout.
Due to the nature of this evaluation, it will not focus on impact and sustainability criteria.
Evaluation Questions
Key evaluation questions and possible exploratory sub-questions under each
criteria are described below. The questions that guide the evaluation are the leading
questions, while the sub-questions are presented as a way to incentivize some key
areas to be explored under each evaluation question. Please be aware that the
evaluability assessment and inception phase will be the time to review and confirm
feasibility and appropriateness of these questions, and the firm is able to propose
alternative or refined questions that are meaningful and respond to the
methodological approach and availability of data finally agreed upon.
The questions will be organized around the OECD/DAC criteria of relevance,
efficiency, effectiveness and sustainability. Human rights, equity and gender
equality will be lenses of analysis of all the questions and when appropriate will be
appear as sub-questions.
114448
Evaluation Evaluation Questions and Sub-questions
OBJECT OF THE EVALUATION
Criteria
UNICEF Myanmar humanitarian response to the national emergency from 1st
• Taking the emergency context into consideration and within the
February will be the object of evaluation. UNICEF strategic priorities are
parameters of UN engagement, to what extent did UNICEF’s
consistent with inter- agenrceys popnrisoer iitdieesn tiofyu talninde dre sipno ntdh et oI tnhtee riimmm eEdmiaeterg neenecdys of women,
RReseploevnasen cPela n developed unmdeern t,h beo leyasd aenrsdh gipir losf o tfh ed iHffuermenant iettahrniainc iCtieosu, nritsrky Tofe aemxp osure to
(HCT) and focuses on 1) vuirobleannc ea,n ddi sapbeirlii-ty usrtabtauns , taonwdn gsehoipgrsa pinh icYala nargeoans? and
Mandalay which have seen dramatTico iwnchraeta esxeste nint wheurme aennaitbarleiarns idneenetdisfi eddu aen dth lee veraged?
o
impacts of the Covid-19T op awnhdaetm eixct eanntd w theree o bnogtotliennge csiktsu aidtieonnt sifiinecde a1n dF estbrrauteagryie, s2 t)o overcome them
scaling up of emergencye rsetaspbolisnhseed in? Kayah State, Chin State and other areas where
clashes have driven large•-scaHleo wdi swpelarec etmhee nhtu, manandi t3a)r iafnle xniebeled si notfe trh- ea pgoenpcuyla rtiaopnid p rioritized and
response in other areas whena dnderwe sesmede.rgency needs related to violence, insecurity
and displacement identified.11 UNTICheE dFe gMreey atnhmata trh ef obceunseefisc iaitrsie sh buemena ninitvaorilavne d in the
o
responses on the following ‘sectoral’i dpernotgifriacmatmioen coof mnepeodnse, nthtse: dHeesaigltnh ,a nNdu itmritpiolenm; entation of the
WASH; Education; Child ProtectioLn;2 eSmoceiragl ePncroy tienctteiorvne n&tio ncosmmunication for
development. Coordinating roleo ofH UowN IdCoEesF t hhea sin tbeerevne nitmiopnos ratlaingnt wcoitmh pUoNne fnrta mework
prevailing in Myanmar.
which will be part of the evaluation.
• To what extent has the Country Office been able to respond and
adapt to changes in national needs, rights, and priorities or to shifts
PURPOSE, OBJECTIVES AND SCOPE OF THE EVALUATION
caused by the crisis and the major political changes?
Evaluation purpose
What was the quality of the response (including
o
The main purpose of the L2 Evaalupaptrioopnr iiast etnoe sps,r o- mbeoitneg ilnelainrne iwngith f trhoem n etehdes of the most
response and adopting a more intevguralnteerda bslter aatnedg ym, abrgleinnadliisnegd )t?he strengths of
a MCO programmes being implemented during the emergency while
To what extent have UNICEF’s programmes reflected
taking into consideration the opreparedness and response capacity setup in
applicable standards (CCCs, Sphere) and complying with the
the MCO. The evaluation is also focused on providing a preliminary assessment of
relevant humanitarian action and human rights principles?
UNICEF’s response to Myanmar crisis regarding its relevance, effectiveness,
efficiency, coverage, co•herTeno cwe,h cato oerxdteinnta thioasn ,t haen dU pNrIoCteEcFti orens,p wointhse a mspeet ciitfsic p rogram targets as
focus on its adaptivity tos pcehcaifniegdi ning tchoen Hduitmioannsit aarniadn Ahocwtio nit fohra sC haidlddrreenss?e Wd hat could be done
marginalization and deprivatitoon a. ccelerate response in future.
To what extent has UNICEF’s intervention contributed to an
o
Evaluation objectives enabling environment for the human rights of women and
children?
The evaluation will be formative in nature with primary aim to identify strengths
anEdf fweceatikvneensesesss in UNICEF responsWe (aHse tahlteh ‘,D Nou tnroit iohnar, mC’h-ialpdp Prrooatcehc ttihoon,r oWuAghSlHy followed or have
o
UNICEF interventions put people at additional risk?
and Social Policy and Child Rights monitoring) in order to assess the extent to
which the preparedness activities havTeo f wedh aint teox ttehnet ewmaesr UgeNncICy EreFsp’so dnesleiv ienrcyl uodf insegr vices well-
o
recommendations for strengtheninign teagnrdat eadd ajunsdt ionfg hiUghN/IaCccEeFp’tsa bpler eqpuaarleitdyn aess sd,e fined in the CCC?
ongoing emergency response, recovTeroy ,w thraant seixtitoenn ta hnadv ed ethvee loseprmviecnest aenffdo rgtoso. dTsh pe rovided been
o
specific objectives will be to: adequate, accepted and used by the affected population?
To what extent has UNICEF engaged with affected
o
populations to collect their feedback on services and good
provided and to what extent has their feedback being taking
11 https://reliefweb.int/sites/reliefweb.int/files/resouricnets/oM cyaonnmsari%d2e0rIantteiroimn% i2n0E amdeorgpentciyn%g2 0tRhesep ornessep%o20nPslaen%?202021.pdf
114459
Evaluation Evaluation Questions and Sub-questions
- Determine UNICEF’s response vis a vis issues of
Criteriaa ppropriateness/relevance, effectiveness, efficiency, coverage,
connectedness and coordination / partnerships.
• To What extent have principles of Accountability to Affected
- Assess the extent to which UNICEF adhered operationally and
Population (AAP) including UNICEF guidance on AAP been
programmatically, tfoo ltlohwe erdevised Core Commitments for Children in
CohereHncuem/a nitarian Action (CCCs);
• To what extent have the linkages between relief, recovery,
Con-necAtessdenses stsh e positive aspects of UNICEF response and areas requiring
development and peacebuilding (the triple nexus) been integrated
improvements.
in the programming, planning of UNICEF’s response?
- Inform the planning and direction of ongoing acute emergency response
and transitioning• to Treoc owvhearty e axntedn dt edviedl othpem pernetp eafrfeodrntsess measures implemented prior
- Identify lessons leartnoe tdh ea ncdri sdise vfealcoilpit arteec oUmNmICenEdFa’tsi oenmse frogre nocnyg roeisnpgo annsde?
future humanitarian response interventions Facilitate learning and
• To what extent have UNICEF’s activities contributed to
strengthen UNICEF Myanmar’s accountability and transparency towards
strengthening Myanmar’s institutional emergency response
partners and donorsc.apacity?
The evaluation aimed to •answHeor wth heases UthNreIeC oEvFer aarlicghniendg wleiatrhn tinhge qouveesratilol nfrsa: mework of UN
engagement in the country.?
• How well has UNICEF responded to the Myanmar Humanitarian situation?
• What UNICEF • appWrohacaht easr eh tahvee mhaadjo trh eex mteornsta li manpda cint toenrn iadle fnatciftoyirnsg influencing the
and addressing the naecehdiesv oefm aefnfetc (toerd nhootu) soefh Eolmdse ragnedn cpyo pPurolagtrioamn maned results? What
what are the barriersi ninfl utheen cree saproen tshee sseo ffaacrt?ors having on achievement (or not) of
Emergency Programme outcomes?
• What actions and changes in strategy are required to develop a conflict-
sensitive, medium•-teTrmo wprhoagt reaxmtemnet aforer hafufmecatned r isgthattse,s eoqfu Mityy acnomncaerr?ns and gender
equality consistently integrated in all aspects of emergency
programming and implementation?
Key Users and Intended use
The primary users of the evaluation are UNICEF Myanmar, UNICEF EAPRO, the
Myanmar UN Country Te•amH anodw d teimveelloyp hmavene tU pNarItCneErFs.’ sF eirfsfto, rUtsN toIC sEcaFle s utapf ft hweh roe sponse
are directly or indirectlyc ainpvaociltvye db eienn t?h is emergency – including those at the field,
• To what extend the preparedness activities (including supplies) have
national, regional and HQ levels – who will use the results of this evaluation to
Efficiency fed into the emergency response. What could have been improved
finetune and calibrate UNICEF’s humanitarian efforts. Secondly, the evaluation
and done differently?
will also benefit UNICEF staff faced with similar emergencies in the future who
• Were there any innovative approaches that improved efficiency
may choose to use this evaluation as a reference document and use the results to
(conversion of UNICEF inputs into outputs for the population) and
inform their own strategies. Finally, a sanitized version of this evaluation will be
to what extent?
shared with UNICEF’s donors and implementing partners, and beneficiaries as a
• Is a transition from development programming & Implementation
mechanism to strengthen accountability and transparency.
to emergency programming & implementation taking place?
(Comment: This question needs to not only take the financial and
technical transition into consideration, but also human resources,
Evaluation Scope
supply and other operational aspects into the
Thematic scope: All thematic areas – health, nutrition, WASH, education, child
assessment procedure. )
protection, social protection, and communication for development (C4D) -of
interventions will be cov•eredW iner eth UisN evICalEuaFt’iso nre. sIonu racdedsi tainodn ,s ctaofof rsduifnfaictiioennt rtool ee nosfu re that it could
Coordination
UNICEF will also be covereda.d equately perform its role as cluster lead/co-lead during emergency
response?
Where: The geographic area will be whole country including the peri-urban areas
• To what extent did UNICEF cluster leads comply with the
114560
wEhevrael UuaNtiIoCnE F is suppoErvtianlgu ahtuimona nQituareisanti orenssp aonndse S purbo-gqraumesmtieosn s
Criteria
responsibilities defined in the IASC and CCC ToR for cluster leads at
the country level?
• To what extent did the internal coordinating tools facilitate the
emergency response?
Coverage
• To what extent did UNICEF assistance reach/was accessible to affected
populations in different areas (by gender, ethnicity, risk of conflict, age,
socioeconomic, disability status, geography)?
Protection12 • To what extent did UNICEF assistance provided protection to the
target population (such as protection from armed elements operating
within the project area, or providing security within a displaced
persons/refugee camp)?
• To what extent where the MRM principles and obligations
adhered to?
• To what extend did UNICEF and implementing partners follow the
PSEA guidelines and Child Safeguarding principles
• Question on PSEA & Child Safeguarding
EVALUATION METHODOLOGY AND APPROACH
UNICEF’s Core Commitments for Children in Humanitarian Action13 will be at
the centre of this evaluation. The evaluation will further focus on Humanitarian
Performance Monitoring indicators derived from the CCCs. These two structures
will provide an implicit logical framework of UNICEF’s emergency response.
The design of the evaluation is expected to be non-experimental, and formative
and will focus on UNICEF’s overall response based on the OECD/DAC criteria
(relevance, effectiveness, efficiency, and coherence sustainability) as well as other
criteria specific to the evaluation of humanitarian action – connectedness,
coordination, coverage14, with a focus on assessing the extent to which UNICEF’s
emergency response and recovery efforts have contributed towards improving
institutional capacities, services and wellbeing and rights of children in Myanmar.
The evaluation will not evaluation ‘impact’
– neither in the OECD-DAC definition, nor in the sense of attributable change.
Nevertheless, the evaluation will seek to assess the effectiveness of UNICEF’s
response in achieving planned results. programme interventions.
12 https://www.unicef-irc.org/publications/pdf/brief_3_evaluativecriteria_eng.pdf.
13 https://www.unicef.org/media/59736/file/Core-commitments-for-children.pdf
14 https://www.alnap.org/help-library/evaluating-humanitarian-action-using-the-oecd-dac-criteria
114571
TMiimxeedf rmametheo: dTsh we iellv baleu ianticoonr pwoirlla tceodv aesr tfhare arse sppoosnsisbel es.t aDrtiisncgu sfsrioomns 1 wst iFtheibn. Y20a2n1g otno
tahned e fniedl odf cMonarscuhlt.a 2ti0o2n2s. will be largely qualitative and is more likely to take place
remotely. Quantitative data will be largely drawn from existing data sources, and to
a lesser extent, from primary data collection. The evaluation team will need to draw
EVALUATION QUESTIONS AND CRITERIA
on available quantitative data from recent evaluations, reviews, research, studies,
Evaluation Criteria
progress reports, situation reports, national datasets and surveys and other sources.
AThll ed aLt2a seomuercrgese nwciyl l enveaeldu attoio unn dperirogroit irsiegso rtohues OtriEanCgDul/aDtioAnC d uervianlgu adtaiotan acnraitlyesriias
awnhdic hre poirntcinlugd. eBs iddreerlse vwanillc eb/ea pepnrcoopurriaagteende stso, preoffpeocsteiv eanneys sf,e aseibffleic isetnackye,h oladnedr
ccoonhseureltnactieo. nI na papdrdoiatciohne st ot hOatE cCouDld/ DgeAnCer aetvea ulusaeftiuoln q ucarnitteitraiati,v eth dea teav oanlu akteioy nis swueilsl
apnrido rhietilzpe f hourmm aqnu arliigtahttisv,e e aqrueiatsy oafn edn gqeunirdye. r equality as key criteria to be prioritized
throughout.
Due to the high level of sensitivity vis a vis the parties to conflict and DFA in
pDaurtei ctuol athr,e nthaetu rEev oafl utahtiiso env aTlueaatmio nw, iitl l wcillel anro tw fiothcu sth oen Dimeppauctty anRde psuresstaenintaabtiivliet y –c riteria.
Programs all external meetings in advance including the questions which will be
Evaluation Questions
asked.
Key evaluation questions and possible exploratory sub-questions under each
Tcrhitee rima eatrhe oddesoclroigbye d wbielll owbe. Tfhuer tqhueer strieofnins etdh ati ng utihdee thinec eevpatilouant iopnh aasree, thpea rletiacduilnagr
cqounesstidioenras,t iwonh oilfe tchoen ssutrba-inqutse pstoiosends barye t hpere csoenutnetdry a cso an wteaxyt. to incentivize some key
areas to be explored under each evaluation question. Please be aware that the
Tevhaelu eavbailluitayt aiosnse sinsmceepntito ann,d d irnacfte patniodn f ipnhaal sree pwoilrlt b we itlhl ec otimmpel yto w reitvhi etwhe a nUdN cEonGf irm
gfeuaisdiebliilniteys :a (nhdtt pa:p/p/ruonperviaatle.onregs/sd oofc tuhmeseen qt/udesettiaoiln/s6, 0a8n)d a tnhde tfhirem H iusm abanlei ttaori apnr opose
aAltcetrionnat iGveu idoerl inree (fhinttepds :/q/uwewstwio.nalsn atph.oatr g/ahree lpm-liebarnairnyg/feuvl aluanatdio nr-eospf-ond to the
mhuemthaonditoalroiagnic-aalc atipopnr-oach and availability of data finally agreed upon.
guide). Th
The questions will be organized around the OECD/DAC criteria of relevance,
e evaluation inception, draft and final report should follow the UNEG report
efficiency, effectiveness and sustainability. Human rights, equity and gender
templates (https://www.unicef.org/evaluation/media/816/file/UNICEF-
equality will be lenses of analysis of all the questions and when appropriate will be
Adapted-UNEG- Evaluation-Report-Standards.pdf). In particular, the
appear as sub-questions.
evaluation will include equity dimensions concerning the needs and level of
participation of men, women, adolescents, children, socially excluded groups
and marginalized groups and those living in geographically remote and
protracted conflict areas.
In the proposal, the Evaluation Team will assess options and set out detailed
methods suited to meeting the requirements of the purpose, scope and objectives
of this evaluation.
The Evaluation Team will be expected to conform to guidance and standards set
by UN and UNICEF. The team will be guided by UNICEF’s revised Evaluation
Policy (2018), the United Nations Evaluation Group (UNEG) Norms and
Standards for Evaluation (2016), UNEG Ethical Guidelines for Evaluation (2020),
UN SWAP Evaluation Performance Indicator (2018), UNEG Guidance on
Integrating Human Rights and Gender Equality in Evaluation (2014), and
UNICEF-Adapted UNEG Evaluation Report Standards (2017)
114582
153
Evaluation Evaluation Questions and Sub-questions
Likewise, conventional ethical guidelines are to be followed during the evaluation.
Criteria
Specific reference is made to the UNEG Norms and Standards and Ethical
Guidelines, as well as• theT aUkiNngI CthEe Fem Perrogecnecdyu creo nftoerx t Eintthoi ccaoln sSitdaenradtaiordn sa nind within the
Research, Evaluation andp aDraamtae tCerosl olefc UtiNon e nagnadg eAmnenalty, stois w ahnadt exUteNnIt CdEidF U’sN ICEF’s
Evaluation Reporting Stanrdesaprodnss.1e5 Nideonteti tfhya at ntdh er esstpanodnadr dtos cthoev eimr tmhee dpioatses inbeileitdys of women,
oRf neleeevdainngc ea n ethical review m of e t n h , e b i o n y c s e p an ti d o n g i r r e ls p o o r f t d a i n ff d e e re v n a t lu e a t t h io n n ic t it o ie o s ls , , r e is s k p e o c f i a e l x ly p osure to
violence, disability status, and geographical areas?
when vulnerable populations are included into the data collection. Ethical review
from an IRB should be considered inT oth we hparto epxotseanlt a wnedr ien e tnhaeb tleimrse ildineen tainfided a raen dth lee veraged?
o
To what extent were bottlenecks identified and strategies to overcome them
responsibility of the consultant. Good practices not covered therein are also to be
established?
followed. Any sensitive issues or concerns should be raised with the Evaluation
• How were the humanitarian needs of the population prioritized and
Manager as soon as they are identified.
addressed.
Data collection methods
The degree that the beneficiaries been involved in the
o
The evaluation team should consideri dmeinxteidfi-cmateiothno odfs naneedd tsr,i atnhge udlaetseig tnh ea nddat iam (bpoletmh entation of the
primary and secondary) obtained. It iLs 2e xepmecetregden thcya ti nthteer tveeanmti ownisll use the following
methods: How does the interventions align with UN framework
o
- Document review: Humaniptarreivanai lsinitgu ainti oMn yraenpmoratrs., needs assessment,
emergency response plan, periodic progress reports
• To what extent has the Country Office been able to respond and
- Key informant interavdieawpt (tKo IcIhs)anges in national needs, rights, and priorities or to shifts
- Focus group discussciaounsse d(F bGy Dthse) crisis and the major political changes?
What was the quality of the response (including
o
Due to the current conflict situationa apnpdr othperi afoteunrethss C, O- bVeIinDg- 1in9l iwnea vwei th the needs of the most
(Omicron), field visits will not be feavsiubllnee. rKabIlIes aanndd mFGarDgisn awliislle db)e? conducted
remotely through use of phone interTvioe wwsh, aZt oeoxtmen mt heeatvien gUs.N ICEF’s programmes reflected
o
applicable standards (CCCs, Sphere) and complying with the
It is important to note that data collection might need to be done remotely in case of travel/ movement
relevant humanitarian action and human rights principles?
restrictions due to COVID-19 or state of emergency imposed by the government. Innovative and
• To what extent has the UNICEF response met its program targets as
appropriate remote data collection methods need to be proposed and considered from the onset.
specified in the Humanitarian Action for Children? What could be done
to accelerate response in future.
Data collection and analysis should be human rights based and gender sensitive.
To what extent has UNICEF’s intervention contributed to an
Data collected should be disaggreogated by age, gender, state/region, disability, etc.,
enabling environment for the human rights of women and
as possible. Data triangulation will be of crucial importance. Data analysis should
children?
also include aspects of gender, equity and human rights into consideration.
Effectiveness Was the ‘Do no harm’-approach thoroughly followed or have
o
UNICEF interventions put people at additional risk?
A sampling strategy should be included in the Technical Proposal, setting out how
To what extent was UNICEF’s delivery of services well-
geographic areas and populationso, and different stakeholder groups will be sampled.
integrated and of high/acceptable quality as defined in the CCC?
This applies to both quantitative and qualitative data collection.
To what extent have the services and goods provided been
o
adequate, accepted and used by the affected population?
To what extent has UNICEF engaged with affected
o
15 See: https://www.unicef.org/media/5479p6/ofpileu lations to collect their feedback on services and good
provided and to what extent has their feedback being taking
into consideration in adopting the response?
114594
Evaluation Evaluation Questions and Sub-questions
Likewise, conventional ethical guidelines are to be followed during the evaluation. Assessing and validating findings
Criteria
Specific reference is made to the UNEG Norms and Standards and Ethical
Guidelines, as well as the UNICEF Procedure for Ethical Standards in • Initial findings v • alid T a o ti o W n h a w t o ex rk te s n h t o h p a : v e I n p i r t i i n a c l ip f l i e n s d i o n f g A s c c c l o e u a n re t d ab i b lit y y t t o h e Affected
Research, Evaluation and Data Collection and Analysis and UNICEF’s Population (AAP) including UNICEF guidance on AAP been
Representative will be presented to a carefully selected number of stakeholders
Evaluation Reporting Standards.15 Note that the standards cover the possibility followed
in a workshop to assess the validity/ accuracy of the findings and their
of needing an ethical review of the inception report and evaluation tools, especially Coherence/
relevance to the cou•ntryT coo nwtheaxtt eaxntde nUt NhaIvCeE tFhe p lrinokgraagmesm bientgw aenend rsetrliaetfe, grye caotvery,
Connectedness
when vulnerable populations are included into the data collection. Ethical review development and peacebuilding (the triple nexus) been integrated
the end of the in-country visit/ data collection phase, with feedback
from an IRB should be considered in the proposal and in the timeline and are the in the programming, planning of UNICEF’s response?
documented including where any divergent views, sensitivities, or lack of
responsibility of the consultant. Good practices not covered therein are also to be
consensus on these• findTion gws haartis eex. tTenhte sdeid w thille bper ebpaasreedd naess sf amr eaass puorsessi bimlep olenmented prior
followed. Any sensitive issues or concerns should be raised with the Evaluation
triangulation of evidencteo c tohlele cctreisdis. facilitate UNICEF’s emergency response?
Manager as soon as they are identified.
• Final report/ Re•comTmo ewnhdaat teixotnens t hwaovrek UshNoIpC: EOF’ns caec tivdiattieas caonnaltyrisbisu teisd to
Data collection methods finalized, a final workshsotpre nwgitthh etnhien gr eMfeyraennmcea rg’sro inuspt iatuntdio mnaaln eamgeemrgeenntc yt eraemsponse
The evaluation team should consider mixed-methods and triangulate the data (both will be conducted. Findcinapgas caitnyd? conclusions will be presented. Conclusions
primary and secondary) obtained. It is expected that the team will use the following should present reaso•nabHleo jwud hgaesm UenNtsI CbEasFe da loignn feidn dwinitghs tahned o svuebrsatlal nfrtaiamteedw boyrk of UN
methods: evidence and provide iennsgigahgtesm peenrtt iinne tnhte tcoo uthnetr yo.b?ject and purpose of the
- Document review: Humanitarian situation reports, needs assessment, evaluation and will b • e p W re h se a n t t a e r d e t in h e t h m e a w jo o r r e k x s t h e o rn p a . l S a t n ak d e i h n o te ld rn er a s l f w ac il t l o t r h s e i n n f b lu e encing the
emergency response plan, periodic progress reports asked at the workshop a t c o h h ie e v lp em th en e t e ( v o a r l u n a o t t io ) n o f t e E a m m e r f g o e rm nc u y l a P t r e o a g n ra d m p m ri e o r r i e ti s s u e lts? What
- Key informant interview (KIIs) recommendations so thiant frlueleenvcaen caere, uthseefsuel nfaecstso arns dh aavcitniogn oanb ialicthy ioevf etmheesnet c (aonr not) of
be maximised. It is Esmuegrggeesntecdy Ptrhoagtr amprmeleim ouintacroym easn?d well- thought
- Focus group discussions (FGDs)
recommendations are brought as inputs, although enough space should be
• To what extent are human rights, equity concerns and gender
Due to the current conflict situation and the fourth COVID-19 wave
given to co-creation ofe qthuea lriteyc ocomnmsisetnednattliyo innst eignr attheed wino arlkl sahsoppe.c tIst oisf etmo ebregency
(Omicron), field visits will not be feasible. KIIs and FGDs will be conducted
noted here that versionsp orof gtrhaem twmoin rge panodrt sim –p alnem inetnertantaiol rne?port with all issues
openly articulated, and an external version for distribution to partners – will be
remotely through use of phone interviews, Zoom meetings.
prepared.
It is important to note that data collection might need to be done remotely in case of travel/ movement • How timely have UNICEF’s efforts to scale up the response
capacity been?
restrictions due to COVID-19 or state of emergency imposed by the government. Innovative and Limitations
• To what extend the preparedness activities (including supplies) have
appropriate remote data collection methods need to be proposed and considered from the onset.
Efficiency fed into the emergency response. What could have been improved
Some limitations already foreseen should be taken into consideration in the
and done differently?
Data collection and analysis should be human rights based and gender sensitive. proposal and in the design of the methodology and approach to be followed. Based
• Were there any innovative approaches that improved efficiency
Data collected should be disaggregated by age, gender, state/region, disability, etc., on the non- engagement principles, the evaluation will not be considering
(conversion of UNICEF inputs into outputs for the population) and
as possible. Data triangulation will be of crucial importance. Data analysis should interviewing the governmentt oof wfichiaatls e. xAtennott?her limitation will be challenges related
also include aspects of gender, equity and human rights into consideration. to restrictions of movement to certain areas due to ongoing protest and armed
• Is a transition from development programming & Implementation
conflict. COVID poses another limitation in terms of mobility and contact with
to emergency programming & implementation taking place?
A sampling strategy should be included in the Technical Proposal, setting out how people. Alternative scenarios and possibilities to ensure that the evaluation retains
(Comment: This question needs to not only take the financial and
geographic areas and populations, and different stakeholder groups will be sampled. its high quality in the face toefc hcnoinctainl tureadn sreitsiotrnic itnioton sc, oanss iwdeerlla taios ni,t sb upta artlsicoi phuatmorayn resources,
This applies to both quantitative and qualitative data collection. approach need to be considesruedp palnyd a nindc loutdheedr oinp ethraet ipornoaplo assapl.e cts into the
assessment procedure. )
Tied to this are budget considerations as resources are being prioritized for the
covid-19 response. Bidde•rs aWre eerxep UecNteIdC EtoF ’osf rfeesr otuhrec ebse astn dp osstasfibf lseu sffeircvieicnets t ow henilseu re that it could
Coordination
15 See: https://www.unicef.org/media/54796/file being cost- conscious and loaodkeiqnuga ftoelry aplteerrfnoartmiv eitss arnodle iansn colvuasttieorn lse atdh/act oc-alnea kde deupr ing emergency
response?
costs down while meeting the evaluation objectives.
• To what extent did UNICEF cluster leads comply with the
Lastly, there might be limitations in terms of the available monitoring and cost-
related information.
154 115505
156
Evaluation Evaluation Questions and Sub-questions
Bidders are encouraged to identify the limitations of the proposed methods and any
Criteria
risks related to evaluation conduct as well as mitigating measures for these
responsibilities defined in the IASC and CCC ToR for cluster leads at
limitations and risks in the proposal.
the country level?
EVALUATION OUTPUTS AND DELIVERABLES
• To what extent did the internal coordinating tools facilitate the
The language of all products ewmille brgee innc Ey nregslpisohn osne?ly. Evaluation products expected
Coverage
for this exercise are: • To what extent did UNICEF assistance reach/was accessible to affected
populations in different areas (by gender, ethnicity, risk of conflict, age,
An Inception Report (IR) of approximately 30 pages (and no more than 40)
socioeconomic, disability status, geography)?
in English excluding annexes. The IR will be initially shared with the
Protection12 • To what extent did UNICEF assistance provided protection to the
(cid:883)(cid:524)
management team and after revision, will be shared with the reference group
target population (such as protection from armed elements operating
for clearance. within the project area, or providing security within a displaced
persons/refugee camp)?
The Inception Report will be key in confirming a mutual understanding of what is
• To what extent where the MRM principles and obligations
to be evaluated, including additional insights into executing the evaluation. At this
adhered to?
stage, evaluators will refin•e anTdo c ownhfairt mex etevnaldu adtiido nU qNuIeCstEioFn sa,n cdo inmfiprmlem theen tsicnogp pea ortfn ers follow the
the evaluation, further improPveS EonA t hgue imdeeltinheosd oalnodg yC phrioldp oSsaefedg iuna trhdein Tgo pRr ianncdip tlheseir
own evaluation proposal to improve its rigor, as well as develop and validate
• Question on PSEA & Child Safeguarding
evaluation instruments. The report will include, among other elements: i)
evaluation purpose and scope, confirmation of objectives of the evaluation; ii)
eEvVaAluLaUtioAnT IcOrNite MriaE TaHndO DqOueLsOtioGnYs; AiNii)D eAvPalPuRatOioAnC Hm ethodology (i.e., sampling
criteria), along with a description of data collection methods and data sources (incl.
UNICEF’s Core Commitments for Children in Humanitarian Action13 will be at
a rationale for their selection), draft data collection instruments, for example
the centre of this evaluation. The evaluation will further focus on Humanitarian
questionnaires, with a data collection toolkit as an annex, an evaluation matrix that
Performance Monitoring indicators derived from the CCCs. These two structures
identifies descriptive and normative questions and criteria for evaluating evidence,
will provide an implicit logical framework of UNICEF’s emergency response.
data analysis methods and a data analysis plan, a discussion on how to enhance the
reliability and validity of evaluation conclusions, the field visit approach, a
The design of the evaluation is expected to be non-experimental, and formative
description of the quality review process, a discussion on the limitations of the
and will focus on UNICEF’s overall response based on the OECD/DAC criteria
methodology and ethical considerations; iv) proposed structure of the final report;
(relevance, effectiveness, efficiency, and coherence sustainability) as well as other
v)evaluation work plan and timeline, including a revised work and travel plan and
criteria specific to the evaluation of humanitarian action – connectedness,
deliverables timeline); vi) detailed evaluation budget; vii) annexes (i.e., organizing
coordination, coverage14, with a focus on assessing the extent to which UNICEF’s
matrix for evaluation questions, data collection toolkit, data analysis framework);
emergency response and recovery efforts have contributed towards improving
and vi) a summary of the evaluation (evaluation briefing note) for external
institutional capacities, services and wellbeing and rights of children in Myanmar.
communication purposes;
The evaluation will not evaluation ‘impact’
– neither in the OECD-DAC definition, nor in the sense of attributable change.
A summary of initial evaluation findings from primary data collection
Nevertheless, the evaluation will seek to assess the effectiveness of UNICEF’s
of maximum 20 pages excluding annexes, and a PowerPoint presentation to
re(cid:884)s(cid:524)ponse in achieving planned results. programme interventions.
facilitate the initial findings consultation workshop. The report should include
findings from the desk review and data collection (primary and secondary),
with an initial attempt to triangulation of findings. The report should also
12 https://www.unicef-irc.org/publications/pdf/brief_3_evaluativecriteria_eng.pdf.
13 httpps:r/e/swenwtw a.u nmicaetfr.oixrg /omf eqduiaa/l5it9y7 3o6f/ fdilaet/aC coorlel-eccotmedm iftomre nretss-pfoorn-cdhiinldgre tno.p edaf ch evaluation
14 https://www.alnap.org/help-library/evaluating-humanitarian-action-using-the-oecd-dac-criteria
question and point to gaps that challenged the data collection phase. The
rreeppoorrtt sshhoouulldd ininccluludde ea sa sa nannenxeexse tsh teh ne onteost easn adnd summaries made during
the desk review, transcripts of qualitative data (KIIs and FGDs) as well as
the anonymymised datasets obtained from the online survey;
115517
summaries made during the desk review, transcripts of qualitative data (KIIs and
FGDs) as well as the anonymised datasets obtained from the online survey;
A draft and final report that fully conforms to the Global Evaluation Report
Mixed methods will be incorporated as far as possible. Discussions within Yangon
Oversight System16 of ideally 40 pages but not more than 50 plus executive
and field consultations will be largely qualitative and is more likely to take place
(cid:885)(cid:524)
summary and annexes (in English and Myanmar) that will be revised until
remotely. Quantitative data will be largely drawn from existing data sources, and to
approved (incl. a complete first draft to be reviewed by the Evaluation
a lesser extent, from primary data collection. The evaluation team will need to draw
Management Team and UNICEF; a second draft to be reviewed by the
on available quantitative data from recent evaluations, reviews, research, studies,
Reference Group, and a penultimate draft to be cleared by the Evaluation
progress reports, situation reports, national datasets and surveys and other sources.
Management Team). It is to be noted here that versions of the two reports –
All data sources will need to undergo rigorous triangulation during data analysis
an internal report with all issues openly articulated, and an external version for
and reporting. Bidders will be encouraged to propose any feasible stakeholder
distribution to partners – will be prepared.
consultation approaches that could generate useful quantitative data on key issues
and help form qualitative areas of enquiry.
A Power Point presentation of the final report (in both English and
Myanmar) to be used to share final evaluation findings and conclusions with
Due to the high level of sensitivity vis a vis the parties to conflict and DFA in
(cid:886)(cid:524)
the Reference Group in a validation workshop and updated to include final
particular, the Evaluation Team will clear with the Deputy Representative –
recommendations for use in subsequent dissemination events; and
Programs all external meetings in advance including the questions which will be
asked.
A four-page Evaluation Brief (in both English and Myanmar) that is distinct
The fmroemth othdeo leoxgeyc uwtivilel sbuem mfuarrthy einr trheefi neveadl uiant iotnh er epinocretp, atinodn itp ihs ainset,e npdaerdti cfuolra ar
(cid:887)(cid:524)
consibdreoraadtieorn, onfo cno- ntesctrhaninictasl paonsde dn obny- tUhNe cICouEnFtr ayu cdoinentecxet,. and should resemble an
e-book or infographic as much as possible. The summary of findings and
The erevcaolumatmioenn dinactieopntsio nw,i ldl raalfsto a nbde fsihnaarle rde wpoitrht wnailtli ocnoaml palny dw istuhb t hnea tUioNnaEl Gle vel
guideolifnfeicsi:a (lhst atpn:d/ /wuinll enveael.do rtgo/ bdeo pcuromdeuncte/dd eutsaiinl/g6 d0i8sa) bainlidty tahcec eHssuimblaen aintadr iiannc lusive
Actiofno rGmuaitds.eline (https://www.alnap.org/help-library/evaluation-of-
humanitarian-action-
Reports will be prepared according to the UNICEF Style Guide, UNICEF Brand
guide). Th
Toolkit and UNICEF Publication Toolkit (to be shared with the winning bidder)
e evaluation inception, draft and final report should follow the UNEG report
and UNICEF-Adapted UNEG Evaluation Reports Standards as per GEROS
templates (https://www.unicef.org/evaluation/media/816/file/UNICEF-
guidelines (referenced before). All deliverables must be in professional level
Adapted-UNEG- Evaluation-Report-Standards.pdf). In particular, the
standard English and they must be language- edited/proof-read by a native
evaluation will include equity dimensions concerning the needs and level of
speaker.
participation of men, women, adolescents, children, socially excluded groups
Tanhde fminaarlg rienpaolizrte ads gwreolul pass thane dfo tuhro-psea gleiv Einvga luina gtieoong Brarpiehfi cnaelelyd rteom boet ea cacnedss ible and
ipnrcoltursaicvtee do fc poneoflpiclet awreitahs .d isabilities. This means specifically that:
All images such as quotation boxes, tables and infographics in the
In the proposal, the Evaluation Team will assess options and set out detailed
design must be accompanied by Alt Text to enable a screen reader to
methods suited to meeting the requirements of the purpose, scope and objectives
of this ev
d
a
e
lu
te
a
c
ti
t
o
a
n
n
.
d provide an audio description;
Final publication must be delivered as an accessible PDF . The
designer is expected to check the levels (ad adjust accordingly)
The Evaluation Team will be expected to conform to guidance and standards set
9
by UN a
o
n
f
d
a
U
cc
N
es
I
s
C
ib
E
il
F
it
.
y
T
in
h e
t h
te
e
am will be guided by UNICEF’s revised Evaluation
Policy (2018), the United Nations Evaluation Group (UNEG) Norms and
Standards for Evaluation (2016), UNEG Ethical Guidelines for Evaluation (2020),
UN SWAP Evaluation Performance Indicator (2018), UNEG Guidance on
Integrating Human Rights and Gender Equality in Evaluation (2014), and
16 UNICEF has instituted the Global Evaluation Report Oversight System (GEROS), a system where final
evaluation reports are quality assessed by an external company against UNICEF/UNEG Norms and Standards
for evaluation reports. The Evaluation Team is expected to reflect on and conform to these standards as they
158
write their report. The team may choose to share a self-assessment based on the GEROS with the Evaluation
Manager.
152
159
UNICEF-Adapted UNEG Evaluation Report Standards (2017)
document. They can do this using the “accessibility checker” in their
design software and via the “Read Aloud” function on Adobe Acrobat
Reader.
Other interim products are:
Minutes of key meetings with the Evaluation Management Team and the
Reference Group;
Presentation materials for the meetings with the Evaluation Management
Team and the Reference Group (if needed, in addition to the ones
mentioned above). These may include PowerPoint summaries of work
progress and conclusions to that point.
Bidders are invited to reflect on each outline and effect the necessary
modification to enhance their coverage and clarity. Having said so, products
are expected to conform to the stipulated number of pages where that
applies.
PROPOSED SCHEDULE
An estimated budget has been allocated for this evaluation. As reflected in Table
1, the evaluation has a timeline of Three months from April to June 2022. Adequate
effort should be allocated to the evaluation to ensure timely submission of all
deliverables, approximately 24 weeks on the part of the Evaluation Team The
proposal should consider alternatives for meeting the deadlines in the current
Covid-19 scenario, including alternative ways of data collection and participatory
validation.
Table 1: Proposed evaluation timeline17
ACTIVITY DELIVERABLE TIME RESPONSIBL
ESTIMATE E PARTY
1. INCEPTION, 6 weeks
DOCUMENT REVIEW
AND ANALYSIS
1. Kick-off meeting Meeting Week 1 Evaluation Team,
minute Evaluation
management Team
(EMT)
2. Inception phase (desk Weeks 1-2 Evaluation Team
review; development of
evaluation matrix,
17 Please note that the timing of the data collection may change depending on the possibility of carrying
out KIIs and FGDs and other contextual factors.
115630
161
ACTIVITY DELIVERABLE TIME RESPONSIBL
Likewise, conventional ethical guidelines are to be followed during the evaluation.
ESTIMATE E PARTY
Specific reference is made to the UNEG Norms and Standards and Ethical
Guidelines, as well as the UNICEF Procedure for Ethical Standards in
methodology and work plan,
Research, Evaluation and Data Collection and Analysis and UNICEF’s
data collection material,
Evaluation Reporting Standards.15 Note that the standards cover the possibility
drafting of the
of needing an ethical review of the inception report and evaluation tools, especially
Inception Report)
when vulnerable populations are included into the data collection. Ethical review
3. Draft inception report and Draft Week 2 Evaluation Team,
from an IRB should be considered in the proposal and in the timeline and are the
present to evaluation manager Inception Evaluation
responsibility of the consultant. Good practices not covered therein are also to be
Report Management Team
followed. Any sensitive issues or concerns should be raised with the Evaluation
Manager as soon as they are identified.
4. Evaluation management team IR Week 3 Evaluation
Dpartao vcoidllee cfteioend bmaectkh otod tsh e IR commenting Management Team
The evaluation team should consider mmiaxteridx- methods and triangulate the data (both
primary and secondary) obtained. It is expected that the team will use the following
m 5 e . t S h e o n d d s: revised inception report Revised IR and Week 4 Evaluation Manager,
to reference group for their response to IR Reference Group
- Document review: Humanitarian situation reports, needs assessment,
feedback and present IR to ERG commenting
emergency response plan, periodic progress reports
Evaluation team
matrix
- Key informant interview (KIIs)
- Focus group discussions (FGDs)
IR PPT
D6u.eE tRo Gth eto c purrorevnidt ec ofenefdlicbta csikt utoation aIRnd the fourth COVWIDee-k1 95 wave
(OIRmicron), field visits will not be feascibolme.m KeInItsi nagn d FGDs will be conducted
remotely through use of phone intervmieawtrsi,x Z oom meetings.
It is important to note that data collection might need to be done remotely in case of travel/ movement
7. Send revised inception report Final Inception Weeks 6 Evaluation Team,
restrictions due to COVID-19 or state of emergency imposed by the government. Innovative and
integrating feedback from the Report Evaluation
appropriate remote data collection methods need to be proposed and considered from the onset.
reference group Management Team,
Reference Group
Data collection and analysis should be human rights based and gender sensitive.
D8a.taR ecvoilelewc taendd s hapopulrdo vbee fdinisaalg IgRregateFdi nbayl aIgnec,e gpetniodne r, stWatee/erke g6i on, disabEilvitaylu, aettico.,n manager
as possible. Data triangulation will beR oefp ocrrut cial importance. Data analysis should
also include aspects of gender, equity and human rights into consideration.
2. DATA COLLECTION AND 3 weeks
AI NsamITpIliAnLg sAtrNatAegLyY shSoISuld be included in the Technical Proposal, setting out how
geographic areas and populations, and different stakeholder groups will be sampled.
1. Pilot data collection tools and - Weeks 7-8 Evaluation Team
This applies to both quantitative and qualitative data collection.
conduct field-based
data collection
2. Prepare initial evaluation Initial Week 9 Evaluation Team,
15 See: https://www.unicef.org/media/54796/file
findings report and evaluation Evaluation Manager
accompanying PPT findings report
115642
ACTIVITY DELIVERABLE TIME RESPONSIBL
Assessing and validating findings
ESTIMATE E PARTY
• pres I e n n i t t a i t a i l o n f indings validation wPoorwkesrhPoopin: t Initial findings cleared by the
Representative will be presented ptor eas ceanrteaftuiollny, selected number of stakeholders
in a workshop to assess the validity/ accuracy of the findings and their
3. Prreelseevnatn pcere tloim tihnea rcyo fuinndtriny gcsontextP aonwde UrPNoiInCtE F proWgraemekm 9i ng and sEtrvaatelugayt iaotn Team,
PPTth teo EenRdG of the in-country vispirte/s ednatattaio cno llection phase, with Efveeadlubaatciokn Manager,
documented including where any divergent views, sensitivities, oRre flaecrekn ocef Group
consensus on these findings arise. These will be based as far as possible on
3.ANALYSIS, 7 weeks
triangulation of evidence collected.
REPORTING AND
• Final report/ Recommendations workshop: Once data analysis is
COMMUNICATION OF
finalized, a final workshop with the reference group and management team
RESULTS
will be conducted. Findings and conclusions will be presented. Conclusions
1. Prepare and submit first draft Draft ER Weeks 10- Evaluation Team
should present reasonable judgements based on findings and substantiated by
of evaluation report (ER) to 11
evidence and provide insights pertinent to the object and purpose of the
evaluation
evaluation and will be presented in the workshop. Stakeholders will then be
manager
asked at the workshop to help the evaluation team formulate and prioritise
2. Freeecdobmacmke tnod Eatvioanlusa stioo nth Taeta rmelevaEncRe , usefulness andW aceteiok n1a2b ility of Ethveaslue actaionn Manager
be maximised. It is suggestceodm mtheantt inpgr eliminary and well- thought
recommendations are brought ams aitnripxu ts, although enough space should be
given to co-creation of the recommendations in the workshop. It is to be
3. Prepare and submit second Draft report Week 13 Evaluation Team
noted here that versions of the two reports – an internal report with all issues
draft of evaluation report
openly articulated, and an external version for distribution to partners – will be
Response to
prepared.
ER
commenting
Limitations
matrix
Some limitations already foreseen should be taken into consideration in the
4. ERG to provide feedback to ER Weeks 14 Evaluation Manager,
proposal and in the design of the methodology and approach to be followed. Based
Evaluation Team commenting Reference Group
on the non- engagement principles, the evaluation will not be considering
matrix
interviewing the government officials. Another limitation will be challenges related
to5 .rPesrterpicatrieo nans do fs umbmovitement to certaDinr aafrte raesp odrute to onWgoeienkgs p1r5o test aEndv aalurmateiodn Team
copnefnluicltt.i mCaOteV dIrDaf tp oofses another limitation in terms of mobility and contact with
Response to
peevoaplluea. tAiolnte rrnepatoivrte wscitehnarios and possibilities to ensure that the evaluation retains
ER
itas chcoigmh pqaunayliintyg PinP Tthe face of continued restrictions, as well as its participatory
commenting
approach need to be considered and included in the proposal.
matrix
Tied to this are budget considerations as resources are being prioritized for the
co6v.iVd-a1li9d raetsiopno nwsoe.r kBsihdodpe rtso parreio erxitpizeec PtePdT t o offer the beWst epeoks 1si6b le serviEcevsa lwuahtiiloen team,
baenindg vcaolisdta- tceo rnesccoimoums eanndda tloioonksing for alternatives and innovations thatE cvaanl ukaeteiopn manager and
cowsittsh down while meeting the evaluation objectives. Reference Group
the Reference Group and
115653
LAasCtlTy, ItVhIeTreY m ight be limitations in DteErmLsI VofE tRhAe BavLaEila TblIeM mEo nitoring RanEdS cPoOstN- SIBL
related information. ESTIMATE E PARTY
Key stakeholders
7. Submit and present final report Final report, Week 16 Evaluation Team,
to Reference Group, evaluation executive Evaluation Manager,
briefing note and final power summary, Reference Group
point presentation that can be PowerPoint
used for dissemination purposes presentation,
and other meeting
materials minutes
MANAGEMENT AND COORDINATION
Evaluation management
The evaluation will be conducted by an external Evaluation Team recruited by
UNICEF Myanmar for conduction of the CPE. The Evaluation Team will operate
under the supervision of Regional Evaluation Advisor at UNICEF EAPRO,
together with the Chief PME at UNICEF Myanmar. Together they will act as
Evaluation Managers and therefore be responsible for the day-to-day oversight and
management of the evaluation and for the management of the evaluation budget.
The Evaluation Managers will assure the quality and independence of the
evaluation and guarantee its alignment with UNEG Norms and Standards and
Ethical Guidelines and other relevant procedures, provide quality assurance
checking that the evaluation findings and conclusions are relevant; and
recommendations are implementable, and contribute to the dissemination of the
evaluation findings and follow-up on the management response. They will work in
close collaboration with the Deputy Representative. The role of the evaluation
management team is to provide feedback and oversight to every deliverable,
including to its first draft version.
A Reference Group will be established, including UNICEF staff from different
sections of the Country Office, staff from the regional office, and up to two external
experts (pending availability). The Reference Group will have the following roles:
contribute to the preparation and design of the evaluation, including providing
feedback and comments on the Inception Report and on the technical quality of
the work of the consultants; provide comments and substantive feedback to ensure
the quality – from a technical point of view
–of the draft and final evaluation reports; assist in identifying internal and external
stakeholders to be consulted during the evaluation process; participate in review
meetings organized by the Evaluation Management Team and with the Evaluation
Team
115664
165
Basi drdeqerusi raerde; e pnlcaoy uar akgeeyd r toole i dinen lteiafyrn tihneg liamndit aktnioonws loedf gthee s phraoripnogs efrdo mme tthheo devs aalnuda taionny
rriesskusl trse,l actoendt ritbou teinvga ltuoa tdioisns emcoinnadtuincgt tahse fwinedlli nagss omf itthigea teivnagl umatieoansu arneds pfaorrt ictihpeastee
liinm tihtaet dioranfst ianngd a nridsk vsa ilnid tahtieo pnr oofp orescaol.m mendations.
EVALUATION OUTPUTS AND DELIVERABLES
Quality assurance
The language of all products will be in English only. Evaluation products expected
Quality assurance plays a vital role in the evaluation and involves a wide range of
for this exercise are:
people. Quality assurance must start from the evaluation team itself, and clear
qualitAyn a Issnucreapntcieo cno nRseidpeorratt i(oInRs) omf uasptp broe xpimreasteenlyte 3d0 ipna gthees (panrodp noosa ml aonred tehnasnu 4re0d)
throuingh oEuntg ltihshe eevxaclluuadtiinogn . anAnse xae sm. inTihmeu mIR, twheil l UbNe ICinEitFia lelyv asluhaatrieodn wmiathn agthere,
(cid:883)(cid:524)
togetmhearn wagitehm tehnet etveaalmua atniodn a mftaenra rgeevmiseionnt ,t ewaimll bwei lsl haalsroed b we itthhe tfhires tr elfaeyreern ocfe qguroaluitpy
assurfaonrc cel. eTahraen rceef.erence group together with the Regional Office will add a second
layer of technical and strategic feedback. Each deliverable will undergo a thorough
The Inception Report will be key in confirming a mutual understanding of what is
process of quality assurance. Quality assurance will focus on the technical soundness
to be evaluated, including additional insights into executing the evaluation. At this
of the deliverables, as well as on ensuring the deliverables meet the reporting
stage, evaluators will refine and confirm evaluation questions, confirm the scope of
standards set out by GEROS and other UNICEF and UNEG guidelines as
the evaluation, further improve on the methodology proposed in the ToR and their
mentioned above. The evaluation manager will make such guidelines available, as
own evaluation proposal to improve its rigor, as well as develop and validate
well as examples of highly satisfactory evaluation reports to guide the evaluation
evaluation instruments. The report will include, among other elements: i)
team.
evaluation purpose and scope, confirmation of objectives of the evaluation; ii)
eQvualaulaittiyo nas scurirtaenricae atnudrn aqruoeustniodn tsi;m ieiis) : Tevhaelu inatcieopnt iomne rtehpoodrot loangdy f(ini.ea.l, respaomrpt lwinigll
cgroit ethrirao),u aglho nvga rwioituhs ar oduenscdrsi potfio qnu oalfi tdya atass cuorlalnecctei,o snt amrteinthgo wdsit ahn ad fdirastta rseovuiercwe sb (yi ntchle.
ae vraalutiaotnioanle m faonra gthemeire nste tleecatmio n(1), wderaefkt) . dAatfate rc othlliesc trieovnie win stthrue meveanltusa, tifoonr feixrmam wpliell
qhuaveset ioonnen awireeesk, wtuirthn aar oduantad c toimlleec taifotner t owohlikciht atsh ea nr eapnonretx m, auns te vbael uraettuiornn emda ttorigxe tthheart
iwdeitnht itfhiees c doemscmriepntitvse m aantdr ixn.o Trmhiast iwviel l qtuheesnt iboen ss haanrde dc rwitietrhi at hfoe rr eefvearleunactien ggr eovuipd,e wncheo,
dhaatvae a ntwaloy swis emekesth tood sr eavnidew a tdhaet ar aenpaolryts isa npdla nre, vae drits cwuistshi ocno omnm heonwts t.o P eonwhaenr cpeo tihnet
rperleiasbenilittayt ioannsd tov altihdeit ym oanf agevemalueantti otne amco nacnluds iroenfse,r etnhcee fgireoldu pv i(siint Eapnpgrloisahc ha, nda
dMeyscarnimptaior)n w oifll tahlseo qbuea lgitivy erne vtoie wpr opvriodcee isnst,e raa cdtiisvceu wssaioyns toon g etth fee elidmbiatactki.o ns of the
methodology and ethical considerations; iv) proposed structure of the final report;
EVALUATION TEAM COMPOSITION
v)evaluation work plan and timeline, including a revised work and travel plan and
deliverables timeline); vi) detailed evaluation budget; vii) annexes (i.e., organizing
The evaluation team should comprise of at least 2 members with one senior-level
matrix for evaluation questions, data collection toolkit, data analysis framework);
evaluation expert as Team Leader to lead the evaluation that will be supported by at
and vi) a summary of the evaluation (evaluation briefing note) for external
least one team member with complementary (culturally diverse) backgrounds, skills
communication purposes;
and experience in the following. It is expected that the team is comprised by at least
one Myanmar national to ensure presence in country even in case of current travel
A summary of initial evaluation findings from primary data collection
restrictions imposed due to Covid-19 and emergency in the country.
of maximum 20 pages excluding annexes, and a PowerPoint presentation to
(cid:884)(cid:524)
Teamf aLceialidteart e the initial findings consultation workshop. The report should include
findings from the desk review and data collection (primary and secondary),
A minimum of 10 years of evaluation experience in developing countries
woith an initial attempt to triangulation of findings. The report should also
with excellent understanding of evaluation principles and methodologies,
present a matrix of quality of data collected for responding to each evaluation
including capacity in an array of qualitative and quantitative evaluation
question and point to gaps that challenged the data collection phase. The
methods, including
report should include as annexes the notes and
115676
spuremvmioaursi ese mxpaedreie dnuceri ngsu tphpeo drteisnkg reevvieawlu,a ttrioannssc riipnvtso olvfi nqgu alnitaattiiovne adl atgao (vKeIrnIsm aenndt
pFaGrtDnesr) sa s well as the anonymised datasets obtained from the online survey;
A draft and final report that fully conforms to the Global Evaluation Report
Experience in conducting real time evaluations for UN agencies
o
Oversight System16 of ideally 40 pages but not more than 50 plus executive
preferably including UNICEF or major bilateral donor for complex
(cid:885)(cid:524)
summary and annexes (in English and Myanmar) that will be revised until
humanitarian emergencies response programmes, and familiarity with
approved (incl. a complete first draft to be reviewed by the Evaluation
UNEG Norms and Standards and Ethical Guidelines and Core
Management Team and UNICEF; a second draft to be reviewed by the
Commitments for Children (CCC).
Reference Group, and a penultimate draft to be cleared by the Evaluation
Previous experience of working in Myanmar is strongly preferred
oManagement Team). It is to be noted here that versions of the two reports –
an inEtxerpnearli ernecpeo irnt wleiatdhi nalgl iasnsdu ems aonpaegnilnyg a ermticeurlgaetendc,y a envda launa teioxtne ronf aUl vNerIsCioEnF f oorr
o
distroibthuetrio Un Nto opragratnniezrast i–o nwsi llp breef perraebplayr ewd.ith good knowledge of UNICEF
planning processes (CPD, AWPs, HAC, HPM etc.).
A PDoiwpelorm Paocyin at npdr etascetn tina ticoanrr yoinf gt hoeu t fiannadl prerepsoenrtt in(ign fbinodtihn gEs nogflish and
o
Myaenvmalaura)t itoon b per oucseesds etso isnh saerne sfiitnivael ecvoanltueaxttiosn findings and conclusions with
(cid:886)(cid:524)
the Reference Group in a validation workshop and updated to include final
Strong English report writing skills and a track record of producing
orecommendations for use in subsequent dissemination events; and
high quality reports
Team member
A four-page Evaluation Brief (in both English and Myanmar) that is distinct
from the executive summary in the evaluation report, and it is intended for a
Having a multidisciplinary background, and understanding of key
(cid:887)(cid:524) o
broader, non- technical and non-UNICEF audience, and should resemble an
UNICEF technical areas – including health, nutrition / food security,
e-book or infographic as much as possible. The summary of findings and
WASH, child protection, humanitarian response,
recommendations will also be shared with national and sub national level
Experience of, and ability to design and factor in, essential cross cutting
oofficials and will need to be produced using disability accessible and inclusive
areas such as gender, human rights and child rights effectively into the
formats.
evaluation process
Reports will be prepared according to the UNICEF Style Guide, UNICEF Brand
Both members of the team should have:
Toolkit and UNICEF Publication Toolkit (to be shared with the winning bidder)
and UNISCtrEoFng-A idnateprt-epde rUsoNnEalG s kEillvsa launadti oanb ilRitye ptoor tesn gSatgaen deafrfdecst iavse lyp ewr itGh EseRnOioSr
o
guidelinesst a(kreehfeorlednecresd before). All deliverables must be in professional level
standard English and they must be language- edited/proof-read by a native
Bringing a strong commitment to delivering timely and high-quality
o
speaker.
results, i.e., credible evaluations that are used for improving strategic
decisions
The final report as well as the four-page Evaluation Brief need to be accessible and
inclusive of people with disabilities. This means specifically that:
Commitment and willingness to work independently, with limited regular
o
supervision; s/he must demonstrate adaptability and flexibility, client
All images such as quotation boxes, tables and infographics in the
orientation, proven ethical practice, initiative, concern for accuracy and
design must be accompanied by Alt Text to enable a screen reader to
quality
detect and provide an audio description;
Final publication must be delivered as an accessible PDF . The
The ability to concisely and clearly express ideas and concepts in written
o
designer is expected to check the levels (ad adjust accordingly)
and oral form as well as the ability to communicate with various
sotfa kacecheoslsdiberilsi tiyn iEn nthgeli sh.
Ability to write and communicate in Myanmar with professional standard
o
is an asset
115687
168
9
16 UNICEF has instituted the Global Evaluation Report Oversight System (GEROS), a system where final
The Team Member(s) will play a key role in data collection, analysis and
evaluation reports are quality assessed by an external company against UNICEF/UNEG Norms and Standards
fporre evsaelunattaiotnio renp,o rtasn. Tdh e pErveapluaatriaonti oTena mo isf extphecet edd teob rerfileefctin ogns a nda ncodn fowrmil lt o tmheasek est ansdiagrndsif aisc athneyt
write their report. The team may choose to share a self-assessment based on the GEROS with the Evaluation
contributions to the writing of the main evaluation report.
Manager.
Mandatory Training Courses for UNICEF: All members of the team must
have completed the mandatory training courses required by UNICEF evaluators
at least once during past five years. These courses can be accessed through the
following link to Agora Website (please search for them once at Website).
AGORA (unicef.org)
• Ethics and Integrity at UNICEF
• Introduction to Ethics in Evidence Generation (Basic)
• Prevention of Sexual Harassment and Abuse of Authority
• Prevention of Sexual Exploitation Abuse (PSEA)
The Evaluation Team is expected to be gender and geographically balanced. Back-
office support assisting the team with logistics and other administrative matters is
also expected. It is vital that the same individuals that develop the
methodology for the RFPS will be involved in conducting the evaluation. In
the review of the RFPS, while adequate consideration will be given to the
technical methodology, significant weighting will be given to the quality,
experience (CV’s and written samples of previous evaluations) and
relevance of individuals who will be involved in the evaluation.
PAYMENT SCHEDULE
Payments are tied to key deliverables and will be as follows:
• Approved Inception Report: 30% of the contractual amount;
• Approved initial evaluation findings report: 20% of the contractual amount;
• Full and complete draft report for review of ERG: 20% of contract amount
• Approved validation workshop presentation; final report, final
presentation, and other materials: 30% of contract amount;
APPLICATION PROCESS
Each proposal will be assessed first on its technical merits and subsequently on its
price. In making the final decision, UNICEF considers both Technical and
Financial Proposals. The Evaluation Team first reviews the Technical Proposals
followed by review of the Financial Proposals of the technically compliant firms.
The proposal obtaining the highest overall score after adding the scores for the
Technical and Financial Proposals together, that offers the best value for money,
will be recommended for award of the contract.
115699
dTohce uTmecehnnti.c Talh Peryo pcaonsa dl soh tohuilsd uinscinlugd teh beu “t ancocte bssei blimiliittye dc htoe ctkhee rf”o lilno wthinegir:
design software and via the “Read Aloud” function on Adobe Acrobat
1. Request for Proposals for Services Form (provided above).
Reader.
a) Presentation of the Bidding Institution or institutions if a consortium
(maximum two institutions will be accepted as part of the consortium),
Other interim products are:
including:
Min•uteNs aomf ke eoyf mtheee tiinnsgtsit uwtiitohn ;the Evaluation Management Team and the
Reference Group;
• Date and country of registration/incorporation;
Presentation materials for the meetings with the Evaluation Management
• Summary of corporate structure and business areas;
Team and the Reference Group (if needed, in addition to the ones
• Corporate directions and experience;
mentioned above). These may include PowerPoint summaries of work
• Location of offices or agents relevant to this proposal;
progress and conclusions to that point.
• Number and type of employees;
Bidders are invited to reflect on each outline and effect the necessary
• In case of a consortium of institutions, the above listed elements
modification to enhance their coverage and clarity. Having said so, products
shall be provided for each consortium members in addition to the
are expected to conform to the stipulated number of pages where that
signed consortium agreement; and
applies.
• In case of a consortium, one only must be identified as the
PROPOSED SCoHrEgaDnUizLaEtio n lead in dealing with UNICEF.
Narrative Description of the Bidding Institution's Experience and Capacity in the following areas:
An estimated budget has been allocated for this evaluation. As reflected in Table
1, the evalua•tionE hmase rag teimnceyl ipnreo ogfr aTmhrmeee mevoanluthatsi ofrno mor Aeqpuriilv taole Jnutn feo 2r 0U2N2.I ACdEeFq uoarte
effort should boet haellro cUaNte dag eton ctyhe evaluation to ensure timely submission of all
deliverables•, apSptrroaxteimgiact eelvya l2u4a twioenesk so fo nco tmhpe lepxa rpt roofg rtahme mEevsa lfuoart ioUnN T aegaemnc Tiehse
proposal shouldo rc monasjiodre bri laatlteerranl adtoivneosr fCoor umntereyt iPnrgo gthraem dmeaedslines in the current
Covid-19 scenario, including alternative ways of data collection and participatory
• Previous assignments in developing countries in general, but
validation.
preferably in Myanmar
Table 1: Prop•osedP reevvailouautsio ann tdim ceulirnree1n7t assignments using UNEG Norms and
Standards for evaluation.
ACTIVITY b) Relevant ReDfeErLenIcVeEs RofA tBheL pEr oTpIoMseEr (past andR oEn-SgPoOinNg SIBL
assignments) in the past five years. UNICEEFS mTaIyM cAonTtEac t rEef PerAeRncTeYs
persons for feedback on services provided by the proposers.
1. INCEPTcI)ON, Samples or Links to Samples of P6r weveieokuss Relevant Work
DOCUlMistEedN aTs RreEfeVreInEcWe of the proposer (at least three), on which the proposed
AND ANALYSIS key personnel directly and actively contributed or authored.
1. Kickd-o)ff meeMtinegthodology. It shMoueledt imngin imize repeWateinegk w1 hat is staEtevda liuna tthioen Team,
ToR. There is no minimmuinmu toer maximum length. If in doubEtv, aelnusautiroen
sufficimenatn daegteamil.e nt Team
2. Work Plan, which will include as a minimum requirement the f(oEllMowTi)n g:
• General work plan based on the one proposed in the
2. Inception phase (desk Weeks 1-2 Evaluation Team
ToR, with comments and proposed adjustments, if any; and
review; development of
• Detailed timetable by activity (it must be consistent with
evaluation matrix,
the general work plan and the financial proposal).
116700
1E7 Pvlaelausea tniootne tTheata tmhe: timing of the data collection may change depending on the possibility of carrying
out KIIs and FGDs and other contextual factors.
• Summary presentation of proposed experts;
• Description of support staff (number and profile of research and
administrative assistants etc.);
• Level of effort of proposed experts by activity (it must be
consistent with the financial proposal); and
• CV of each expert proposed to carry out the evaluation.
The Technical Proposal will be submitted in hard copy and electronic (PDF) format.
Please note that the duration of the assignment will be from March to June 2021,
and it is foreseen that the Team Leader and the Team Expert/Team Members will
devote roughly half of their time to the evaluation. The presence of a conflict of
interest of any kind (e.g., having worked for or partnered with UNICEF in
Myanmar on the design or implementation of current will automatically disqualify
prospective candidates from consideration).
The Financial Proposal should include but not be limited to the following:
Resource Costs: Daily rate multiplied by number of days of the experts
involved in the evaluation.
(cid:131)(cid:524)
Conference or Workshop Costs (if any): Indicate nature and
breakdown if possible.
(cid:132)(cid:524)
Travel Costs: All travel costs should be included as a lump sum fixed
cost. For all travel costs, UNICEF will pay as per the lump sum fixed costs
(cid:133)(cid:524)
provided in the proposal. A breakdown of the lump sum travel costs
should be provided in the financial proposal.
Any Other Costs (if any): Indicate nature and breakdown.
Recent Financial Audit Report: Report should have been carried out
(cid:134)(cid:524)
in the past two years and be certified by a reputable audit organization.
(cid:135)(cid:524)
Bidders are required to estimate travel costs in the Financial Proposal. Please note that:
b)travel costs shall be calculated based on economy class fare regardless of the
length of travel; and ii) costs for accommodation, meals and incidentals.
The financial proposal must be fully separated from the technical proposal. The
financial proposal will be submitted in hard copy. Costs will be formulated in US$
and free of all taxes.
EVALUATION WEIGHING CRITERIA
The proposals will be evaluated against the two elements: technical and financial.
The ratio between the technical and financial criteria depends on the relative
importance of one component to the other. Cumulative Analysis will be used to
evaluate and award proposals. The evaluation criteria associated with this ToR is
116711
spAliCt TbeItVwIeTenY t echnical and financial aDs fEoLlloIwVsE: RABLE TIME RESPONSIBL
ESTIMATE E PARTY
• Weightage for Technical Proposal = 70%
met•hodWoloeiggyh atangde wfoorr kF pinlaann,c ial Proposal = 30%
data• colTleocttaiol nS cmoraete =ri a1l,0 0%
drafting of the
Inception Report)
3. Draft inception report and Draft Week 2 Evaluation Team,
present to evaluation manager Inception Evaluation
Technical Proposal:
Report Management Team
The Technical Proposal should address all aspects and criteria outlined in this
4. Evaluation management team IR Week 3 Evaluation
Request for Proposal.
provide feedback to the IR commenting Management Team
matrix
Table 1: Evaluation of Technical Proposal
5 It . e S m en d r T ev e i c se h d n i i n c c a e l p E ti v o a n lu r a ep ti o o r n t Cri R te e r v i i a s ed IR and Week 4 Evaluation M M a a n x a . g P er o , ints
to reference group for their response to IR Reference GOrobutapi nable
f1e edbackO anvedr palrle sReenst pIoRn tsoe E RG commenting 20
Evaluation team
e.g. the understanding of thme aatsrsixig nment by the proposer and the
alignment of the proposal submitted with the ToR
1.1 Completeness of response IR PPT 5
1.2 Overall concord between RFP requirements and proposal 15
62. ERG tCoo pmropvaidney faeneddb Kaceky t oPersonIRn el Week 5 40
I2R.1 Range and depth of organizcaotmiomnaeln etxinpge rience with similar 5
projects matrix
2.2 Samples of previous work 5
72..3S end rNevuismedb eirn coefp ctuiosnto rmepeorsrt, sizeF oinf aplr Ionjeccetpst,i onnum beWr oeef kssta 6ff per Evaluation Team, 5
integratinpgr ofejeecdtb ack from the Report Evaluation
r2e.4fe renceC glireonutp references Management Team5,
2.5 Key personnel: relevant experience and qualifications of the proRpeofesreedn ce Grou2p0
team for the assignment
83. ReviewP raonpdo aspepdr oMvee tfhinoadl IoRlogy aFnidn aAl pInpcreopatciohn Week 6 Evaluation mana4g0e r
e.g. Work plan showing detRaiel psoamrt pling methods, project implementation
plan in line with the project
23..1D ATAP rCoOpoLsLedE wCoTrkIO pNlan A aNndD approach of impleme 3 n w ta e ti e o k n s o f the tasks 15
as per the ToR
INITIAL ANALYSIS
3.2 Implementation strategies, monitoring and evaluation, quality 10
control mechanism
1. Pilot data collection tools and - Weeks 7-8 Evaluation Team
3.3 Technologies used - compatibility with UNICEF 5
conduct field-based
3.4 Innovative approach 10
data collection
2T.OPTreApLar Te EinCitiHal NevIaCluAaLtio SnCORESI nitial Week 9 Evaluation Team 10 , 0
findings report and evaluation Evaluation Manager
Minimum technical required score: 65
accompanying PPT findings report
116722
ACTIVITY DELIVERABLE TIME RESPONSIBL
Financial Proposal
ESTIMATE E PARTY
The total amount of points allocated for the price component is 30. The maximum
npumresbeenr toaft ipooni nts will be allotted to tPhoew loewrPeositn pt rice proposal that is opened and
compared among those invited firms/pinrsetsietunttiaotniosn w, hich obtain the threshold points
in the evaluation of the technical component.
3. Present preliminary findings PowerPoint Week 9 Evaluation Team,
APllP oTth teor EprRicGe proposals will receive pporeinsetsn itnat iinovne rse proportion to the loEwveaslut aptrioicne ,M e.agn.,a ger,
Reference Group
Score for price proposal X = $Value of lowest priced proposal
3.ANALYSIS, (Divided by) $Val7u we eperkops osal X
REPORTING AND
COMMUNICATION OF
ARnnEeSxeUs LTS
1. Prepare and submit first draft Draft ER Weeks 10- Evaluation Team
Aonfn eevxa l1u:a Etioxnp ercepteodrt f (oErRm) atot for the final report 11
evaluation
manager
Executive Summary (up to 4 pages)
2. Feedback to Evaluation Team ER Week 12 Evaluation Manager
• Acknowledgements
commenting
Table of contents
matrix
• Abbreviations and acronyms
•3. PMreappare and submit second Draft report Week 13 Evaluation Team
•drafItn otfr oedvaulcutaitoionn ( r6e-p7o prtages)
Response to
Purpose of the Emergency Programme Evaluation
ER
Scope of the evaluation
(cid:145) commenting
Methodology and approach to the evaluation
(cid:145) matrix
• Country context and UNICEF’s Emergency Programme (6-7 pages)
(cid:145)
Draw from the appropriate sections of the Inception Report, with relevant updates based
4. ERG to provide feedback to ER Weeks 14 Evaluation Manager,
on the subsequent field work and analysis
Evaluation Team commenting Reference Group
(cid:145)
• Findings (25-30 pages)
matrix
Answers to each of the evaluation questions
•5. P
C
re
o
p
n
a
c
r
l
e
u
a
si
n
o
d
n s
s u
(
b
5-
m
6
i t
pages)
Draft report Weeks 15 Evaluation Team
pen(cid:145)ultimate draft of
• Lessons (3-4 pages)
Response to
evaluation report with
• Recommendations (3-4 pages)
ER
•
accoAmnpnaenxyeinsg PPT
commenting
Terms of Reference
matrix
Inception Report including Evaluation Matrix
(cid:145)
6. ValBidibatliioongr wapohrykshop to prioritize PPT Week 16 Evaluation team,
(cid:145)
and validate recommendations Evaluation manager and
(cid:145)
with Reference Group
the Reference Group and
116733
Draft Report August 2019 Annexes / Page 173
For further information, please contact:
UNICEF East Asia and Pacific Regional Office
19 Phra Atit Road Bangkok 10200 Thailand
E-mail: eapro@unicef.org or asia.pacific.evaluate@unicef.org
www.unicef.org/eapro