UNICEF Nepal Country
Programme Review
(Final) Report
Volume I
18 November 2022
Address:
UNICEF Regional Office for South Asia (ROSA)
P.O. Box 5815,
Lekhnath Marg, Kathmandu, Nepal
Tel: +977-1-4417082
Email: rosa@unicef.org
Website: www.unicef.org/rosa/
Cover photo: ©UNICEF Nepal
Disclaimer: The statements in this publication do not necessarily reflect the policies or the views of UNICEF. Permission is required to
reproduce any part of this publication. All images and illustrations used in this publication are intended for informational purposes only and
must be used only in reference to this publication and its content. All photos are used for illustrative purposes only. UNICEF photographs
are copyrighted and may not be used for an individual’s or organization’s own promotional activities or in any commercial context. The
content cannot be digitally altered to change meaning or context. All reproductions of non-brand content MUST be credited as follows:
Photographs: “© UNICEF /photographer’s last name”. Assets not credited are not authorized. Thank you for supporting UNICEF.
UNICEF Nepal Country
Programme Review
(Final) Report
Volume I
18 November 2022
ii UNICEF Nepal Country Programme Review
Title Review of UNICEF Nepal Country Programme (2018-2022)
Timeframe April 2022 to November 2022
Date of the Report 18 November 2022 (Final)
Location Nepal
Commissioning agency UNICEF Regional Office for South Asia
Evaluation Team Ranjith Mahindapala
Lise Bendiksen
Raghu Shrestha
Anil Chandrika
UNICEF Nepal Country Programme Review iii
Contents
Acknowledgements iv
Acronyms and Abbreviations v
Chronology of key actions in the Country Programme Review vii
Executive Summary ix
1. Introduction 1
2. The Country Context 3
3. Object of the Review 7
The Results Framework 11
4. Purpose and the Scope of the Review 13
Stakeholders of the Country Programme 14
Main End Users and Use of the CPR 14
5. Methodology 17
5.1. Review Principles 17
5.2. Methodology and Tools 18
5.3. Integration of Gender Equity and equity in review 20
5.4. Limitations 21
6. Findings of the Country Programme Review 23
6.1. Relevance 23
6.1.1. Overview 23
6.1.2. Adequacy of the implemented theories of change of the selected thematic areas 23
6.1.3 Consideration of the needs of children in planning and implementation of the Country Programme 26
6.1.4 Critical interventions that are missing or received low attention 29
6.2. Effectiveness 31
6.2.1. Overview 31
6.2.2. Achievement of results 32
6.3. Factors Influencing the Achievement (or not) of the Nepal Country Programme Results 51
6.4. Adjustment of Programming within a Changing Context 53
6.4.1 Changing context caused by COVID-19 pandemic 54
6.4.2 Changing context caused by federalization 57
6.5. Strategic Positioning 59
7. Conclusions 63
8. Lessons Learned 67
9. Recommendations 69
Acknowledgements
n Elke Wisch (Representative) and James McQuen Patterson (Deputy Representative) (and Gitanjali
Gurung(Senior Programme Associate), UNICEF NCO;
n Amadou Seck (Chief Planning and Monitoring) and Sita Nepal(Budget Officer), UNICEF NCO –
willingly provided information, documents etc.;
n UNICEF NCO Section Chiefs and their staff, Heads of Field Offices and staff;
n Esther Kaggwa (Regional Advisor – Evaluation, Impact and Learning) and Barsha Pradhan (Evaluation
Officer) from UNICEF ROSA;
n All key informants including those in UNICEF for their time – sometimes given at short notice;
n Respondents of the Perception Survey.
We thank all of you immensely.
UNICEF Nepal Country Programme Review v
Acronyms and
Abbreviations
CEHRD : Centre for Education and Human Resource Development (of MoEST)
CFLG : Child friendly local governance
CFT : Child tracker survey
CP : Country Programme (Nepal)
CPAP : Country Programme Action Plan
CPD : Country Programme Document
CPR : Country Programme Review
CRC : Child Rights Convention
CSOs : Civil society organizations
CwD : Children with disabilities
DRR : Disaster risk reduction
ECD : Early childhood development
ECE : Early childhood education
ERG : Evaluation Reference Group (UNICEF ROSA)
FCHV : Female Community Health Volunteers
GoN : Government of Nepal
IMEP : Integrated monitoring and evaluation plan
INGOs : International non-governmental organizations
KII : Key informant interview
M&E : Monitoring and evaluation
MoEST : Ministry of Education, Science & Technology
MoFAGA : Ministry of Federal Affairs and General Administration
MoHP : Ministry of Health & Population
MoWSS : Ministry of Water Supply & Sanitation
MSPN : Multi-sectoral plan for nutrition
NCO : Nepal Country Office (UNICEF)
NGOs : Non-governmental organizations
ODF : Open defaecation free
OR : Other Resources Regular
PLGSP : Provincial & Local Governance Support Programme
PS : Perception Survey
PSN : Programme Strategy Notes
RAM : Results Assessment Module
RR : Core Resources for Results (Regular Resources)
SAM : Severe and acute malnutrition
vi UNICEF Nepal Country Programme Review
SBC : Social and behaviour change
SDGs : Sustainable Development Goals
SitAn : Situation Analysis
SPSS : Statistical Package for the Social Sciences
ToC : Theory of Change
UN : United Nations
UNDP : United Nations Development Programme
UNICEF : United Nations Children’s Fund, (United Nations International Children’s Emergency Fund)
UNICEF NCO : UNICEF Nepal Country Office
UNICEF ROSA : UNICEF Regional Office for South Asia
UNSDF : UN Sustainable Development Framework
USD United States Dollar
WASH : Water Sanitation and Hygiene
WFP : World Food Programme
WHO : World Health Organization
UNICEF Nepal Country Programme Review vii
Chronology of key
actions in the Country
Programme Review
n Kick-off meeting with UNICEF ROSA to n Online Perception Survey from 15 April to 26
develop a common understanding of the Terms May 2022
of Reference (ToR) of the CPR and to agree on n Presentation of the inception process to SMR
the scope of the review and limitations (several Group (27 April 2021);
rounds of discussions starting from 15 March
n Discussion with UNICEF NCO staff on
to 25 March 2022);
federalization (6 May 2022);
n Initial meeting with UNICEF NCO senior
n Presentation of the initial findings to UNICEF
management to discuss the ToR and the
NCO (13 June 2022) and continue KIIs;
timelines for the Review (25 March 2022);
n Submission of the (draft) Report (16 July 2022);
n Finalization of ToR for the Review (29 March
n Preliminary comments from Evaluation
2022);
Section, ROSA (19 July 2022);
n Development of KII Guides and Perception
n Submission of the revised (draft) Report (21
Survey Questionnaire for review and approval
July 2022);
by UNICEF ROSA (last week of March 2022);
n Presentation of Review Findings to ROSA and
n Initial series of discussions with Representative,
NCO (10 October 2022);
Deputy Representatives, Section Heads and
Field Office Heads (29 March to 7 April 2022); n Submission of the Revised Report (25 October
2022);
n Presentation of the methodology to the
Evaluation Reference Group (ERG) (20 April n Comments from ROSA (15 November 2022);
2022); n Submission of the revised version of the Report
(Vol I) (18 November 2022).
viii UNICEF Nepal Country Programme Review
lapeN
FECINU
©
UNICEF Nepal Country Programme Review ix
Executive Summary
Introduction to the UNICEF Nepal positioning in Nepal). Only two OECD-DAC criteria
Country Programme (CP) of relevance and effectiveness have been covered
as guided by the TOR and utility for the next
The goal of the country programme is “children
country programme. The CPR, covering the period
benefit from improved and equitable access to
2018-2021, is expected to inform programme
and the use of high-quality child-friendly services,
design and support managerial decision-taking
improved care practices, protective and safe
for the next country programme, and assess
environments and better policies and resource
the performance of results. The Review focused
allocation for children”. The CP has six thematic
on five thematic areas, namely, health, nutrition,
outcomes with 22 outputs that target specific
education, social policy, and emergency/DRR. The
change in the lives of children, plus an outcome
main participants of the review were stakeholders
on programme effectiveness. Following the mid-
(duty-bearers), who were mapped and identified
term review (MTR) of the CP, an output on local
in consultation with UNICEF ROSA/NCO.
governance was added to support improved
planning and implementation for children at
Methodology
local levels. The CP focuses on all three levels of
government with overall targeting of the most The review adopted a participatory and interactive
disadvantaged children, particularly focusing on approach based on an evaluation design matrix. A
the central Terai and far western areas of Madhesh perception survey was undertaken using a group of
and Sudurpaschim Provinces. stakeholders, which provided quantitative data on
relevance and effectiveness, including stakeholder
The Country Programme is reflected as the
satisfaction of interventions. 94 stakeholders
Country Programme Action Plan (CPAP), a signed
(out of 126 invited to participate) responded to
document between UNICEF Nepal Country Office
the survey. Desk research was conducted using
(NCO) and the Government of Nepal (GoN). The
reports and other published and unpublished
sub-national activities are implemented through
materials. Qualitative data were collected from
three field offices, Nepalgunj, Bharatpur and
interviews with 69 key informants comprised
Siddharthanagar. CPAP was amended in 2020
of 35 external stakeholders and 34 UNICEF
following the MTR.
staff members, using structured KII Guides.
Save for five, all KIIs were conducted online.
The Country Programme has been designed with
a budget of about USD 150 million made up of
Aspects of equity, gender equality, and ethical
USD 36 million from Regular Resources (RR) and
norms and principles were followed during the
USD 114 million from Other Resources (OR).
whole evaluation process. This evaluation followed
the minimum standards laid down by UNICEF and
Purpose, objectives of the Country UNEG. The qualitative information collected was
Programme Review (CPR) analysed and triangulated to derive trends and
conclusions. The data gathered in the Perception
The scope of this “light touch review” is limited to
Survey were analysed using the statistical
four domains (relevance, effectiveness, adaptation
software SPSS.
to changing context, and UNICEF’s strategic
x UNICEF Nepal Country Programme Review
The Country Context Findings of the Country Programme
Review
Nepal is land-locked and has a population of 29.5
million with half the population in the Terai region.
Relevance
It is a highly diverse country, with 125 caste/ethnic
The 2018-2022 Country Programme (CP) is
groups speaking 123 languages and representing
aligned to the Fourteenth National Plan (2016-
over 10 religions. Children under 18 is estimated
2019) of the Government. The CP is directly linked
at about 40 per cent.
to three of the UNDAF’s four outcomes and is
The new constitution, promulgated in September, in line with UNICEF Strategic Plan (2018-2022),
2015, encompasses federal democratic republic UN Convention on rights of the child (CRC) and
governance restructuring the country to seven Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
provinces and 753 Palikas (metropolitan cities Discrimination against Women (CEDAW)
and rural/urban municipalities), with substantial
Overall, the theories of change (ToC) are relevant
devolution of power to the sub-national agencies.
and address the needs identified in SitAn 2017 and
Nepal was struck by an earthquake of magnitude
the country plans and strategies. In Nutrition, the
7.8 Richter Scale in April 2015; this and a series
outputs respond well to the situation in Nepal and
of afterquakes caused the death of about 9,000
have fairly clear and measurable indicators. There
people, and one-third of them were children.
is about 10 to 15 per cent “unreached” children
The Fifteenth Plan (2020-2024) of the Government who continue to show wasting. In Education,
of Nepal aims to upgrade Nepal to a middle- the outcome is well reflected with detailed
income developing country by 2026. Over the indicators, which are however not reflected in
past decades Nepal has made rapid progress on toto in the Results Framework. Although the
many fronts related to children’s wellbeing. Under ToC identifies “the most disadvantaged”, the
five mortality has steadily declined. Immunization inclusivity is not explicitly reflected in the CPAP.
rates of infants are at 84 per cent. Maternal The WASH outcomes are well reflected. Whilst
mortality has also reduced. Stunting affects 31.5 the interventions are positively linked to bring
per cent of children under five in Nepal; wasting about the desired changes, there are provincial
at 12 per cent has not declined. Access to primary differences (e.g., open defecation) which are not
education is at 47 per cent (attendance rate). The reflected in the Results Framework. In Social
completion rate for primary school is 82 per cent. Policy, the outcome is reflected in the CPAP with
About 40 per cent of children attending school are well-defined indicators; however, the outputs are
taught in a language other than the language they less clearly linked to the indicators.
speak at home. Birth registration has increased to
The planning framework in Results Assessment
77 per cent of children under five. About 22 per
Module (RAM) is strong: most indicators are
cent are engaged in child labour. About 33 per
well defined with baselines and annual targets.
cent of women aged 20-24 were married before
Exceptions include several instances of targets
they were 18 years old. Access to improved water
being identical to or lower than the baselines. The
sources has improved significantly but the quality
ToC uses national data which are not available for
remains an issue. Open defecation has declined.
measuring targets. The initiatives of UNICEF NCO
Nepal experienced several waves of the COVID-19 directly address Sustainable Development Goals
pandemic since beginning of 2020; it was worst (SDGs) 1, 3 4, 5, 6, 8, 11, 16 in Nepal.
hit with the second wave as daily cases reached
In the planning process, selection of Palikas is
up to about 9,000. The COVID-19 pandemic had a
somewhat unclear to the stakeholders and some
direct impact on the livelihoods of millions in the
sub-national agencies did not concur with UNICEF
country and negated some of the gains. Children
selections. Consultations at the Provincial level
living in poverty rose from an estimated 1.3 million
have been less frequent. Palika-level work plans
before the pandemic to about 6 million in August
2020. Schools were closed for long periods.
UNICEF Nepal Country Programme Review xi
are not always discussed with the relevant sub- Palikas. It promoted improvement of enrolment
national agencies. UNICEF has not adequately of out-of-school children and developed the early
“decentralized” its approaches to accommodate learning development standards report cards
local planning and decision-making, and the to assess children’s development. It continued
Field Offices do not have the required flexibility to lobby for inclusive education. During the
to adapt to changing situations and revise plans COVID-19 pandemic, it supported development
accordingly. About 80 per cent of the stakeholders of an education cluster contingency plan and
feel that the CP has considered national and self-learning materials for primary classes. It
provincial needs in planning; the expressed need continued to train stakeholders on school safety
is to expand geographic coverage of UNICEF and DRR. Inadequate sub-national staffing and
thematic work, and include adolescents and funding by GoN, delays in fund transfers, difficulty
women of reproductive age, generate provincial in scaling up digital education, the inability of GoN
baselines, and include some of the marginalized to equip schools for inclusive education, and less-
communities and those in unreached areas. than satisfactory inter-agency collaboration have
hampered progress.
Effectiveness
The WASH component has made strides with very
Achievement of the results: The self-assessed
close stakeholder engagement on sanitation and
results for the CP are impressive. Overall, five out
WASH planning. The level of engagement is seen
of the six programme outcomes are reported to
by the government as a good model which has
be “on track” by the end of 2021. Many results
been shared with development partners. Open
have been achieved ahead of time in spite of
defaecation has reduced, and the NCO is focused
COVID-19. In general, service delivery or coverage
on achieving SDG targets. The Support for Water
targets are more often achieved, while system
Safety Programme is taken as a model and will be
strengthening and policy-level indicators are less
scaled up in local authorities. It is also supporting
often achieved.
the development of WASH-related statutes for
In Nutrition, NCO-supported scaling up of a the Government. There is a demand for expanding
multi-sector nutrition plan (MSNP), enhanced the NCO work, particularly in WASH planning and in
capacity of officials to enable them to monitor WASH in schools.
MSNP, maintained its programme on Vitamin
In Emergency/DRR, emergency support for Nepal
A despite the COVID-19 outbreak, supported
(following disasters and COVID-19) and the support
sub-national entities to incorporate nutrition in
for preparation of emergency response plans
these plans, supported a web-based reporting
for 50 Palikas are noteworthy. It also supported
system and databases. It is adopting more of an
development of disaster preparedness and
advocacy role after reduced funding, and nuances
response plans for 15 Palikas and strengthening
of these changes are not well understood by the
the crisis management information system. The
stakeholders. Inadequate staffing and capacity at
NCO identified standby partners to be used in
the sub-national level, sub-optimal coordination
an emergency and piloted an important initiative,
between the three tiers of GoN, issues with data
Anticipatory Action Plan, to pre-identify potential
collection at sub-national level, and inadequate
beneficiaries in an emergency. NCO contributed
SBC engagement have affected the programme’s
towards Children’s Clubs and introduced Child
effectiveness. Wasting remains an issue.
Centred DRR work at the Palika level. The
In Education, the NCO continued to assist the challenges included ambiguous interpretation
Government to strengthen the education systems of laws and statutes in federalized structures,
and improve learning outcomes. It supported the difficulty of real-time monitoring on displacement
development of a national early childhood strategy of children ahead of monsoon, and the limitations
and developed the local-level planning package for of funds in Palikas.
xii UNICEF Nepal Country Programme Review
In Social Policy, the NCO continued to build uneven across thematic areas due to staffing and
capacity on producing evidence on child poverty funding constraints.
to adopt the multi-dimensional poverty index,
which will provide a basis for resource allocation Reporting in RAM is uneven; reporting of
in the provinces. The NCO contributed to a range outcome indicators is inadequate but have been
of policies and strategies applicable to national “approved”. The annual targets are unclear and
and sub-national levels. Its advocacy work corresponding reporting is confusing. Monitoring
resulted in extending the child grants programme plans are available across all thematic areas, and
to reach 370,000 children. It was also involved in the reports have been made in a timely manner.
implementing the cash transfer system covering Progress monitoring at the field level offices is
a million children and launched a programme inadequate. In general, the outreach materials
to monitor exclusions in this programme. The produced by the UNICEF NCO are well received
NCO continued to provide budget briefs to by the stakeholders, yet some key stakeholders
support government decision-making and for do not appear to be receiving them.
child budget allocations. During the pandemic,
CSOs are an important partner in the
the NCO developed a child and family tracker
implementation of UNICEF’s programme as
survey to obtain real time data and rolled out
they are familiar with the communities and have
emergency cash relief through the government
regular dialogue with them. Notwithstanding
system. The social policy component has faced a
that, there were reservations expressed by sub-
number of challenges such as: a lack of common
national officials on the capacity and commitment
understanding of social policy issues in the three
of some CSOs to further UNICEF’s goals. Many
tiers in the GoN; absence of relevant legislation;
were unaware of the selection process of CSOs.
inadequate coordination between donors leading
to duplication of work; inadequate information on
There are a number of INGOs with substantial
children at risk of neglect, abuse and violence;
investments in children and UNICEF stands
and the minimal dialogue between stakeholders
to benefit by closer collaboration with them in
to support more effective policies concerning
programme partnerships.
children. The UNICEF NCO has been the only UN
agency to explicitly examine children-specific local Factors contributing to the achievement (or not)
governance issues at Palika level. of results
Federalization has brought out challenges. Whilst
In equity, it is noted that some geographical
the WASH and Education programmes have
areas of the country (e.g., hilly areas of Karnali
somewhat adapted and been better accepted,
and Sudurpaschim provinces) and some
there is lukewarm ownership expressed by
marginalized communities (e.g., Badi and
some of the sub-national agencies as the work
Musahar) are not adequately serviced by the
programme has been drawn up and agreed with
donors, including UNICEF. Gender mainstreaming
the Federal Government. UNICEF’s engagement
in the programmes is uneven, and reporting is
at the provincial level is inadequate. Programme
inadequate. It is also observed that recognition
delivery is also affected by delays in enacting
of gender equality amongst both federal and sub-
legislation related to federalization. Overall, the
national agencies is uneven. Overall, resources
programme implementation suffered a set-
allocated by UNICEF for strengthening equity
back due to the COVID-19 pandemic; UNICEF’s
and gender equality in the programme, including
response is much appreciated by the GoN, and
monitoring and evaluation (M&E), is inadequate.
the pandemic also provided new opportunities
Use of Social and Behavioural Change (SBC) is
for UNICEF NCO to work with the GoN. UNICEF
NCO and the sub-national entities have regularly
experienced internal coordination issues and
instances of inordinate delays in transfer/ receipt
UNICEF Nepal Country Programme Review xiii
of funds through the government fund transfer an opportunity, and noted the need for additional
system, which is a constraint common to all human and financial resources to service 50
development partners. highly diverse and geographically dispersed
Palikas. In order to address issues surrounding
Adjustment of the Programme within a
federalization, the CP added an output (under
changing context
Social Policy) which was approved by GoN in 2021.
COVID-19: As in other parts of the world, COVID-19 An activity on systems improvement was added
caused an unprecedented impact on lives and to other outcome areas.
livelihoods in Nepal. The Government of Nepal
responded by launching a suite of relief measures At the national level, UNICEF NCO supports a
which were better implemented during the second range of ministries to formulate guidelines and
wave as the agencies had a clearer roles vis-à-vis strategies related to children in line with the
federalization. The UNICEF NCO reprogrammed policies of GoN. At the provincial level, UNICEF
its work and launched the Child & Family Tracker NCO supported policy level dialogues in provinces.
Survey to assess the situation and needs of families At the Palika level, UNICEF NCO supports in
with children during the pandemic and lockdowns. periodic planning, annual plan formulation, and
UNICEF NCO also gathered real-time data on advocacy for children’s welfare. The three field
health services through mobile data collection. offices function as the liaison point between NCO
Although UNICEF did not significantly change its and the sub-national government agencies. The
programming based on this information, the data Field Offices are also understaffed.
will be useful for the next cycle. UNICEF NCO’s
UNICEF’s main challenges affecting performance
thematic area responses are considered timely
vis-à-vis federalization are: top-down planning;
and important contributions towards COVID-19
selection of Palikas; inordinate delays in
management. UNICEF NCO adopted strategies
implementation due to fund transfer issues;
to deliver its programme within the COVID-19
inadequate “decentralization” of UNICEF
context, and indeed provided some lessons
operations; lack of key legislation to effectively
of success (e.g. Vitamin A campaign in spite of
devolve functions to sub-national levels;
COVID-19 restrictions). UNICEF recorded several
inadequate staff capacities and non-targeted
lessons from COVID-19 work which included: the
capacity development initiatives by UNICEF;
need for greater flexibility in funding to facilitate
minimal engagement at the provincial level; non-
repurposing of programmes to adapt to changed
synchronized financial year with the GoN; and
needs and deliver results in an emergency; the
inadequate coordination at Palika level. Overall,
engagement of local leaders in immunization and
UNICEF NCO has been constrained to adjust to
Vitamin A campaign; value of preparedness in
the new situation during this short period. While
DRR response using child clubs; and surveys (such
some challenges are beyond the control of UNICEF
as CFT) which provided important data useful for
NCO, there is scope for internal adjustments to
programme interventions. GoN stakeholders are
mitigate some of the constraints faced by the NCO.
very appreciative of UNICEF’s initiatives and are
likely to continue the successful initiatives after
UNICEF strategic engagement helping leverage
COVID-19 pandemic is over. policies and resources for children
Federalization: Federalization was expected to UNICEF NCO is well regarded amongst the higher
improve the reach of support to the most echelons of the Government and enjoys the
vulnerable communities and to channel resources confidence and trust of the agencies. It is noted for
to Palikas so that the communities would benefit bringing global best practices for children’s welfare
more. At the end of the first year of the CP, UNICEF and has a unique position with regard to Child
NCO reported federalization as a key constraint in Protection. In Social Policy, UNICEF exclusively
implementation; however, in the second year, it examines children’s social development issues.
was considered less as a challenge and more as
xiv UNICEF Nepal Country Programme Review
In regard to WASH, Health and Nutrition, and authorities are not familiar with the indicators
DRR, there are a number of other UN Agencies, in the CPAP; however they appreciate the
Development Partners and INGOs who are active. changes brought about by UNICEF NCO at
the district and local level.
UNICEF’s influence in launching the Multi-Sectoral
n Changes in funding modalities by donors
Nutrition Plan and the expansion of the Child
are likely to happen in the future with
Grants and Dalit Child Grants Scheme are well
more funding being channeled to the GoN,
recognized. In education, COVID-19 guidelines
and UNICEF NCO needs to take examples
brought global practices. In the health sector,
from others to have alternate plans and/or
COVID-19 management is very significant. Its
exit strategies to keep the momentum of the
service delivery mode was well recognized.
programme without abruptly discontinuing
the existing mechanisms which will negatively
UNICEF NCO has regularly pursued changes in
affect programme implementation.
policies, particularly in the light of federalization,
and has contributed to the policy dialogue of Recommendations
GoN. It has a niche in policy areas relevant to
children, and is best placed to take those forward. Programme strategy and design
UNICEF’s best practices have been sought by the
1. In the new programme cycle, UNICEF
development partners. Due to UNICEF’s position,
NCO should focus on actions that will
it has been invited to chair three important policy
facilitate programme design and planning
working groups.
to enhance consideration of federalization
concerns (collaboration with PLGSP,
UNICEF’s adaptation to federalization is not as swift
decentralization of UNICEF operations,
and convincing; it could have better demonstrated
coordination of joint planning, develop clear
its focus by enhanced decentralization of its own
criteria for Palika selection, use a focused
business to mirror the GoN’s federalization process
capacity development programme in the
and introduced better internal coordination to
provinces, and improve engagement with
address the cross-cutting nature of federalization.
Provincial Governments/Ministries).
Lessons learned 2. In equity and gender equality, UNICEF must
comply with minimum UNICEF standards,
n UNICEF NCO has missed the opportunity and adopt a more robust gender responsive
to work closely with the Provincial & Local
approach rather than the current gender
Governance Support Programme (PLGSP).
sensitive approach and addressing the needs
UNICEF could have adapted and built upon its
of children in difficult remaining pockets
past experience in decentralization and would
of unreached areas and disadvantaged
have benefitted from engaging closely with
communities (e.g., hilly areas of Karnali and
PLGSP.
Sudurpaschim provinces; communities affected
n Some thematic sectors have better adapted by caste and other social considerations).
to work in the federalization milieu. The
3. Develop theories of change which
closer dialogue with local authorities has
clearly show the adequacy of the planned
contributed to the success stories; the modus
interventions and their convergence to
operandi employed in these sectors could be
demonstrate UNICEF NCO’s contribution
used in other programmes as well.
towards national targets.
n Local level changes to improve the lives
4. Expanding the Social and Behaviour
of children due to interventions are well
Change (SBC) approaches across the
recognized by GoN agencies. Most local
programme and introduce appropriate
UNICEF Nepal Country Programme Review xv
performance indicators for SBC. 8. Delegation of authority (DoA) to the
Field Offices should be reviewed to
5. UNICEF should enhance focus on policy
improve delivery of the Provincial and Palika
development and influencing the government
programmes.
on policies and strategies to address the
needs of children. 9. UNICEF should review its partnerships
and internal arrangements vis-à-vis (a) fund
6. UNICEF may consider several new areas
transfer mechanisms to GoN entities, (b)
of work identified in this review (e.g., the
improve internal coordination, and (c) engage
need to expand coverage of nutrition, WASH,
with INGOs in programme partnerships.
social policy, DRR, inclusion of adolescents
and women of reproductive age, and generate 10. Improve the reporting in RAM (and
provincial baselines). elsewhere) towards better consistency and
ease in tracking progress.
Programme delivery
11. Improve programme implementation
7. Before the launch of the next Country
monitoring particularly in the Field Office
Programme, the NCO should review (a) staff
operations where on-the-ground monitoring
capacity in field offices, (b) re-examine selection
needs improvement.
mechanisms of CSOs for implementation, (c)
ensure GoN acceptance of the consultants Sharing of results and knowledge
hired by UNICEF NCO, and (d) ensure that
12. Improve communications with
technical support provided via the Field Offices
stakeholders, in particular with its
are need-based rather than on a predetermined
implementing partners on the Country
basis.
Programme content, results, and highlights
of achievements together with improvements
made to the lives of children.
xvi UNICEF Nepal Country Programme Review
1
Introduction
In accordance with the UNICEF Evaluation Whilst UNICEF Nepal Country Office (NCO) has
Policy, it is necessary to conduct a Country conducted a Country Programme Review in the
Programme Evaluation (CPE) at least once every last cycle, the recent changes in the country
two programme cycles or once in a programme context have necessitated another review
cycle if monitoring and audit information points to characterized by a “light touch approach” that will
a significant shift in the programming context or a seek views from a limited but carefully selected
significant increase in the level of risk. list of stakeholders and partners.1
This Country Programme Review commenced in
April 2022.
1. Terms of Reference of this Review (UNICEF ROSA).
lapeN
FECINU
©
2 UNICEF Nepal Country Programme Review
2
The Country Context
Nepal is a landlocked country in South Asia, wedged Nepal is a highly diverse country, with 125 caste/
between China to the north and India to the south ethnic groups speaking 123 languages and
(see Figure 2.1). The population is 29.2 million, representing over 10 religions.4 Children under
with 2 million living in the capital Kathmandu.2 18 make up a large proportion of the population,
Only about six per cent of the population (1.8 estimated at about 40 per cent.5
million) live in the mountain region towards the
north, while the hilly region is home to about 11.7 A 10-year armed conflict with the Communist
million people. The flat Terai region bordering India Party of Nepal (Maoist) ended with a peace
is home to about half of the country’s population agreement in 2006. The reinstated parliament
(15.6 million). The annual population growth rate adopted an interim constitution, declaring the
is 0.93 per cent, the lowest recorded in 80 years.3 country a secular, federal state and called for an
FIGURE 2.1: Map of Nepal with the provinces created by the new constitution
Sudurpashchim
Province
Karnali Province
Gandaki Province
Lumbini
Province
Bagmati Province
Province 1
Province 2
2. Census 2021, Preliminary Report, Central Bureau of Statistics, Nepal.
3. Ibid.
4. UNICEF Nepal, Situation Analysis, 2017.
5. UNICEF Nepal, see: https://www.unicef.org/nepal/children-nepal
4 UNICEF Nepal Country Programme Review
election of a constituent assembly.6 The Maoists LSGA was never fully realised; hampered by the
won the election to the constituent assembly in ongoing conflict and the impossibility of holding
2008. The assembly abolished the monarchy at its local elections). Elections for federal, provincial
first meeting but was not able to provide a draft and local levels were held in 2017, and when the
constitution by the end of its four-year term, and elected officials took their office in the country’s
elections to the second constituent assembly 753 municipalities in 2018, they filled a decades-
were held in 2013. Some of the contentious issues long void in local democracy in Nepal. However,
during the drafting process were the number and frequent changes in the political and bureaucratic
boundaries of the proposed federal provinces, leadership and delays in enacting legislation
to what degree they would be based on ethnic hampered social and other services. The second
identity, and the powers to be devolved to local local level elections were held on 13 May 2022
and provincial governments. (during this review).
While the vast majority voted in favour of the On 25 April 2015, amidst the political turmoil
Constitution, there were protests from political brought about by the new constitution, Nepal was
parties of the Madhes (in the south, bordering struck by an earthquake of magnitude 7.8 Richter
India), which culminated in a general strike across Scale. Nepal lies in a seismically active zone and
much of the Terai that severely disrupted transport frequently experiences smaller earthquakes. The
and health services and forced schools to close. epicentre was Gorkha district, 76 km northwest
Border points with India were also blocked, lasting of Kathmandu. It was followed by hundreds of
from August 2015 to February 2016, which had a aftershocks of magnitude four or larger, including
major impact on the life of people all over Nepal one of magnitude 7.3 on 12 May 2015. About 9,000
causing severe shortage of fuel, medicine, and people lost their lives, one-third of them were
essential supplies. children. In the most affected districts, 70 per cent
of birthing centres were damaged or destroyed,
The new constitution, promulgated in September and close to 24,000 classrooms were damaged
2015, encompasses federal democratic republic or destroyed, affecting the education of almost
governance and has defined social, economic, one million enrolled children.7 The earthquake
cultural, and environmental rights (including happened on a Saturday, the only day of the week
education, health, employment, housing, food when most schools are closed in Nepal.
security, social security as fundamental rights of
the people). Furthermore, the Constitution has Nepal experienced several waves of the COVID-19
made the rights of children a fundamental right pandemic, the first was in August-December 2020
and has guaranteed their holistic development. when the number of reported daily cases went up
to above 5,000. The second wave, in April-June
The new constitution divided the country into 2021, was much more severe with reported daily
seven provinces and 753 Palikas (metropolitan case numbers reaching up to about 9,000. A third
cities and rural/urban municipalities), with wave of similar magnitude occurred in January
substantial devolution of power to the provincial 2022, lasting only about one month and resulting
and local levels, including many government in far fewer deaths than the second wave (up to
functions related to children. This would replace about 15 deaths per day compared with reaching
the functions managed by central, district (75) 200 deaths per day in May 2021).8 A nationwide
and village/municipality authorities (3,915) of survey by the Ministry of Health and Population
the 1999 Local Self Governance Act (LSGA) (MoHP) in mid-2021 estimated that two-thirds
(though the planned decentralization under the of Nepalis had developed antibodies against
6. UNICEF Nepal, Situation Analysis, 2017.
7. UNICEF Nepal, see: https://www.unicef.org/rosa/press-releases/nepal-earthquake-education-nearly-1-million-children-jeopardy-unicef
8. See: https://ourworldindata.org/coronavirus/country/nepal
Unicef Nepal Country Programme Review 5
COVID-19. Through the COVAX facility, partner live births.11 Most children are taken to a health
country dose sharing, and direct government care provider to receive treatment for acute
procurement, 64 per cent of the whole population respiratory infections (82 per cent) and diarrhoea
was fully vaccinated by March 2022.9 Vaccine (60 per cent).12 Immunization rates are high, with
coverage was expanded to adolescents aged 12- 84 per cent of infants receiving their third dose
17 in early 2022. of the DPT vaccine. While there has been much
progress in child health, the neonatal mortality
A preventive nationwide lockdown was imposed rate is declining slower, at 16 out of 1000 live
on 24 March 2020 (there was no evidence of births. More than half of children who die before
community transmission at that time), sealing their fifth birthday in Nepal is during the first 28
the borders with India and China, closing days of life.13
schools, prohibiting public gatherings, and halting
international and domestic travel. Subsequent The maternal mortality rate is 186 (deaths per
lockdowns were implemented during the second 100,000 live births), a significant decline from
and third waves of the pandemic. 553 in 2000. In parallel, the rate of skilled
attendance at delivery has increased, now at 77
Two key contextual changes during the current per cent of all deliveries. Most pregnant women
Country Programme period stand out. First, the (78 per cent) attend antenatal care, fewer attend
transition to a federal system of government, with postnatal care. Fourteen per cent of women give
local elected officials taking on new local functions birth before the age of 18.14
at the same time the CP started. With this, the
counterpart infrastructure was redesigned, while Stunting, low height-for-age affects 31.5 per cent of
the CP and CPAP were already finalized. Secondly, children under five in Nepal (down from 58 per cent
COVID-19 presented profound challenges that in 2000). Wasting, low weight-for-height affects
required adjustment to the ongoing programme in 12 per cent of children under five (no significant
order to respond to needs of children as well as reduction over the years).15 About 62 per cent of
continue working towards stated goals. infants are exclusively breastfed during the first five
months of life (no clear trend of improvement).
The Government of Nepal has formulated the
Fifteenth Plan (2020-2024) with the aim of There has been a significant increase in access to
upgrading Nepal from a least developed country primary education over the past 20 years. The net
to a middle-income developing country by 202610 attendance rate for primary school is higher (74 per
and achieving the Sustainable Development Goals cent) than in lower secondary school (50 per cent).
(SDGs) by 2030. The completion rate for primary school is high, at
82 per cent. Almost half (40 per cent) of children
Social development
attending school are taught in a language other
Over the past decades Nepal has made rapid than the language they speak at home.16 Only
progress on many fronts related to children’s four out of ten children aged 7-14 can successfully
wellbeing. Under five mortality has steadily complete three foundational reading tasks, the
declined and in 2019 was at 28 out of 1,000 result is slightly lower for mathematics tasks.17
9. Ibid; see: https://www.unicef.org/nepal/press-releases/over-7725-million-covid-19-vaccines-through-covax-facility-people-nepal
10. Originally expected to be by 2022, extended by five years due to COVID-19 setbacks (UNGA, 76th session).
11. Nepal Multiple Indicator Cluster Survey (MICS) 2019, National Planning Commission and Central Bureau of Statistics..
12. See: https://data.unicef.org/country/npl/. All data in this section are from this source unless otherwise noted.
13. Nepal Multiple Indicator Cluster Survey (MICS) 2019, National Planning Commission and Central Bureau of Statistics.
14. Ibid.
15. Ibid.
16. Ibid.
17. Ibid.
6 UNICEF Nepal Country Programme Review
Birth registration has increased to 77 per cent of There has been a significant reduction in poverty
children under five.18 A large majority (82 per cent) in Nepal, with the proportion of the population
of children aged 1-14 report having experienced living below the national poverty line declining
physical or psychological aggression by their from 42 per cent in 1995 to 12.5 per cent in 2010
caregivers in the past one month.19 Child labour (the national poverty line was revised the same
is still common: one in five children (22 per cent) year, changing the estimate to 25 per cent living
aged 5-17 years is engaged in child labour. One in in poverty). Using the international poverty line,
three (33 per cent) of women aged 20-24 were 15 per cent were living under two USD per day
married before they were 18 years old. the same year.21 More recent data has been used
to estimate multi-dimensional poverty, showing a
Access to improved water sources has improved reduction in the multi-dimensional poverty index
significantly over the years, from 46 per cent of (MPI) from 30 per cent (MICS 2014) to 17 per cent
households in 1990 to 97 per cent today. However (MICS 2019).22
quality remains an issue, and 75 per cent of all
water sources are contaminated with E. coli The COVID-19 pandemic and the prolonged
bacteria. The use of improved sanitation facilities lockdowns in Nepal had a direct impact on the
has increased tremendously, from 6 per cent in livelihoods of millions in the country as well
1990 to 94 per cent of households today. Open as outside – one of the key factors behind the
defaecation has declined from 69 per cent of the poverty reduction seen over the past decades
population in 2000 to 10 per cent in 2020. is remittances from overseas migrant workers.
Tourism was also badly affected, negatively
The 2019 MICS noted that 10 per cent of children impacting household income in several regions
aged 2-17 years reported a functional difficulty in of the country. The number of children living in
at least one domain. Estimates suggest that more poverty rose from an estimated 1.3 million before
than 80 per cent of individuals with disabilities the pandemic to about 6 million in August 2020.23
do not hold a disability card that is required to Schools were closed across the country from
benefit from government support. The disability March 2020 onwards and in many areas remained
allowance is one of five government social closed for a full school year, with some shorter
security allowances and provides cash transfers periods of being open. In August 2020, a UNICEF
and specialized or subsidized services to people NCO survey found that 53 per cent reported loss
who hold a disability identity card. Many card of livelihood, 25 per cent reported reduced dietary
holders do not receive the allowance, estimated intake for children and 21 per cent reported that
at between 30 to 60 per cent.20 The Child Grant their children were not studying.24
Programme of the GoN has been implemented
since 2009, initially focusing on Dalit children and Reducing disparities will further improve social
children in Karnali region under the age of five. In development in Nepal. The national averages for
2016, the Government committed to the gradual the much-improved indicators cited above mask
universalization of the programme to cover all significant disparities by factors such as region,
children under five nationally and doubling the language, caste, ethnicity, gender, age, disability,
benefit value. and income.
18. Nepal Multiple Indicator Cluster Survey (MICS) 2019, National Planning Commission and Central Bureau of Statistics.
19. Ibid.
20. See: https://www.unicef.org/nepal/reports/nepals-cash-allowances-children-disabilities
21. World Bank, ‘Poverty and equity brief: Nepal’, October 2020.
22. See: https://www.unicef.org/nepal/reports/nepal-multidimensional-poverty-index-2021-report
23. See: https://www.unicef.org/nepal/press-releases/150-million-additional-children-plunged-poverty-due-covid-19unicef-save-children
24. See: https://www.unicef.org/nepal/media/15281/file/Assessing_Secondary_Effects_of_COVID_on_Families_and_Chilren_In_Nepal_-_CFT_
Endline_Report.pdf
3
Object of the Review
The object of this evaluation is UNICEF Nepal The overall outcome of the CP is that “children
Country Programme (CP) 2018-22, which was benefit from improved and equitable access to
developed in the context of the then ongoing and the use of high-quality child-friendly services,
Fourteenth National Plan (2016-2019) of the improved care practices, protective and safe
Government, which set the goal for Nepal to environments and better policies and resource
graduate to middle income status by 2030 “as allocation for children”. In terms of coverage, the
a welfare state with social justice based on programme was designed to provide national
socioeconomic transformation and rapid poverty and sub-national support and scale up successful
reduction.”25 The CP was designed to support interventions, but also to provide intensive
priorities in this plan and continued progress assistance in a number of priority rural and urban
towards SDG targets within the overall framework municipalities (Palikas).
of the UN organizations in Nepal expressed in the
UN Development Assistance Framework (UNDAF) The CPD sought to support the country to:
(2018-2022).26 The Country Programme Document a) Improve and ensure the uninterrupted delivery
(CPD) is directly linked to three of UNDAF’s four of essential services during the transition to
outcomes: social development; disaster risk the federal system of government;
reduction, disaster preparedness and resilience;
b) Foster multi-sectoral programming on such
and human rights, rule of law and governance. The
issues as early childhood development (ECD),
CP was also designed to be in line with UNICEF’s
adolescents, and disability;
global priorities as expressed in the UNICEF
c) Enhance the national capacity for humanitarian
Strategic Plan (2018-2022). The CP is also aligned
action and an effective humanitarian-
with the Convention on rights of children (UNCRC)
development transition, including disaster
and Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
preparedness and resilience and sustainable
Discrimination against Women (CEDAW).
recovery and reconstruction in the aftermath
The CP refers to the impending decline in the working of the 2015 earthquakes;
age population relative to the total population by 2047
d) Strengthen gender-responsive programming
and sets out to help Nepal capture its “demographic
in all areas;
window of opportunity”; investing in today’s children
e) Promote positive behaviours, demand for
is critical to ensure that they are prepared to sustain
services and the strengthening of social norms
the development progress. The programme aims to
that contribute to the realization of child rights
focus especially on disadvantaged girls, ethnic and
by means of innovations, behavioural-change
low caste groups, those in hard-to-reach areas, out-
communication and the improvement of
of-school adolescents, and single- and child-headed
relevant programmes, policies and systems;
poor households.
f) Share lessons learned and best practices
through South-South cooperation.
25. UNICEF Nepal Country Programme Document (2018-2022).
26. The programme specifically targets SDG Goals 1, 3 4, 5, 6, 8, 11, and 16.
8 UNICEF Nepal Country Programme Review
The programme has six outcomes with 22 outputs The nutrition programme seeks to ensure that
that target specific change in the lives of children. children, including adolescent girls and women
These are further described below. One additional of reproductive age have improved and equitable
outcome on programme effectiveness provides access to and use of an adequate nutritious
cross-sectoral support to the thematic programmes diet and improved nutritional care behaviour
(this includes a specific output on DRR). Following and practices. The programme is guided by the
the mid-term review of the CP, an extra output Multi-Sector Nutrition Plan (MSNP) II (2018-2022)
was added specifically on local governance, to implemented under the leadership of the National
support improved planning and implementation Planning Commission. The programme sought to
for children at local levels. In general, at all support (i) adolescent, maternal, infant and young
three levels of government, the programme child nutrition and care through the “Golden
was to focus on policy reform, improved supply 1000 Days” campaign, the baby friendly hospital
chain management for basic services, capacity initiative and the Maternal, Infant and Young
strengthening for operationalization of the federal Child Feeding Action plan, increase capacity of
system, overall targeting the most disadvantaged health workers and FCHVs, and communication
children, particularly focusing on the central Terai approaches for positive behaviour change at scale;
and far-western areas: Madhes Province and (ii) scale up severe and acute malnutrition (SAM)
Sudurpaschim Province. In the remaining four management interventions through support for
provinces, broader policy and advocacy support is SAM treatment centres and capacity development
to be provided. of health workers and FCHVs, social mobilization
of caregivers, community and religious leaders; (iii)
In health, the programme aim is improved addressing micronutrient deficiencies through the
and equitable access to and use of high-impact national supplementation programme focused on
quality health interventions and improved Vitamin A and iodine deficiencies, advocacy and
healthy behaviours. Guided by the National private sector engagement to strengthen local
Health Policy of Nepal (2019), and other strategic production of micro-nutrient powder and fortified
plans,27 the programme addresses (i) neonatal foods; (iv) operationalization of federal system
and maternal mortality (through legal reform, for nutrition programmes supported through the
quality improvement system, early detection of MSNP. In DRR, support would be provided to
disability, promotion of care-seeking behaviour); develop guidelines on resilience and DRR and
(ii) childhood illnesses (through implementation CCA in relation to nutrition.
of the Immunization Act, scaling up Integrated
Management of Neonatal and Childhood Illness In education, the programme aim is to ensure that
Programme, strategy to prevent pneumonia all children have improved access, participation,
through reduction of pollution, and improved and learning outcomes in pre-primary and basic
prevention and care for pneumonia and diarrhoea); education – in inclusive, safe and protective
(iii) adolescent health issues such as teenage environments. Guided by the School Sector
pregnancies and menstrual hygiene management Development Plan (SSDP) (2016-2022) and its
(MHM) (through strategy implementation, equity strategy, the programme sought to support
capacity strengthening of Female Community (i) access to early learning in underserved areas
Health Volunteers (FCHV) and health workers, through community-based Early Childhood
and communication campaigns for promoting Education (ECE) and parenting education feeding
healthy behaviours). Operationalization of the evidence-based advocacy for scaling up ECE
federal structure for health would be supported nationally, capacity building of local levels to
through strengthening the Health Management support school-based ECE, and development of
Information System and e-health strategy as well teacher skills and quality teaching and learning
as disaster preparedness/DRR.
27. WHO Nepal, Country Cooperation Strategic Agenda (2018-2022).
UNICEF Nepal Country Programme Review 9
materials; (ii) quality in basic education through practices such as diversion, restorative justice and
policy development and planning, improvement victim/witness protection measures.
of classroom teaching and learning, early grade
literacy and numeracy, inclusive education, In water, sanitation and hygiene (WASH), the
and innovations and research on teaching in programme seeks to achieve that children and
multilingual classrooms; (iii) adolescents to enter families have improved and equitable access to
formal school system through non-formal classes, and use of safe and sustainable drinking water
communication strategies targeting parents to and sanitation services, and improved hygiene
increase demand for formal education for working practices. It is guided by the WASH sector
children, improving life skills of adolescents Development Plan (2016-2030) implemented by
(Rupantaran curriculum); (iv) operationalization of Ministry of Water Supply and Sanitation (MoWSS).
the federal system within the context of SSDP. Specifically, the programme would support:
(i) improved water quality by strengthening
In child protection, the programme aims to the water regulatory body, water safety plans,
ensure that children have improved protection raising community awareness on household level
from all forms of violence, abuse, and exploitation. water treatments, strategy to ensure access
This component is guided by the Child’s Act28 and of unreached populations, and inter-sectoral
policies and strategies related to children on child collaboration for increasing access to safe water in
marriage,29 child labour,30 child trafficking,31 and education and health care facilities; (ii) scaling up
Nepal’s commitments towards the Convention the open defaecation free (ODF) movement and
on the Rights of the Child. Specifically, the total sanitation concept, through engaging private
programme would support: (i) strengthening of sector to promote improved hygiene practices
the child protection system within the federal and markets for sanitation, advocacy for gender-
structure by scaling up case management and disability-friendly sanitation facilities in HF,
procedures, advocating for professionalisation of ECD centres and schools, scaling up nationally
the child protection workforce, introduction of the the ranking of schools’ provision of WASH
Child Protection Sector Information Management facilities, media campaigns to create awareness
System (CPIMS) to provide disaggregated data on on hygiene behaviours; (iii) operationalization of
protection issues, strengthening DRR capacity, federal government structure for WASH system
and CCA preparedness at all levels; (ii) addressing through development of a new WASH Act and
violence and exploitation through support for revisions of policies to promote gender equality
improved legislation and policies across a range and social inclusion, mainstreaming DRR and CCA
of thematic issues, communication strategies into existing policies, strategies and plans.
towards changing societal acceptance of these
issues, strengthen capacity of government In social policy, evidence and evaluation (SPEE),
and systems to provide appropriate services the programme aims to ensure that children benefit
to victims, (iii) review legislation and policies on from strengthened policies and programmes that
children’s access to justice, develop necessary address child poverty, vulnerability and exclusion.
regulations, protocols and guidelines, strengthen This programme component is guided by the
information management system on justice for Fourteenth National Plan and the draft National
children, capacity strengthening of justice and Framework on Social Protection. The programme
security professionals, psychosocial counsellors would support: (i) NPC and CBS to strengthen their
and social workers on gender-sensitive and capacity for evidence generation (measurement of
child/friendly justice procedures, and pilot new child poverty, vulnerability and exclusion, and key
emerging issues such as federalism, urbanization
28. The Act Relating to Children (2018), Government of Nepal.
29. Ending Child Marriages in Nepal (2017), UNICEF Nepal.
30. Child Labour Prohibition Act (2008), Government of Nepal, and the National Master Plan on the Elimination of Child Labour in Nepal (2011-2020).
31. Human Trafficking and Transportation (Control) Act (2007), Government of Nepal.
10 UNICEF Nepal Country Programme Review
and migration, and fiscal space analysis for social Budget
interventions); (ii) Scaling up the Child Grant
The CP is based on a planned budget of about
Programme through technical support (impact
USD 150 million over five years (see Table 1.1). Of
assessment, use of IT, strengthening inter-
this, USD 36 million was Regular Resources (RR)
sectoral linkages with birth registration, health,
and USD 114 million was Other Resources (OR).32
etc.); (iii) facilitate dialogue to co-create, share
The OR component is dependent on development
and use knowledge to support more effective
partners. The budget is at a similar level as the
policies regarding children, including dialogues
indicative budget of the previous CP (USD 144
with parliamentarians on legislation, policies, and
million).
budgetary matters.
Country Programme and Action Plan
Figure 1.1: Organigram of UNICEF Nepal
The Country Programme is titled ‘Country
Programme and Action Plan’ (CPAP), a joint
Representative
working document between UNICEF NCO and
GoN. It envisaged close partnerships with the
United Nations system, multi- and bi-lateral donor
Deputy
Deputy
partners, NGOs, and CSOs. Representative
Representative
(Operations)
Country Programme structure
Chief, SPEE Chief, Education
The Country Programme Office is situated in
Kathmandu, headed by the Representative. The
Chief, Chief, Health
Deputy Representatives, Section Chiefs and
Communications
other programmatic, administrative, and financial
Chief, Child
support staff are based there. The three Field
Chiefs, Field Protection
Offices from the previous CP continue during Offices (3)
this cycle albeit in different locations. The Field
Chief, Nutrition
Office in Nepalgunj (in Lumbini Province) covers
Karnali Province and Sudurpaschim Province. The
Chief, WASH
Bharatpur Field Office had been shifted to the
capital of Madhes Province (Janakpur) to cover
Chief, Partnership,
Madhes Province. Finally, the Biratnagar office in
Planning and
eastern Nepal was shifted to Siddharthanagar to Monitoring
cover Gandaki and Lumbini Provinces. Province
1 and Bagmati Province were to be supported by Chief, Emergency
the country office in Kathmandu (see Figure 1.1).
Chief, SBC
32. UNICEF terminology: Core Resources for Results – Regular Resources (RR) refers to funding that is received by the organization without restrictions
such as country or sector, from which country offices receive a certain proportion each year. Other Resources Regular (OR) refers to contributions
from donors that are earmarked for specific purposes.
UNICEF Nepal Country Programme Review 11
TABLE 1.1: Summary budget; Country Programme Action Plan (UNICEF Nepal) (USD)
Programme component Regular resources (RR) Other resources (OR) Total
Health 3,200 15,700 18,900
Nutrition 3,000 33,000 36,000
Education 3,200 30,100 33,300
Child Protection 3,000 14,060 17,060
WASH 2,600 15,400 18,000
Social Policy, Evidence & Evaluation 2,500 3,000 5,500
Programme Effectiveness33 18,510 3,000 21,510
Total 36,010 114,260 150,270
The CPAP was revised following the mid-term Outcome 3 By 2022, all children, especially
review of the CP to ensure programmatic the most disadvantaged,
alignment to national priorities.34 The Programme benefit from improved access,
Strategy Notes (PSN) have also been revised participation and learning
accordingly. These revisions did not amend the outcomes in pre-primary and
Outcomes or Outcome Indicators. Also, the basic education within inclusive,
budget remained unchanged. safe and protective environment.
The Results Framework Outcome 4 By 2022, children and adolescents
have improved protection from
The overall outcome of the Country Programme
all forms of violence, abuse and
is stated as “children benefit from improved and
exploitation.
equitable access to and the use of high-quality
Outcome 5 By 2022, children and their
child-friendly services, improved care practices,
families have improved and
protective and safe environments and better
equitable access to and use of
policies and resource allocation for children”. There
safe and sustainable drinking
are six programme outcomes and one programme
water and sanitation services,
effectiveness outcome, as follows:
and improved hygiene practices.
Outcome 1 By 2022, children, including
Outcome 6 By 2022, children benefit
newborns and adolescents,
from strengthened policies
and women of reproductive age
and programmes that address
have improved and equitable
child poverty, vulnerability and
access to and use of high-impact
exclusion.
quality health interventions and
improved healthy behaviours. Outcome 7 The country programme is
efficiently designed, coordinated,
Outcome 2 By 2022, children, including
managed and supported to meet
adolescent girls, and women of
quality programming standards in
reproductive age have improved
achieving results for children.
and equitable access to and
use of adequate nutritious diet
The Review did not cover Outcome 4.
and improved nutritional care
behaviour and care practices.
33. Includes: Planning & Monitoring; Communications, C4D, DRR and Climate Change; and Operations. There is an error in the sub-total (USD 26,610) in
the original document plus in the CPAP Addendum.
34. CPAP (2018-2022) Addendum, UNICEF NCO.
12 UNICEF Nepal Country Programme Review
lapeN
FECINU
©
4
Purpose and the
Scope of the Review
The purpose of the CPR is threefold: n Summarize lessons learned and provide
1. Inform programme design and support guidance on how the country office could
managerial decision-taking at country office level strategically position UNICEF given the
in preparation for the next country programme. changing context and existing challenges.
Recommendations are to be provided which
must be specific enough that necessary Scope of the Country Programme
actions can be determined in response. Review
2. Foster organizational and Nepal CO learning
As per the Terms of Reference, this review is limited
about what works and does not work,
in scope (“light touch approach”), and focused on
especially within a changing context such as
four domains/aspects (relevance, effectiveness,
the one experienced by the Nepal Country
adjustment of programming within a changing
Office.
context (COVID-19 and decentralization), and
3. UNICEF has an accountability to design strategic positioning of UNICEF in Nepal).
and implement programmes at a standard
Other parameters of the review are briefly outlined
of excellence. The review will support
below:
accountability by providing an independent
(a) Theory of change for the Country Programme:
assessment of how selected results were
The Review focused on the theory of change
achieved (or not) and the factors that
for the areas that were explored for a deeper
contributed to the achievement or lack of it.
dive under relevance and strategic positioning.
The overall objectives of the review are to:
Changes in the ToC across the cycle, including
n Provide an independent assessment of the
the extent to which these changes were
extent to which the country programme is
implemented and the extent to which the
relevant to the needs of children within the
implemented ToC is relevant to meet the
local context (relevance);
needs of children were explored.
n Provide an independent assessment of the
(b) Results levels: The Review focused on the
extent to which anticipated results have been
effectiveness of the following “big budget”
achieved or will be likely to be achieved and
consumers:
explanatory factors for their achievement or
z Education;
lack thereof (effectiveness);
z Nutrition;
n Provide an independent assessment of
z Health;
the extent to which the country office has
z DRR/Emergency.
contributed to results being achieved for
children in Nepal; In addition to the above, a deeper dive on relevance
n Provide an independent assessment of how was undertaken on the following outputs/thematic
the country has adapted its programming areas:
within the changing context including the z Local governance;
COVID-19 pandemic and implementation of z Nutrition.
the decentralization/federalization process;
14 UNICEF Nepal Country Programme Review
(c) Geographic and chronological scope: The These stakeholders were broadly categorized into
principal focus was on the present CP from two groups, viz., (a) internal and (b) external. The
2018 to the on-going final year of the cycle. internal stakeholders were further categorized
The scope of the evaluation was national into three sub-groups, namely: UNICEF regional
but programming in the provinces was also staff, UNICEF NCO staff, and UNICEF Nepal Field
assessed. Office staff. The external stakeholders included
development partners, GoN agencies at federal,
(d) Participants: As one of the important objectives
provincial and municipal level, UN agencies,
of the Review was to seek information for the
CSOs, academia, and the private sector.
next programme cycle, the main participants
of the Review were external stakeholders,
The Review Team analysed the stakeholders
confined to duty-bearers. In this regard,
further, identified the rights-holders and their
the Review team undertook a stakeholder
entitlements as well as the corresponding duty-
mapping exercise (see Section 2.4).
bearers and their obligations (see Annex 2.2). In
(e) DAC criteria: In terms of criteria, this review consultation with UNICEF ROSA, it was possible
focused on two of the six current DAC to identify institutions in the federal and sub-
criteria based on the TOR viz., relevance and national entities that are essential duty-bearers for
effectiveness. The other criteria were not a the realization of children’s rights in the thematic
focus of this review. areas of focus for the Review.
The Terms of Reference of this review are included
Main end Users and Use of the CPR
in the annex of this report (see Annex 2.1).
The Nepal Country Office (CO) is preparing for
Stakeholders of the Country the next Country Programme cycle, with several
Programme related exercises either completed or on-going.
The results of this review will be available for the
In the context of the CP, the rights holders
development and fine-tuning of the objectives,
include all children and young people who are
components, and strategies for the new Country
the beneficiaries of the programme. The key duty
Programme, which will cover the period 2023-2027.
bearers that CP engages with are the central
and subnational government institutions, UN
Aside from this use, the Review will be useful for
agencies, international, as well as national non-
government counterparts (ministries and other
governmental and civil society organizations. (see
agencies) who receive direct benefits from the
Annex 2.2 for roles and responsibilities of the
programme.
stakeholders) The review team, in consultation
with UNICEF NCO and UNICEF ROSA undertook Finally, though the Review is limited in scope,
a stakeholder mapping exercise and identified the findings will be useful for improving the
the stakeholders for this review (see Figure 2.1). performance of the programme in the next cycle.
Figure 2.1: Stakeholder mapping
Stakeholder
Federal government UNICEF Nepal Country Office
National Planning Commission Representative
Ministry of Foreign Affairs Deputy Representatives
Chiefs and staff of thematic sections (Health,
National Natural Resources and Fiscal
Nutrition, Education, Child Protection, WASH,
Commission
Social Policy, CC/DRR and Programme
Ministry of Women, Children and Senior
Management)
Citizen
Heads and staff of the three field offices
Ministry of Federal Affairs and General Head, PME
Administration
UNICEF Nepal Field Office staff
National Disaster Risk Reduction Heads and staff of Field Offices (Nepalgunj,
Management Authority Bhairahawa, and Janakpur)
Ministry of Education, Science & Technology UNICEF ROSA
and its agencies (Department of Education, Regional Advisor (Education)
Centre for Education and Human Resource Regional Advisor (WASH)
Development) Regional Evaluation Advisor
Ministry of Water Supply and Sanitation Regional Nutrition Specialist
Central Bureau of Statistics
Ministry of Health and Population and
INGOs/NGOs/CSOs
its agencies (National Health Education,
NEEDS
Information and Communication Centre;
Kanchanpur, CSO
Family Welfare Division; DONIDCR)
World Vision
KIRDARC Nepal, Karnali Province
Save the Children, Nepal
Sub-national government
Plan International, Nepal
Province Health Directorate,
Nepal Red Cross Society (CSO)
Lumbini Prov
Child Club
Policy and Planning Commission,
Madhes Province
Ministry of Social Development, Development partners/UN
Sudurpaschim Province agencies
Social Development Division, European Union
Ministry of Law, Women Children and FCDO, UK
Senior Citizen, USAID
Lumbini Province World Bank
UNDP
Ministry of Tourism, Rural & Urban
UN Resident Coordinator
Development, Lumbini Province
WHO
Parsagadhi Municipality Parsa,
Raskot Municipality, Kalikot
Duty bearers/beneficiaries
Child Club, Kanchanrup Municipality,
Saptari
16 UNICEF Nepal Country Programme Review
5
Methodology
5.1. Review Principles The Review maintained integrity by respecting
the stakeholders engaged in the Review and
The Review adopted the following principles in
by adopting standard ethical principles and
order to ensure that the perspectives of equity,
professional standards during the Review.
gender, and human rights were assured to the
Additionally, the Review Team ensured that there
extent possible in this light review:
was no conflict of interest. Accountability was
n Obtaining verbal consent from key informants ensured by the team’s background experience
for online interviews (see KII Guides – in ethics, quality assurance at different stages
preamble; Annex 2.6); of the review, and proper data and information
n Conducting interviews in the local languages management. The Review did not engage
when necessary; children; therefore ethical clearance was not
deemed necessary. The Review Team consisted
n Examining the extent to which elements of
of three males and one female with both national
gender responsive programming have been
and international experience thereby ensuring
incorporated into the design; and
diversity and representation. The consultations
n Integrating gender equality and human rights-
during the Review were carried out in an impartial
based approaches as well as be guided by the
and an objective manner based on the guides
principles of do no harm, leave-no-one-behind
prepared for the purpose; all stakeholders were
(SDG), impartiality, transparency, inclusivity
clearly informed of the purpose of the review,
and participation;
and their responses were voluntary. No audio
n Providing an opportunity to voice their views recordings of conversations were made. The
openly; and team ensured that the information collected both
n Respecting differences in culture and through interviews and for the online perception
customs, religious beliefs, gender roles, age, survey was kept confidential and not disclosed to
and ethnicity. third parties.
Ethical standards The Review was designed with a clear purpose
and a systematic assessment process. This
Ethical norms and principles were followed during
ensured that the Review results would benefit all
the review. The Review Team maintained a free
stakeholders. Carbon neutrality was maintained
and an independent review process upholding
by avoiding travel, including within Nepal, and by
evaluation ethics, in order to maintain the integrity
adopting online/remote interviews.
and honesty. During the review, the team followed
the ethical guidelines of UNICEF35 and UNEG.36
35. UNICEF, ‘Procedure for Ethical Standards in Research, Evaluation, Data Collection and Analysis’, Doc. CF/PD/DRP/2015-001, April 2015.
36. UNEG, ‘Revised UNEG Ethical Guidelines for Evaluation’, 2020.
18 UNICEF Nepal Country Programme Review
Data/information collection active in the same programme areas as NCO, or
cooperating with it on joint initiatives. Furthermore,
The data/information collection methods and
another selection criterion for Government was
tools were customized to obtain answers to
representation from all three different levels of the
the Review questions stipulated in the Terms of
Government. In addition, two – three stakeholders
Reference under the given criteria (effectiveness,
who did not have partnership with UNICEF NCO,
relevance, programme adjustment, and strategic
but active in the same programme areas were
positioning).
also selected.
5.2. Methodology and Tools
Due to time constraints and the need for tentative
findings by mid-June 2022 for the ongoing NCO
A mixed-methods approach was used in this
planning process for the next programme cycle,
review to enable triangulation of data from
the engagement of stakeholders had to be
different sources. The Evaluation Design Matrix
limited, and it was agreed not to include rights-
(see Annex 2.3) summarizes and links the
holders in the Review, which was a drawback.38
review criteria, key questions and sub-questions,
Furthermore, travel to the provinces for meetings
indicators, and sources of information/data. They
with rights-holders was not possible.
are briefly described below:37
Sampling of stakeholders for the Review After several rounds of discussions, agreement
was reached at a meeting held with NCO on 20
The Review Team used information from the
April 2022 to select 40 stakeholders as external
stakeholder mapping exercise and the analysis
key informants and 30 internal stakeholders from
of rights-holders and duty-bearers (see Annex
UNICEF NCO and ROSA. All stakeholders for KIIs
2.2) to identify stakeholders to be engaged in
were chosen based on their designations and
the Review. Relevant development partners and
relevance to the areas of inquiry; thus there was
civil society organizations working in the review
no purposive gender application in selecting the
focused thematic areas were included as key
stakeholders.
stakeholders.
The participation of stakeholders in the Review
The selection of stakeholders for KII and the
was voluntary; they were informed of the Review
Perception Survey was undertaken in consultation
by Representatives of UNICEF NCO and ROSA;
with the NCO and ROSA through purposive
the Review Team followed-up with the identified
sampling. In identifying the stakeholders, their
stakeholders to make appointments for interviews.
engagement in specific sectoral activities in the
The choice of language for the interview was left
UNICEF programme was considered. In the case
to the interviewee.
of government and NGO staff, respondents were
targeted from among line ministries and NGOs A summary of the stakeholders who participated
engaged in ongoing partnerships with UNICEF. in the KIIs and Perception Survey is included below
Among donors, respondents were targeted on the (see Table 3.1). Of the 40 external stakeholders
basis of the level of their engagement in thematic identified for KIIs, 34 participated (85 per cent), of
areas that UNICEF is engaged in. Similarly, UN which 9 were women.
agency staff were selected from among agencies
37. The methodology was presented to the Evaluation Reference Group comprised of Elke Wisch, James Patterson, Cairan O’Toole, Zivai Murira, Peter
Harvey, Usha Mishra, Mohanlal Peiris, Anita Dahal, Carmen van Heese, Jessica Owens, Peter de Vries, and Sunita Kayastha.
38. During the course of the review, one rights-holder was included for a KII.
UNICEF Nepal Country Programme Review 19
Table 3.1: Summary of stakeholder report). Analyses of thematic theories of change
participation in KIIs and the Perception Survey were undertaken mainly through the desk review.
(a) Key Informant Interviews No.
Notes:
Federal government 14 (18)
n Four small group meetings were also held
Sub-national govt. agencies 5 (5) with UNICEF staff. Numbers in parentheses
Development partners 4 (5) in Table (a) refer to the original number of
stakeholders invited.
Palikas 1 (2)
n Thirty-four (34) external informants were
INGOs/CSOs 7 (7)
made up of 25 males and 9 females and 35
UN Agencies 3 (3)
UNICEF staff (NCO and ROSA) were made up
TOTAL 34 (40) of 20 males and 15 females.
UNICEF staff
Desk review and analysis
ROSA 4
The desk review was particularly helpful in
Nepal Country Office 31
assessing the effectiveness of the Programme.
Sub-total (UNICEF) 35
The review used three sources of information, as
(b) Perception Survey No. % follows:
Federal ministry 11 11.7
(a) RAM and annual reports (2018 to 2021) were
Federal dept/agency 9 9.6
used to map performance against targets in
Provincial gov/agency 25 26.6
the Results Framework. These are summarized
Palikas 8 8.5 in these findings, but a detailed analysis is
Donor agencies 3 3.2 presented in annex (see Annex 4.2). The desk
review was also used to analyse the theories
UN Agencies 3 3.2
of change as presented in the revised PSN
National NGO/CSO 23 24.5
Notes. The analysis provided key information
INGO 9 9.6 on the review question on effectiveness
Private sector 1 1.2 (“to what extent targets were achieved and
documented and whether they contributed to
Associations/networks 2 2.1
change for children”); further evidence from
TOTAL 94 100
interviews and the Perception Survey was
used to elaborate and triangulate evidence to
Assessment of the results framework
derive conclusions.
The Results Framework in the CPAP was amended
(b) The reports generated by the NCO during
between July and December 2020 following the
the period under review (e.g., studies,
mid-term review of the CP resulting in changes
evaluations, and other research or evidence)
to some outputs.39 However, the outcomes
were reviewed in each thematic focus area and
and outcome indicators remained unchanged.
applied throughout the review where relevant,
The progress was assessed by reference to
particularly for review questions related
the various progress reports (e.g., RAM, annual
to relevance (whether programmes were
reports, other reports); their linkages to the review
adequate or appropriate to respond to needs).
questions were assessed via interviews with
(c). Other literature including GoN policies,
stakeholders and through analysis of the data
strategies, etc.
from the Perception Survey (see Volume III of this
39. Addendum to CPAP (July-December, 2020)
20 UNICEF Nepal Country Programme Review
The list of key documents reviewed, and other Data management
bibliography are in annex (see Annex 2.4).
The reliability of the quality of data/information
Key informant interviews and tools collected was ensured by using well-designed
Field Guides to capture the required information
Selection of key informants was done purposively
and that same or similar responses would have
to ensure balanced representation across the
been gathered if administered under similar
programme sectors and geographical areas
conditions.
covered in the review. Beyond this objective, the
main criterion in stakeholder sampling was the The review collected both qualitative and
depth and relevance of knowledge held in the quantitative data. Descriptive qualitative data
thematic areas being assessed of NCO. Semi- collected from KIIs were analysed and triangulated
structured interviews and small group meetings to derive trends and conclusions. Evidence
were conducted with a total of 34 external (seeT able gathered was cross-checked with sources other
3.1 (a) and 35 internal informants (see list in Annex than the original source to seek verifications. This
2.5), using guides developed by the Review Team analysis was also used to identify any limitations
and reviewed by UNICEF ROSA (see Annex 2.6). experienced by the Country Programme during
the period under review.
Due to elections and the national budget
preparation, a few key informants could not be The data from the Perception Survey was
interviewed, in spite of repeated attempts by analysed using the statistical software SPSS by
the national evaluators. Of the 34 interviews, 5 a qualified data analyst under the supervision of
interviews were held physically, while the rest the Team Leader. The descriptive statistics were
were held online. separately reported jointly by the Review Team,
and supplemented with data and information
Perception Survey
from the desk research and KIIs. Since the
The Perception Survey (PS) was designed in stakeholders for the Perception Survey were
consultation with UNICEF ROSA to capture the identified by UNICEF ROSA and NCO based on
following aspects: their designations or engagement pattern, gender
balance in the respondents was not possible.
n Participants’ nature of business and
However, as outlined in the section below,
programmatic engagement with UNICEF
questions related to gender equality and equity
NCO;
were asked and responses were analysed to form
n Their perceptions on relevance and
the findings and recommendations of this review.
effectiveness of the UNICEF NCO programme;
Overall, a pragmatic and systematic approach was
and
used to analyse the data received from all the m.
n Their perceptions on programme management,
partnerships, outreach communications, and
5.3. Integration of Gender Equality and
sharing knowledge of UNICEF NCO.
Equity in review
The survey was carried out online from 15 April to
To integrate gender, equity and human rights,
26 May 2022 with stakeholders identified during
the evaluation design had introduced relevant
the stakeholder mapping exercise (see Table 3.1
questions within the review questions and sub-
(b)). Of the 126 invited for the PS, 94 responded
questions. This included the review’s specific
(75 per cent). Most who did not respond were from
inquiries into UNICEF’s engagement with and
government agencies and local authorities from
targeting of the most vulnerable marginalized
the provinces. These officials were pre-occupied
groups, children, adolescents and youth, as part
with the elections. The Report of the Perception
of the Leave No One Behind (LNOB) agenda. The
Survey is included in this report (see Volume III).
review tools for perception survey and KII included
UNICEF Nepal Country Programme Review 21
standalone section on NCO’s contribution to equity and gender equality and sought the answers to what
more could be done. The findings are reflected in this report specifically for gender equality and equity.
5.4. Limitations
Limitations and mitigatory actions are shared below (see Table 3.2):
Table 3.2: Limitations and mitigatory actions
Limitations Actions taken
Short time period available for the review. Meetings were arranged after working hours and on holidays with the
consent of the duty-bearers. In some instances, they preferred meetings
outside of office time.
Low response to the Perception Survey. Sending reminder emails regularly to the respondents.
Limited KIIs to complete the Review in a Key informants were identified in consultation with UNICEF ROSA and
short time so that the results are available NCO who were able to provide comprehensive perspectives.
for the ongoing planning of the next cycle.
Difficulty of interviewing senior officials No mitigatory actions could be taken. In spite of repeated efforts,
due to their involvement in the elections four high-level government informants and one Mayor could not be
and annual budget formulation. interviewed.
22 UNICEF Nepal Country Programme Review
lapeN
FECINU
©
Findings of the
6
Country Programme
Review
6.1. Relevance and infections, and deficiencies in micronutrients.
Undernourishment contributes to an estimated
6.1.1 Overview 52 per cent of child mortality in Nepal, which has
shown an improvement over the past decades.
The current Country Programme was planned at
a time when the country was recovering from the
earthquake of 2015. The federalization process had By 2022, children – including adolescent girls –
just begun, but the devolution of power was at a and women of reproductive age have improved
very nascent stage. As a result, the exact division and equitable access to and use of adequate
of functions between the three tiers of government nutritious diet and improved nutritional care
was not yet defined. Furthermore, elections for behaviour and care practices.
local government were being planned. As such,
(Source: PSN Notes)
at the time of programme design, UNICEF NCO
did not have a full grasp of the working modalities
The ToC for nutrition focuses on four main
in the newly-introduced, devolved, power-sharing
gateways (outputs) to the desired outcome
mechanisms. The structure of the Country
which is improved access to adequate nutritious
Programme was to be examined in light of these
diet and improved nutritional care behaviours: (i)
circumstances.
knowledge among caregivers and communities
on nutrition and care practices; (ii) SAM treatment
6.1.2 Adequacy of the implemented theories of
change of the selected thematic areas by health workers at sub-national levels; (iii)
supplementation of micronutrients; and (iv)
The following sections examine whether the
system strengthening and DRR for nutrition.
theories of change adequately address the needs
of children in Nepal and whether the intended
Reflecting on the needs and situation in SitAn,
outcomes will be realized.
2017, the outputs respond well to the situation
in Nepal. Potential or expected changes are well
Nutrition
integrated into the ToC. The ToC for nutrition is
Stunting is the key focus of the CP nutrition translated into a results framework with fairly
component. Nepal has had significant progress clear and measurable indicators. Looking at
in reducing stunting over the past 15 years, the schematic illustration of the ToC, the list of
from 57 per cent to 36 per cent (2016). Stunting interventions is long and broad, making it difficult
remains high especially in younger children, and to assess if there are gaps in terms of likely
is linked with maternal undernutrition, feeding achieving the planned outputs. The four outputs
practices, lack of treatment for acute malnutrition feed well into the desired outcome.
24 UNICEF Nepal Country Programme Review
As noted by Government stakeholders, about 10 to The outcome is well reflected in the CPAP
15 per cent of children continue to show stunting with detailed indicators, which are however
in spite of long-term investments by many donors not reflected in toto in the Results Framework.
including UNICEF. These “unreached” populations The interventions identified are relevant and are
such as Chamar, Musahar, Dusadh, Badhi, Barai, expected to bring about the changes envisaged.
Mallah, Kewat, Koiri, etc., need attention for the
nutrition programme to be more relevant to the Although the ToC addresses “the most
needs of all. The reports also show that there is disadvantaged”, the inclusivity is not explicitly
significant variation in stunting across provinces reflected either in the CPAP or RAM. In the
(Karnali 48 per cent, Sudurpaschim 41 per cent, relevant activity, the indicator, “the number of
Lumbini and Madhes Pradesh around 35 per cent schools with UNICEF support using materials and
with rural areas showing higher values than urban support the inclusion of children with disabilities”
areas except in Madhes Pradesh).40 The theory of is unclear as to the precise meaning of the term
change does not seem to focus on these issues. “materials” in terms of converting the activity to
output. Disparities in ECD based on geography
Education has been already noted in a report elsewhere.41
Education is a priority area under Nepal’s
Water, sanitation and hygiene (WASH)
Fourteenth National Plan (2016-2019). The
education system has made significant progress Water, sanitation and hygiene are priorities in the
in recent times, yet access to a quality learning Fourteenth National Plan, and are very relevant
environment remains a challenge. Furthermore, to the achievement of the SDGs. Although Nepal
the youth need skills development for them to has made significant strides in improving water
contribute to economic growth. The School Sector supply and in improving sanitation and hygiene
Development Plan (SSDP) has identified several practices, there are concerns on water quality and
areas for focus, such as professional development access to safe water. Open defaecation remains a
of teachers, curriculum development, early matter of concern, particularly in some provinces,
childhood education, early grade reading, access and faeces-borne diseases such as diarrhoea and
and participation, inclusive education, recovery, cholera recur in some areas. WASH interventions
risk reduction, and school safety. Additionally, are also required to improve outcomes in other
decentralized service delivery will require system thematic areas; at the same time WASH requires
strengthening at sub-national levels. support from other areas such as SBC and Early
Childhood to achieve its objectives.
By 2022, all children, especially the most
disadvantaged, benefit from improved access, By 2022, children and their families have
participation and learning outcomes in pre- improved and equitable access to and use
primary and basic education within inclusive, of safe and sustainable drinking water and
safe and protective environments. sanitation services, and improved hygiene
practices.
(Source: PSN Notes)
(Source: PSN Notes)
The ToC for education has four outputs to reach
the outcome, viz., (i) early childhood education, The ToC has identified three pathways to achieve
(ii) quality basic education, (iii) adolescent the changes desired. These are: (i) safe water
literacy and life-skills education, and (iv) systems supply, (ii) improved sanitation and hygiene, and
strengthening (including DRR/CCA and Schools (iii) systems strengthening including for disaster
as Zones of Peace (SZOP)). These approaches risk reduction/climate change adaptation.
address the needs identified in SitAn, 2017.
40. Nepal Multiple Indicator Cluster Survey (MICS) 2019, National Planning Commission and Central Bureau of Statistics.
41. Oxford Policy Institute, ‘Evaluation of the National ECD Programme’, 2018.
UNICEF Nepal Country Programme Review 25
The outcome is reflected in CPAP with well-defined The ToC seeks to achieve the changes through
indicators for safe drinking water and reducing interventions aimed at: (i) providing credible data
open defaecation. Whilst the interventions are and evidence on child poverty, vulnerability and
well-linked to bring about the desired changes, exclusion, (ii) enhancing and expanding child-
there are provincial differences (e.g., open sensitive social protection systems, and (iii)
defaecation) which are not reflected in the ToC. supporting and strengthening partnerships for
policy development and advocacy.
Social policy (including local governance)
The outcome is reflected in the CPAP with well-
Nepal’s child poverty trend is a major concern
defined indicators, however, the outputs are less
with the consequent possibility of poor physical
clearly linked to the indicators.
and cognitive development. The social protection
systems are important for reducing child poverty,
Following the mid-term review of the Country
but the systems are somewhat fragmented. The
Programme, a new output on local governance
Child Grant system serves children well, but it is
was created (6.4). This output contributes the
limited in distribution. The budget allocations for
social policy outcome by: (i) facilitating sub-
children are inadequate to serve the deserving
national agencies to generate and analyse data
population. Expansion of these programmes,
and evidence (Palika profiles); (ii) improving
including those for children with disabilities (CwD)
the capacity for local planning, budgeting, and
require credible evidence and data, which are
resource mobilization; (iii) empowering children to
currently inadequate. There is also a need for
participate in decision-making; and (iv) supporting
strengthening child sensitive social protection
sub-national entities to formulate/revise laws and
systems to overcome barriers to a range of
guidelines that are child sensitive.42 However, the
early childhood development objectives. These
output lacks information on the important issue
approaches are in line with the guarantees
of coordination of actions of other players at the
proclaimed in the Constitution of Nepal and
local level who have interests similar to those of
the proprietaries set out in the Fourteenth
UNICEF.
National Development Plan of Nepal. Further,
the programme will also help Nepal to contribute A note on indicators and RAM
towards achieving the relevant SDG Goals.
n As per UNICEF guidelines, the theories of
The social protection approaches were to be put in change use national data for baselines. They
place in the changing governance structures due to are also used for setting targets. Whilst
federalization. Implementation of the programmes it is clearly understood that UNICEF will
will have to take into consideration the devolution contribute towards achieving the targets,
of power, and the concomitant administrative RAM assesses performance by measuring
arrangements and the implementation capacity at the actual reach of the target, which should
the sub-national level. Importantly, implementation not be the responsibility of UNICEF as the
of sub-national activities will depend on the national targets can only be achieved by larger
devolution of the national budget. initiatives involving government and other
partners. Provincial, district, or Palika-level
indicators are more appropriate to show the
By 2022 children benefit from strengthened
direct contribution of UNICEF.
policies and programmes that address child
n The planning framework in RAM is strong:
poverty, vulnerability and exclusion.
there are, for the most part, well-defined
(Source: PSN Notes)
indicators, with baselines and annual targets
42. UNICEF Nepal Country Office, Programme strategy notes, Local Governance.
26 UNICEF Nepal Country Programme Review
Results from the Perception Survey
n In regard to the CP meeting the needs of children, 44 per cent and 55 per cent of the
respondents stated, “very much” and “to some extent”, respectively.
n The 14 respondents who thought that provincial/Palika priorities have not been
considered in the CP included five federal officials, one sub-national official, six NGO/
INGOs, a donor and a UN Agency.
n In regard to UNICEF changing its planning and implementation following COVID-19, 38
(or 40 per cent) and 46 (or 49 per cent) of respondents felt that UNICEF changed the
plans “very much” and “to some extent”, respectively (n=94).
that seem well planned with gradual progress 6.1.3 Consideration of the needs of children in
throughout the CP period. Exceptions include planning and implementation of the Country
Programme
several instances of targets being identical to
or lower than baselines. The Country Programme and CPAP have clear
n For most indicators, the sources vary from statements on UNICEF NCO’s intention of
year to year (field reports, national surveys, targeting its programmes to “reach all children”.
administrative data, “other”, etc.). This may However, this intention is not that strongly
result in differences in measurement affecting reflected in the Results Framework.
the value and making tracking of progress
erroneous; however, the advantage is that In the previous country programmes before
the NCO keeps a “finger on the pulse” while federalization, UNICEF NCO implemented
waiting for final 2022 measurement. programmes in selected villages. For example,
a flagship project of UNICEF NCO was the
n Geographic area of scope is generally not
Decentralized Action for Children and Women
defined. In some cases indicators appear
(DACAW) project;45 this together with its
national, though in other cases it can be
predecessor project, Decentralized Planning for
inferred that they are related to focus areas,
the Child Programme, demonstrated the results
though this is not explicit. The consequence is
of combining support for capacity development
that it is difficult to get a sense of the scope
of local communities and government officials
of the result.
towards improving decentralized service delivery
n Most result areas have a mix of what is
for children’s wellbeing.
referred to as “standard” and “additional”
indicators, and the reasons for having two In the current Country Programme, Palika-level
categories of indicators could not be elicited.43 work is two-fold; certain Palikas are targeted for
Sustainable Development Goals: The initiatives multi-sectoral support (“convergence Palikas”)
of UNICEF NCO directly address in particular SDGs and others for sectoral support based on needs
1, 3, 4, 5, 6, 8, 11, and 16 in Nepal. The GoN finds by each sector (“programme priority Palikas”).
this Country Programme contributing significantly In light of UNICEF NCO’s work on the DACAW
towards fulfilment of its commitments to SDGs.44 project, it has over two decades of experience
43. Staff involved in the original design are no longer available, and the relevant documentation is not available.
44. KII with senior Federal Agency staff.
45. UNICEF and the Government of Nepal, ‘Improving Lives for Children and Women In Nepal’, 2007.
UNICEF Nepal Country Programme Review 27
on the convergence approach. The convergence Selection of Palikas for UNICEF work
approach is conceptualized by UNICEF NCO
UNICEF NCO uses the following criteria for
as “addressing all the rights of children, at the
selection of convergent Palikas:49
same time in a select number of the most
vulnerable municipalities and provinces within the n Enabling environment including proven
country. Through support to local government, leadership of the Local Government;
convergence results in comprehensive delivery of n Presence of other partners;
quality services and local and community-based
n Balanced selection of Gaun Palikas and Nagar
outcomes for children”.46 Further, programmes
Palikas (where applicable);
with an integrated approach are expected to
n Consider accessibility especially in Province 6
ensure that:
and 7 (equity lenses should be considered);
partners and sectors work together to address n Consider children population;
key leverage points and adopt complementarity, n Selected Palikas will be presented in the order
synergistic strategies, delivery of multi-sector of priority by phases (I and II).
programmes by shared partners, and convergence
of programme delivery to identified priority areas The programme priority Palikas are generally
or population groups, and integration of relevant selected by thematic sections using local data and
components of a sector into another sector’s evidence.50
programme.47
The selection of intervention districts in itself
UNICEF NCO works in five of the seven
was well grounded on empirical studies,
provinces in Nepal (Province No. 1, Madhes
making them highly relevant as intervention
Province, Lumbini Province, Karnali Province,
areas.
and Sudurpaschim Province). In general, these
(Source: Evaluation of the Child-centered Disaster Risk
provinces are considered to be the “needy”
Reduction Programme in Nepal (2013-2018))
provinces, having been identified through an
analysis of Child Deprivation Index followed by
Planning process
sector specific deprivation analyses using the
latest available data in each sector.48 Indeed, many The Review examined the programme planning
development partners and INGOs are active in approach adopted by UNICEF NCO in the current
these five provinces. This report provides a map CP in the provinces mentioned in the previous
indicating intensity of UNICEF thematic activities paragraph. The process is led by the three field
in the convergent Palikas and provincial profiles at offices, where staff, sometimes with NCO staff,
a glance (see Annex 4.1). have consultations with Palika-level officials to
determine the needs of Palikas. The consultations
The Review also noted that the convergence at the provincial level are less frequent. The needs
approach is heavily infused with service delivery identified through this process are matched with
type of support. In the event of UNICEF NCO the Results Framework of UNICEF NCO to ensure
shifting to a more upstream policy arena at the that they are within the agreed CPAP. The resultant
local level, there is a risk of reduced support for work programme and the implementing Palikas are
children, an aspect that needs to be considered in incorporated into an agreement with the Federal
the next Country Programme.
46. UNICEF Nepal, ‘Concept Note for Convergent and Integrated Approach to Programming in Nepal’, 2018.
47. Ibid.
48. The Review did not have access to these reports.
49. UNICEF Nepal, ‘Concept Note for Convergent and Integrated Approach to Programming in Nepal’, 2018.
50. Some thematic sections use local data to track progress, but such data are not reflected in RAM and annual reports.
28 UNICEF Nepal Country Programme Review
Government (a 30-month rolling work plan), and n Although UNICEF NCO’s intention is to reach
based on this agreement, annual work plans are all children, this does not happen in reality.
prepared for Palikas. In regard to this process, the Often difficult-to-reach areas are left out due
observations of the Review Team are as follows: to logistical problems, and some excluded
communities (e.g., Badi and Musahar
n On occasion, UNICEF staff did not have the
communities) are not covered in UNICEF or
opportunity to visit and/or consult communities
indeed in many other donor programmes.54
and other stakeholders in the identified
Palikas to obtain first-hand information on the n UNICEF NCO’s engagement is seen to
situation due to their remoteness as well as be largely with Palikas; the engagement
funding and time constraints.51 with provincial authorities is deemed to be
inadequate in the planning process.55
n Some of the sub-national officials did not
concur with the choice of the selected Palikas Whilst the concept of integrated approach
and contested their relevance as it has been (convergent Palikas) is well-founded, there are
agreed with the federal government.52 no data to demonstrate the effectiveness of
this approach in the focus areas (for example,
n Palika-level work plans are not discussed with
improvement of selected indicators in the
the relevant Palikas before being presented
convergent Palikas vis-à-vis national data).
for signature.
n Coordination with government agencies and In summary, whilst the CP has attempted to
between UNICEF and other partners who provide for the needs of children, the evidence
work in the same province is insufficient shows the need to expand coverage to some of
leading into overlapping work and duplication the marginalized communities and difficult-to-
of efforts. Due to inadequate coordination, reach geographic areas.56
sub-national officials are required to attend
many meetings of different donors, which is a The UNICEF NCO selects municipalities based on
strain on their time. The view of the high-level the Multi-Dimensional Poverty Index to select the
government agency is that donors should, most disadvantaged/backward municipalities and
at the Palika level, conduct joint planning does not distinguish between marginalized and
exercises to avoid overlaps and reduce non-marginalized communities in delivering the
meeting time.53 services except in child protection. Thus coverage
n UNICEF has not adequately “decentralized” data in terms of marginalized and non-marginalized
its approaches to accommodate local planning communities across various areas except in child
and decision-making, and that the Field protection do not carry any significance.
Offices, although with delegated powers to
Currently, the Programme Strategy Notes do not
sign provincial and Palika agreements, do not
reflect UNICEF NCO approaches vis-à-vis gender
have the required flexibility to adapt to changing
equality and equity, particularly as they relate to
situations and revise plans accordingly.
marginalized communities.)
51. KII with sub-national staff and UNICEF Field Staff.
52. KII with senior provincial officials.
53. KII with the National Planning Commission.
54. KII with senior federal and sub-national officials.
55. Ibid.
56. KII with GoN officials and Development Partners.
UNICEF Nepal Country Programme Review 29
6.1.4 Critical interventions that are missing or
received low attention
Quotes from the
Perception Survey The “missing interventions” are analysed using
the situation described in SitAn, 2017, 57 a summary
n “More coordination among all the of which is produced below.
interventions is needed. Target
Nutrition: Nepal had achieved goals for reduction
audiences get confused and have
in proportion of underweight children (MDG)
difficulty in managing time for aid
agencies to talk to them separately and micronutrient levels (e.g., Vitamin A, iron
almost for the same cause. All of it and iodine). Stunting was still high, particularly
can be integrated and implemented.” in the mid and far western hills and mountains
(Federal government agency) (Karnali and Sudurpaschim Provinces). Wasting
n “If UNICEF invites the partners for the had not changed much in the past ten years and
programme planning and formulation was higher among disadvantaged castes/ethnic
of the country plan, it would be more groups and in the Terai.
beneficial in terms of needs of the
Education: Primary level net enrolment was 96 per
community as well as in terms of impact
cent, with strong gender parity. Areas of concern
of the programme. UNICEF should
included increasing the access to ECE, secondary
give priorities to those organizations
who have similar vision, mission, and school, and non-formal programmes; scaling up
priorities.” (Partner) inclusive education at all levels and models for
reaching out-of-school children; addressing quality
n “The nature and extent of interventions
at local level depends on the local at all levels within child-friendly school concepts
context. Hence the interventions for improved learning; and creating disaster
should be tailored with the local resilient schools and meaningful contribution of
situation and context. To be specific, children in this.
blanket approach of intervention based
WASH: Use of improved sources of drinking water
on ‘one size fits all’ does not work. The
was near universal, at 96 per cent. Improved
interventions should be specific based
sanitation had reached 60 per cent. Remaining
on the local needs and demands.”
(Federal ministry) issues included expanding the ODF movement
and related behavioural changes particularly in
n “In recent times UNICEF seemed
the Terai; expanding water supply in hard to reach
less committed to work with the
areas; strengthening water supply maintenance
government and model building and
seems to be leaning more towards a nationwide; improving water quality; water and
more scattered local level approach sanitation in urban centres with rapidly growing
with limited technical support.” (INGO) populations that require different technologies;
n “The only thing we want to request increasing key hygiene practices to reduce
UNICEF is to engage your partner in disease and malnutrition; accelerate provision of
the country plan formulation process as menstrual hygiene management toilet facilities in
well, which will be definitely beneficial schools; and increase resilience of WASH systems
to achieve impactful outcomes.” (NGO) to withstand disasters.
n “It would be great if UNICEF could
Social policy: Social sector budgets had increased,
consider addressing the local context
particularly following the peace agreement, in
specific problems and local priorities
health, education, and social protection, leading to
instead of only engaging so extensively
increased allocations to child health, numbers of
through federal level ministries.”
teachers in primary schools, and expanded social
(Development partn
protection programmes. Remaining challenges
57. UNICEF Nepal, Situation Analysis, 2017.
30 UNICEF Nepal Country Programme Review
included further expanding SP programmes and Concluding remarks
increasing inclusion.
The CPAP overall responded to most of the issues
presented in the preceding section through
ECD: Access to ECD has increased rapidly over
efforts directed at different levels and types of
the past decades (from about 11 per cent in 2004
support (e.g., advocacy, policy development,
to 63 per cent in 2014). Coverage issues included
guidelines and development of standard operating
increasing numbers of centres and teachers, but
procedures, implementation and service delivery,
quality was a major concern, particularly in urban
and behavioural change communication (C4D)).
areas where many centres were private, and few
monitored. The strategy to roll out implementation
Cross-cutting issues such as supporting
to achieve one year compulsory pre-primary
operationalization of federal structures in each
education for all was not clear.
sector is covered well in the sectoral summaries
and for most represented by a separate output
Children with disabilities: Health services
on system strengthening (and DRR). The system
targeting this group were practically non-existent,
strengthening section generally responds to
with scarcity of data on this group as a whole,
the need to increase local capacity for planning,
remaining hidden and unreached by most services.
budgeting, etc., and tracking of system
Urban poor: Pressure on social services in performance to ensure quality service delivery.
urban areas due to rapid urbanization, and risks DRR is combined into the same output, covering
for multiple rights violations for children among capacity strengthening for developing policies,
the urban poor noted. Previous achievements in awareness raising, and technical assistance for
different sectors would need reinforced support if real time reporting of service delivery.
not to deteriorate, particularly in WASH.
A few of the main issues noted above are not
DRR: Following the earthquake and the recovery evident in the CPAP narrative. These include:
process, there was a noted urgency to
n Education: Inclusive education;58
systematically include risk-assessment and
n WASH in urban centres;
improving understanding of risk data in UNICEF
n Social policy: Inclusion of Child Grant Programme
programmatic work and advocating the same
(versus scaling up/coverage, which is noted);
within government systems – to be child-inclusive
as well as risk informed. There was an impetus to n Urban poor (reference pressure on social services
scale up DRR, CCA, and resilience programming to and rapid urbanization/internal migration) multi-
ensure current investments in recovery converted sectoral;
into long-term sustainable development. n Disability is stated as a cross-cutting issue, but
is not reflected adequately in the narratives
Equity: Remained a cross-cutting issue, with
(or results frameworks) in most sectors, with
particular gaps in each sectoral area depending
the exception of WASH;59
on household income, gender, caste/ethnic and
n Mainstreaming gender across all sectors
language groups, urban/rural location as well as
is difficult to gauge; there is often a simple
geographic barriers. Lacking information on the
statement on inequities/disadvantaged or
situation of women and children with disabilities
marginalized groups, that includes other
was a concern, with sparse data suggesting
groups that are excluded on the same issue.
strong patterns of exclusion across basic services.
58. It shows briefly in the Result Framework but only as an indicator on “schools using materials that support the inclusion of children”, which is a very
limited approach.
59. Inclusion of WASH here is noteworthy; however, the Review did not have an opportunity to physically assess the WASH disability approaches to
ensure whether they are about installation of accessible systems and infrastructure with technical approaches to enable access by differently-abled
persons.
UNICEF Nepal Country Programme Review 31
Education indicators are heavily gender 6.2. Effectiveness
disaggregated, child protection is not in some
areas where it seems it could be (e.g., cases 6.2.1. Overview
reported/referred, children in institutional
The Results Framework for the Nepal CP is not
care), similarly for health and nutrition on
in the CPD itself, but in the CPAP signed with
dietary diversity, immunization, drop out,
the GoN.62 Following the mid-term review of
etc. The Gender Review by ROSA in 201960
the programme, an addendum to CPAP has
identified the following emerging issues from
been provided.63 The outcome indicators remain
a gender perspective: adolescent pregnancy,
unchanged in this addendum.
adolescent mental health, increasing dropout
rates of boys, unpaid and care work, and The self-assessed results for the Country
migration (both high out-migration by fathers Programme are impressive. Overall, five out of the
leaving a female-headed household behind, six programme outcomes are reported to be “on
and high female migration in some areas). track” by the end of 2021; the fifth is the health
outcome and is considered “partially met”. Across
Below are the areas suggested by stakeholders
the Country Programme’s 22 outputs, 4 outputs are
to be considered in the new Country Programme
already met and 13 are “on track”. Only four outputs
(see Box 1).
Box 1: Areas suggested by stakeholders to be considered in the new
Country Programme61
n More focus on decentralized planning including closer dialogue with PLGSP;
n Nutrition (urban poor; children in difficult-to-reach areas; improving capacity of caregivers;
introducing area-specific nutrition packages; using locally available foods for nutrition; growth
monitoring and counselling);
n Improve coverage of adolescents and women of reproductive group;
n Children’s participation (piloting CFLG in tole level in urban municipalities; expand Child Responsive
Budgeting at the sub-national level);
n Support establishing provincial baselines on key children’s indicators and an effective monitoring
system;
n Attention to WASH in urban areas and semi-urban areas, in particular high-density areas;
n Increased efforts to integrate DRR into school system and teacher training;
n In light of the introduction and expansion of digital learning space, there is a need to develop
policies and strategies to make digital space safe for children;
n Widen and implement inclusive social protection system for children with special focus on
children living in poverty and with disabilities; pilot GIS-based entitlement tracking system for
children;
n Strengthen the child-sensitive and child-friendly DRR systems at the sub-national levels;
n Expand the work on “ecozones” to reduce indoor air pollution.
60. UNICEF Regional Office for South Asia, ‘Nepal Gender Programmatic Review’, 2019.
61. Sources: KIIs and Perception Survey.
62. UNICEF Nepal and Government of Nepal, ‘Country Programme Action Plan (2018-2022)’.
63. UNICEF Nepal and Government of Nepal, ‘Country Programme Action Plan (2018-2022) Addendum’.
32 UNICEF Nepal Country Programme Review
are reported to be partially met and just one output documented, while system strengthening and
is labelled “constrained” (see Table 3.1). Across policy-level indicators are less often achieved,
the programme, status reporting (met, on track, or progress is not well captured even if target
partially met, constrained) is uneven and appears is achieved (e.g., target set at the same level
to be judgmental. For example, the nutrition output as baseline using a 1-4 scale).
that is labelled “constrained” has three indicators
The following sections examine the actual
that are all met or on track and the corresponding
achievement of UNICEF NCO results for children,
narrative annual report gives no further information
delivery of outputs and their contribution towards
on why it is constrained. Some results that are
stated programme outcomes, and major factors
reported as “met” or “on track” have achieved a
influencing the achievement (or not). Additional
target that is of the same value as the baseline.
details based on the desk review of reports are
Summary findings across thematic areas provided in annex (see Annex 3.2).
n At output level, many results have been 6.2.2. Achievement of results
achieved ahead of time or achieved well
(a) Thematic areas
above target. This is impressive having faced
two years of a pandemic. Some of these Nutrition
achievements are in training and have been Achievements: UNICEF NCO continued to assist
undertaken remotely.65 the GoN in implementing and scaling up the Multi-
n Coverage rates for several programmes with Sector Nutrition Plan (2018–2022). During the
direct reach to children either did not decline period of the current programme cycle, UNICEF
as much as could have been expected during NCO has been able to expand the services
COVID-19 pandemic or bounced back rapidly to about 720 Palikas from 303 in 2020.66 A
in 2021. noteworthy milestone is the considerable financial
commitment from Palikas to address malnutrition
n Most thematic outcome levels are noted as
as a result of the advocacy role of UNICEF NCO.
on track, but very few have reported updated
The interventions included targeted provision
data on the outcome indicators.
of full packages for needy Palikas and partial
n In general, service delivery or coverage
packages to others.
targets are more often achieved and well
Table 3.1: Overview of self-reported status for results by end 202164
Component Outcome Outputs Outputs on Outputs Outputs Total No. of
met track partially met constrained outputs
Health Partially met 4 4
Nutrition On track 1 2 1 4
Education On track 4 4
Child protection On track 1 2 3
WASH On track 2 1 3
Social policy On track 3 1 4
Total 4 13 4 1 22
64. UNICEF Nepal, ‘Results Assessment Matrix (RAM)’, 2018-2021.
65. KII with Field Office staff.
66. KII with UNICEF NCO.
UNICEF Nepal Country Programme Review 33
UNICEF NCO continued to enhance the capacity collection and issues on data quality as a result of
of GoN representatives at both national and sub- the transfer of responsibilities of the volunteers
national levels to enable them to implement and to Ministry of Federal Affairs and General
monitor MSNP work and other nutrition problems. Administration (MoFAGA), although UNICEF
NCO continues to maintain seven Provincial
UNICEF NCO supported the GoN on the Coordinators in its budget.
development of national guidelines, strategies
and procedures to address severely-wasted
“UNICEF has been able to provide policy
children. Due to the advocacy work of UNICEF
support in nutrition which have borne fruit.
NCO, the GoN expanded the treatment services
UNICEF can do much to improve the situation.
for moderately-wasted children. UNICEF NCO also
For example, we have to change the food
provided technical support for piloting treatment
habits – that is why some indicators are not
care in four districts; the follow-up by UNICEF
improving”.
NCO is expected to influence the GoN to expand
A mayor
the services to other areas.
In spite of the COVID-19 outbreak and the Summary of reported achievements of
disruptions it caused UNICEF NCO was able outcome/outputs (see Annex 3.2 for more):
to maintain its programme on Vitamin A The outcome indicators are not reported on;
supplementation reaching about 85 per cent thus progress towards outcomes cannot be
coverage.67 This success has led UNICEF to assessed.68 It appears that UNICEF NCO does not
replicate such programmes in other countries. have the requisite data. In Output 2.1, a majority
of the targets were achieved in 2020 and in one
UNICEF NCO has helped sub-national agencies output, the target was overachieved.69 In Output
to integrate nutrition in their plans and has 2.2, the target is available for 2020 only, and one
trained sub-national staff to track budgets and target was met.70 In Output 2.3, one target was
performance. UNICEF NCO has observed some achieved. In Output 2.4 (system strengthening),
shortcomings in these processes largely due three out of five targets are on track, and one is
to insufficient staff at the sub-national level and not reported on.71
insufficient monitoring data at the national level.
Assessment of effectiveness: Achievement
of results has been affected due to a number of
“MSNP work – this adds lots of value at the
reasons, viz.,:
local level as municipal governments have
started putting resources in nutrition and
n Historically, UNICEF NCO nutrition programme
nutrition governance at all levels”.
has been known for delivery of specific
Sub-national level official
nutrient requirements. GoN’s needs on
nutrition appear to be on treatment, rather
UNICEF NCO also supported the establishment than prevention, which does not seem to be a
of a web-based reporting system and the priority. As a result of reduced funding, UNICEF
development of the requisite databases. A cadre NCO is now adopting more of an advocacy
of volunteers, supervised by the Policy Planning role with reduced service delivery; however,
Division (GoN), has been in place to collect local the nuances of these changes are not clearly
data. There has been some set-back on the data understood by the sub-national entities, who
67. UNICEF NCO, ‘Annual Report’, 2021.
68. RAM reports that the outcome is on track, although there is no evidence.
69. However, this output is labelled as “constrained”, and the reasons for this conclusion are not available in the ‘Annual Report’ (2020).
70. RAM reports that this output as “met”, which is not an accurate reflection.
71. There is a lack of clarity in some of the targets under this output.
34 UNICEF Nepal Country Programme Review
expect full-service delivery. As a result, sub- determinants surrounding nutrition reach
national entities feel that UNICEF NCO should such as poor maternal nutrition and low
expand its services. The critical consideration birth weight, which need to be addressed to
is the balance between UNICEF’s influencing achieve the full results of the programme.
role and service delivery in the provinces. n Inadequate focus on SBC approaches in
n The staff capacity/staffing of sub-national nutrition is a cause noted during the review.
entities is inadequate for taking forward Effectiveness of MSNP III will be enhanced
the nutrition initiatives; this will also impact with ramped up SBC approaches.
possible work on custom-made packages
Stakeholder perceptions of nutrition work:
which are being explored by UNICEF NCO.
The majority expressed satisfaction/moderate
The staffing of UNICEF Field Offices too is
satisfaction on health interventions of UNICEF
inadequate as the areas to be reached are
NCO (see Figure 4.1).
spread over a large geographic area.
n The coordination between and amongst Education
the three tiers of government, especially at
Key achievements: UNICEF has provided long-
the Palika level is inadequate to effectively
standing support to the education system in
implement the programme and to avoid
Nepal. Overall, it has helped to strengthen the
duplication of work.
education system to provide inclusive education
n Data collection at the sub-national level is not and improve learning outcomes in pre-primary and
to the expected level as sub-national agencies basic education. It supported the development
are unable to provide the required support for, of the National ECD Strategy (2019-2030) with
and oversight of, volunteers who are tasked a focus on holistic early childhood development.
with data collection. Additionally, data from In collaboration with the Ministry of Education,
difficult-to-reach areas are not available. Gaps Science & Technology (MoEST) and other
in data are a challenge for the implementation Ministries, UNICEF NCO developed the ‘Local
of the programme. Level Integrated ECD Planning Package’, which is
n In spite of long-term investments on nutrition appreciated by the Government and implemented
by the donors, wasting is observable in about by a considerable number of Palikas.
15 per cent of the children. There are social
40
34 35 34 35
35
29
30
24
25 21 21 21 22 21
19 19 18
20 16
15
10 7
5 3 4 4
5 1 1
0
Strengthening the Strengthening the Strengthening the Enhance the resources Enhance capacities of
capacity of caregivers capacity of sub-national capacity of health and accountability of the sub-national entities in
and communities for health workers to provide workers to stimulate Multi-Sector Nutrition planning, implementation
improved adolescent, quality care on SAM demand for Programme (MSNP) and delivering child
maternal, infant and (n=79) supplementation and a sector ministries and nutrition and care
young child nutrition and diversified diet (n=78) partners (n=79) practices based on
care practices (n=79) priorities (n=79)
stnednopseR
fo
.oN
Figure 4.1: Perception on effectiveness of UNICEF Nutrition
programme
Very unsatisfactory Moderately unsatisfactory
Moderately satisfactory Very satisfactory
Unable to assess
45
40
40
38 38 37
36
35
30
25
20 20 21 22 19 20 20
20 18
17 17
15
9
10 6 5 7 8
5
1 1 1 1 2
0
Strengthen the capacity Increase the capacity of Increase the capacity of Increase the capacity of Meeting the local
of the government and the government's government's the government government priorities
communities to education agencies to education agencies to agencies to legislate, on education (n=85)
improve access to and provide quality basic provide adolescents plan, budget and
quality of early learning education especially for (aged 10-19) with life- monitor to improve
opportunities (children the most disadvantaged skills education (n=85) education programmes
up to five) (n=85) children(n=84) (n=85)
stnednopseR
fo
.oN
Figure 4.1: Perception on effectiveness of UNICEF Nutrition
Figure 4.2: Perception on effectiveness of UNICEF Education
programme
Very unsatisfactory Moderately unsatisfactory Moderately satisfactory
Very satisfactory Unable to assess
UNICEF Nepal Country Programme Review 35
UNICEF NCO’s support towards improving
“UNICEF’s collaboration with the Government
enrolment of out-of-school children has brought
[of Nepal] is a long-standing partnership; it has
positive results. Its work on promoting the use
brought global experiences to the table, and
of Early Learning Development Standards (ELDS)
we are happy to be a part of that partnership,
together with Centre for Education and Human
which has benefitted the country very much”.
Resource Development (CEHRD) has progressed
well, with the development of ELDS report cards Senior federal government official
to assess the children’s development and learning,
supporting the teachers on planning corrective UNICEF’s strategy of seconding an officer in
actions, and advising parents accordingly. MoEST has helped both UNICEF NCO and the
Ministry to effectively implement the programmes.
UNICEF NCO, in terms of its global policy, is
lobbying the GoN for inclusive education for Other notable achievements include: parenting
differently-abled children and supporting specific education (including positive disciplining) to
teacher training. However, the GoN is constrained caregivers which is well received; UNICEF support
due to a lack of funds to provide the necessary on mother-tongue instructions; support for formal
facilities in all schools to cater for the needs of and non-formal education complemented with
differently-abled children. skills development programmes which have
benefitted adolescents; and the introduction of
The education component responded well to Safe School Zones.
support the GoN during the COVID-19 pandemic.
It supported the development of the Education Summary of reported achievements of
Cluster Contingency Plan to enable the GoN outcome/outputs (see Annex 4.2 for more): The
to respond to the pandemic, and developed outcome indicators are not reported on as there is
guidelines for reopening schools. no baseline and targets, except in one indicator
which is not reported on; thus progress towards
outcomes cannot be assessed.72 In spite of these
“UNICEF ensured the right to education of the
shortcomings, the outcome is rated on track by
children even in the pandemic”.
NCO. In Output 3.1, there are seven indicators of
Sub-national level official
which three have been achieved; one on track, and
the remaining three have no updated information.
Additionally, UNICEF NCO supported the
In Output 3.2, there are eight indicators; of these
development of self-learning materials for primary
five have targets same as the baselines and are
classes, which were provided online and by hard
reported fully achieved. Two indicators are on track,
copies to 175 Palikas. During the latter period of
whilst the indicator on CwD is lagging.73 In Output
the pandemic, UNICEF continued supporting
3.3, two of the four indicators are fully achieved by
alternative learning approaches to be used when
2021; one cannot be effectively assessed as the
the schools are closed, and trained teachers on
target and the baseline are the same (yet reported
psychosocial support and online teaching.
as on track), and one indicator behind. In Output
3.4, the indicators on emergency work have
UNICEF NCO also helped in building the capacity
been achieved whilst the balance three indicators
of sub-national entities on planning and designing
cannot be effectively assessed as the baseline
programmes, and their monitoring which
and targets are the same.
facilitated the preparation of education sector
plans. As a part of the contingency plan, it trained
stakeholders and teachers on school safety and
disaster risk reduction measures.
72. RAM reports that this outcome is on track, although there is no evidence.
73. The indicator (“using materials that support inclusion of CwD”) is unclear for the purposes of assessment.
36 UNICEF Nepal Country Programme Review
Assessment of effectiveness: The programme Stakeholder perceptions of education work:
has faced a few constraints, which have affected The majority expressed satisfaction/moderate
the achievement of the results, as follows: satisfaction on education interventions of UNICEF
NCO (see Figure 4.2).
n Challenges of working with sub-national
entities largely due to inadequate education Water, sanitation and hygiene (WASH)
staffing in many Palikas/provinces to effectively
Key achievements: UNICEF NCO focused on
support UNICEF programmes.74
sanitation, WASH planning (including hygiene),
n Inclusive education for children with disabilities
and water quality. In planning, it used local data
is very much the way forward but GoN lacks
to plan improvements, although this was before
resources to equip schools; GoN is currently
federalization. This approach, together with
planning to set up at least one special school
intense discussions at the local level resulted
in each province.75
in a firm grounding of the programme at the
n Lack of funding for a more comprehensive local level. There has been engagement with
programme, expected by GoN; federal ministries and agencies, the Association
n Delays in fund transfer for programme of Municipalities, private sector, development
implementation (including UNICEF NCO’s partners (e.g., UN Habitat on sanitation, WHO on
own delays); water quality, WFP on school WASH), and the civil
n In order to be more effective, some of the society in the planning process, which resulted in
education-related work requires collaboration the GoN endorsing the WASH planning guidelines
with other agencies (e.g., those dealing with on climate-sensitive WASH interventions at the
WASH, child protection, nutrition), which is Palika level. This level of engagement is seen by
not always evident. GoN as a good model resulting in state ownership
of the initiatives, and the model has been shared
n Whilst UNICEF NCO has contributed towards
with development partners.77 The success of this
online education, there are still a number of
initiative is also attributed to significant inputs from
areas such as access to digital devices, poverty,
using SBC approaches. These plans have been
geographic remoteness, and consequent poor
linked to an innovative Geographic Information
network signals needing attention to scale-up
System-based sector Management Information
digital learning.76 However, digital security
Systems for WASH, facilitating the progress
to ensure the safety of children is becoming
towards SDG targets.
important in this context.
“UNICEF has not managed to bring together its portfolios for greater impact. For example, the health
efforts are not linked to the education efforts to reduce disability and to ensure early identification of
children with disability. The nutrition efforts do not link across the 1,000 Golden Days to ECD to early
grade programming. School meals are being expanded and are falling victim to corruption in many
priority communities but there are few links between UNICEF and WFP to ensure improved school
nutrition efforts”.
Senior INGO official
74. This evidence is also corroborated by other donors in the Education Sector.
75. KII with development partner.
76. Ackers, J., ‘Long-term social impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic on education in South Asia; Proceeding of the International Webinar on Long-term
social Impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic’, National Academy of Sciences of Sri Lanka, 2022.
77. IDPG Principals Meeting, 1 April 2022.
40
34 35 34 35
35
29
30
24
25 21 21 21 22 21
19 19 18
20 16
15
10 7
5 3 4 4
5 1 1
0
Strengthening the Strengthening the Strengthening the Enhance the resources Enhance capacities of
capacity of caregivers capacity of sub-national capacity of health and accountability of the sub-national entities in
and communities for health workers to provide workers to stimulate Multi-Sector Nutrition planning, implementation
improved adolescent, quality care on SAM demand for Programme (MSNP) and delivering child
maternal, infant and (n=79) supplementation and a sector ministries and nutrition and care
young child nutrition and diversified diet (n=78) partners (n=79) practices based on
care practices (n=79) priorities (n=79)
UNICEF Nepal Country Programme Review 37
stnednopseR
fo
.oN
Figure 4.1: Perception on effectiveness of UNICEF Nutrition
programme
Very unsatisfactory Moderately unsatisfactory
Moderately satisfactory Very satisfactory
Unable to assess
45
40
40
38 38 37
36
35
30
25
20 20 21 22 19 20 20
20 18
17 17
15
9
10 6 5 7 8
5
1 1 1 1 2
0
Strengthen the capacity Increase the capacity of Increase the capacity of Increase the capacity of Meeting the local
of the government and the government's government's the government government priorities
communities to education agencies to education agencies to agencies to legislate, on education (n=85)
improve access to and provide quality basic provide adolescents plan, budget and
quality of early learning education especially for (aged 10-19) with life- monitor to improve
opportunities (children the most disadvantaged skills education (n=85) education programmes
up to five) (n=85) children(n=84) (n=85)
stnednopseR
fo
.oN
Figure 4.2: Perception on effectiveness of UNICEF Education
programme
Figure 4.2: Perception on effectiveness of UNICEF Education programme
Very unsatisfactory Moderately unsatisfactory Moderately satisfactory
Very satisfactory Unable to assess
NCO is pursuing the interventions to ensure that
“The schools and local communities have
national SDG targets are met.
benefitted very much from improvements
of water supply and sanitation facilities in UNICEF NCO launched a water safety programme
schools and local communities”. (Safe Water Community) by supporting a mobile
GoN provincial official laboratory owned by the GoN. It facilitated the
development of water quality monitoring protocols
“The preparation of water safety plans, WASH
in 37 local authorities and will use the lessons to
plans and school WASH programme has
up-scale this model in other areas.
helped us to understand the concepts better,
and we are better equipped now”.
“Extensive knowledge base and experience
A mayor
was gained in-terms of water, sanitation and
hygiene…Learning from global evidence, cross
A noteworthy contribution is the reduction of open
learning and sharing”.
defaecation because of the interventions. There
Sub-national level official
were provincial differences with some provinces
achieving better results.78 Reversal of gains has been
Of particular importance to the GoN is UNICEF
observed in areas with disadvantaged communities
NCO’s contributions towards developing WASH-
due to difficulty of accessing the areas, particularly
related statutes and operational guidelines, and
during the COVID-19 pandemic. In general, UNICEF-
developing the capacity of officials in all seven
targeted provinces show positive developments
compared to other provinces.79 However, UNICEF provinces on these guidelines which will facilitate
the local agencies to respond to emergencies.
78. For example, in Province No. 2 there has been marked improvement in reducing open defaecation from 46 per cent to 15 per cent within two years
during the current programme.
79. KII with UNICEF and provincial-level officials.
38 UNICEF Nepal Country Programme Review
UNICEF NCO also supported the development of Climate mitigation, disaster risk reduction,
the N-WASH web portal of the GoN.80 and emergency response
Summary of reported achievements of Key achievements: In the UNICEF NCO
outcome/outputs (see Annex 4.2 for more): programme, DRR and emergency are incorporated
Unlike other programmes. WASH has updated into other outcome areas (health, nutrition,
progress on outcome indicators. One indicator is education and WASH), and are reflected in their
on track and the other indicator (on safely managed respective programmes. Each section has a focal
drinking water) is not on track. In Output 5.1, the point for this programme.
targets have been exceeded; in Output 5.2, one A key input to the GoN is the provision of emergency
indicator each has been achieved and on track support following disasters and COVID-19. UNICEF
whilst two are behind. In Output 5.3, three out of NCO supported the GoN and sub-national entities
six indicators have been achieved whilst reporting to prepare Emergency Response Plans (ERP) and
on two indicators is unclear. One indicator has no update them as needed. It provided direct support
target. to prepare 50 Palika-level ERP plans; in addition,
Assessment of effectiveness: Overall, the WASH UNICEF NCO supported 15 vulnerable Palikas to
programme has not faced any significant setbacks develop Disaster Preparedness and Response
to affect its programme. Unlike some other Plans (DPRP). Other key inputs include technical
programmes, the WASH programme has received support to MoFAGA to strengthen the Crisis
close to what is budgeted (see Section 4.3). Management Information Systems.
Given the nature and spread of work done, there
UNICEF NCO also identified standby partners to be
is a demand from the local authorities and other
used in an emergency, as a preparedness action.
stakeholders to expand the WASH programme,
Likewise, it has piloted an initiative to introduce
particularly WASH planning81 and an expansion
anticipatory action (pre-identifying potential
of WASH into schools;82 these will need to be
beneficiaries in an emergency) with the GoN.
considered on the availability of funding.
UNICEF NCO worked with Children’s Clubs and
“UNICEF has supported access to WASH
schools to introduce child centred-DRR work
services to the community. These services
at the Palika level, and work on “ecozones” to
should be extended to other areas because
address indoor air pollution has begun.
UNICEF’s work is good and known to many.
Government does not have the resources to
“In the Child Clubs, we learned about the effects
expand these services”.
of climate change and natural disasters such as
Sub-national level official
floods, which are regular in the villages we live.
I was able to brief my family and neighbours on
Stakeholder perceptions of WASH work:
how to avoid or cope up with disasters. This was
The majority expressed satisfaction/moderate
a unique experience which were not exposed to
satisfaction on WASH interventions of UNICEF
before.”
NCO (see Figure 4.3).
Child Club graduate
80. Ministry of Water Supply, NWASH Dashboard, Government of Nepal, see: http://nwash.mows.gov.np/
81. WASH Planning in the remaining Palikas require about USD 6 million (Source: UNICEF Presentation to IPDG (1 April 2022).
82. KII with federal officials.
UNICEF Nepal Country Programme Review 39
45
40
38
40
37
35
30
25
21 22 21
18 20 19
20
15
10
4 5 6
5
0
Increased capacity to improve Improved sanitation and hygiene Increased capacity to legislate, plan
water quality and functionality and behaviours and sector stakeholders and budget to improve WASH
to deliver and sustain safe water have enhanced capacity to provide systems, including mainstreaming
(n=83) access to safe and sustainable disaster risk management (n=84)
sanitation and hygiene facilities
(n=84)
stnednopseR
fo
.oN
Figure 4.3: Perception on effectiveness of UNICEF WASH programme
Moderately unsatisfactory Moderately satisfactory Very satisfactory Unable to assess
40
33 34 35
32
28 30
25
25 22
20 20 19
20 17 15 17
15
10
7 4 6 5
5
0
Availability of child UNICEF response and Availability of planning and Development of capacity of
sensitive national or local recovery efforts to COVID- monitoring systems that stakeholders on disaster
risk management plans 19 in meeting explicitly address risks at risk management and
(n=77) organizational benchmarks national and subnational climate, energy and
on risk-informed level (n=76) environment (n=75)
programming and peaceful
inclusive societies (n=76)
stnednopseR
fo
.oN
Figure 4.3: Perception on effectiveness of UNICEF WASH programme
Summary of reported achievements of of the relevant laws and statutes vis-à-vis
outcome/outp
F
u
ig
t
u
s
re
(
4
s
.4
e
:
e
P e
A
rc
n
ep
n
ti
e
on
x
o
4
n
.
e
2
ff e
f
c
o
ti
r
ve
m
nes
o
s
r
o
e
f
)
U
:
N
A
IC
s
E F Emergen
fe
cy
d
/
er
D
a
R
l
R
iz atiopnro grreammmaein a concern and has been
indicated elsewhere, a single Output (7.3) provides a constraint for smooth implementation of the
the programme portfolio. There are five indicators, programme.83
and all of which have been achieved by 2021. n Emergency Response/DRR is a cross-cutting
Some have overachieved 2022 targets as well. issue requiring strong collaborations between
Of particular note is that the local governance partners. For example, UNICEF NCO has
indicator on planning and monitoring systems that faced difficulty of real-time monitoring on
address local-level risks has been achieved. displacement of children ahead of monsoon,
which require strong inter-agency collaboration
Assessment of effectiveness: The review notes amongst GoN agencies,84 particularly as early
some constraints which affect the effectiveness
warning is not UNICEF’s strength.
of the programme, as set out below:
n Influencing Palikas for higher investments
n In the federalized system, there are DRR on emergency response/DRR has been a
focal points in sub-national agencies who challenge because of competing demands for
have the responsibilities for preparedness limited funds received by the Palikas.
work. However, ambiguous interpretation
Very unsatisfactory Moderately unsatisfactory Moderately satisfactory
Very satisfactory Unable to assess
83. An example is DRR which is a concurrent subject falling under Schedule 9 of the Constitution. The national policies indicate the roles of sub-
national actors. The National Disaster Risk Management Act 2017, followed by the Disaster Risk Reduction Management Regulation 2019 are the
two key policy documents but the local government operational acts also provide specific roles on DRR at the local level. These have led to different
interpretations by different levels of the officialdom, creating confusion.
84. KII with UNICEF staff.
40 UNICEF Nepal Country Programme Review
Stakeholder perceptions of emergency/ UNICEF NCO contributed to a range of policies
DRR work: The majority expressed satisfaction/ and strategies applicable to both national and
mod4e5rate satisfaction on emergency/DRR sub-national levels. These include: the Men
40
inter4v0entions of UNICEF NCO (see Figure 4.4). Engagement Strategy for3 8Ending Violence against
37
35 Women and Girls; advocacy on resource allocation
Social policy, evidence, and evaluation
30 in the social sector which resulted in extending
Achi2e5vements: UNICEF NCO contributed to the Child Grant Programme to 11 more districts to
21 22 21
build2 0national capacity t1o8 measure and produce r 2 e 0 ach 370,000 children and fam 19 ilies in 25 districts;
cruc1ia5l evidence on child poverty, by supporting and the National Integrated Social Protection
the 1C0entral Bureau of Statistics to develop and Framework. UNICEF NCO also contributed to link
4 5 6
adopt5 the Multi-Dimensional Poverty Index, which the Child Grant scheme to online civil registration
is use0d to allocate resources in the social sector and vital statistics.87 The cash transfer system
for children Incarneads eda claspoac ityto to imseprloevcet municImippraolviteide ssa nitatio i n s a n e d f h fe yg c ie t n iv e ely im In p cr l e e a m se e d n ca t p e a d ci ty c t o o v le e g r is i l n at g e , p 1 l . a 0 n 8 million
water quality and functionality and behaviours and sector stakeholders and budget to improve WASH
to implement multi-sectoral programmes of children against the target of 900,000 children in
to deliver and sustain safe water have enhanced capacity to provide systems, including mainstreaming
UNICEF.85 Poverty an (n a = ly 8 s 3) is suggests that a t c h c e es r s e t o i s s afe an2d 0su2s1ta.i nUabNleICEF NdCisOas teprr roisvk imdeanda gsemupenpt o(nr=t 8t4o) the local
considerable room for manoeuvring in tesarnmitastio no afn d hyggieonev efarcnilimtiesents in monitoring the exclusion data
increasing social expenditure through a range of (n=84 i ) n the Child Grants Programme due to a lack of
strategic approaches.86 In a decentralized context, citizen certificates and lack of awareness. Only 20
child poverty analysis supports policy and planning per cent of children under five years benefit from
decisions on where and how to allocate resources child grant cash transfers.88
across the country.
stnednopseR
fo
.oN
Figure 4.3: Perception on effectiveness of UNICEF WASH programme
Moderately unsatisfactory Moderately satisfactory Very satisfactory Unable to assess
40
33 34
35
32
28
30
25
25
22
20 20 19
20
17 15 17
15
10
7 4 6 5
5
0
Availability of child UNICEF response and Availability of planning and Development of capacity of
sensitive national or local recovery efforts to COVID- monitoring systems that stakeholders on disaster
risk management plans 19 in meeting explicitly address risks at risk management and
(n=77) organizational benchmarks national and subnational climate, energy and
on risk-informed level (n=76) environment (n=75)
programming and peaceful
inclusive societies (n=76)
stnednopseR
fo
.oN
Figure 4.4: Perception on effectiveness of UNICEF Emergency/ DRR programme
Figure 4.4: Perception on effectiveness of UNICEF Emergency/DRR programme
Very unsatisfactory Moderately unsatisfactory Moderately satisfactory
Very satisfactory Unable to assess
85. Based on KII with UNICEF NCO.
86. Programme Strategy Note – Social Policy, UNICEF Nepal, 2017.
87. UNICEF NCO, ‘Annual Report’, 2021.
88. UNICEF NCO, ‘Annual Report’, 2020.
UNICEF Nepal Country Programme Review 41
Achievement of results have been affected due to
“An issue with the child grants programme is
a number of reasons, viz.:
the duplication of grants by different donors,
n A lack of common understanding on social
including UNICEF. As a result, some families
policy issues amongst three levels of
receive more than one grant.”
governments; different interpretation on
Sub-national level official
social issues, and inadequate guidelines to
operationalize social protection work at the
UNICEF NCO provided budget briefs to the GoN sub-national level.
enabling them to decide on allocations for children;
n The Social Protection Act and National Social
the improvements to child budget allocations are
Protection Framework are not yet in place;
attributed to the influencing work of UNICEF NCO.
absence of these legislations hamper social
Five provinces are ear-marked for introducing
protection work. The impact of the social
participatory budgeting processes.
protection portfolio is to be examined in 2022.
As a part of COVID-19 management, the Child and n Inadequate coordination between donors
leading to duplication.
Family Tracker Survey was completed to obtain
real time data; UNICEF NCO also supported the n Adequate information on children at risk of
roll-out of cash PLUS emergency COVID relief neglect, abuse, and violence is not available.
through the government system for marginalized n The dialogue between a range of stakeholders
families. to create, share, and use knowledge to
support more effective policies concerning
UNICEF NCO, as the Chair of the Development
children is minimal.
Partners’ Social Protection Task Team, provided
n Convening a broad range of stakeholders,
assistance to harmonize social protection support
including development partners, and carving
to GoN.
out a space for the children’s agenda at the
national and sub-national levels are crucial to
Summary of reported achievements of
address child poverty but it is not taking place
outcome/outputs (see Annex 4.2 for more): The
as expected.
social policy outcome consists of three outputs.
There is no data reported for outcome indicators,
and progress towards outcomes cannot be “The big players sit in Kathmandu, but they do
assessed. In Output 6.1, there is no achievement. not coordinate with each other. Often times
In Output 6.2, there are four indicators; one is different donors support similar work in the
fully achieved, another indicator is overachieved Palikas.”
while the remaining two indictors are on track. In
Senior Government of Nepal official
Output 6.3, one indicator is reported as already
achieved, one indicator is on track, one indicator is
A recent evaluation has also noted the need to
not on track and the remaining indicator is slightly
consider changes to improve the social protection
behind the target.89
programmes (e.g., better integration of social
protection system actors with emergency
Assessment of effectiveness: Given UNICEF’s
operational response actors, address barriers
position in the country, many stakeholders
of emergency cash transfer programmes,
including development partners are of the view
strengthen M&E, and improve the understanding
that UNICEF is best placed to influence the GoN
of the relevance of cash transfers across all
on policies within the mandate of UNICEF. There is
UNICEF sections); this review concurs with these
general perception that UNICEF should increase
recommendations.91
its efforts in the policy arena.90
89. UNICEF, ‘Results Assessment Module’ , 2021.
90. KII with senior GoN officials and development partners/donors.
91. Economic Policy Research Institute, ‘Evaluation of UNICEF’s work on cash transfer programming in emergencies’, 2021.
42 UNICEF Nepal Country Programme Review
Stakeholder perceptions of social policy, n Facilitating local governments (including
evidence and evaluation: About 65 per cent municipalities) to produce disaggregated child
of the respondents expressed satisfaction on data and use those data to develop municipal
the four parameters presented; about 20 per profiles;
cent indicated dissatisfaction on partnerships to n Facilitating local governments (including
promote social policy, capacity enhancement to municipalities) with development plans that
deliver child-sensitive social protection systems, include specific activities that address child
and enhancement of national institutions priorities;
on measurements and data generations
n Facilitating local governments (including
(see Figure 4.5).
municipalities) with functioning mechanisms
for child/adolescent and/or community
Local governance
participation in local planning, budgeting, and
Local governance was not a component in the monitoring processes;
original CPAP but was added in 2021 as an output
n Influencing local governments to ensure
(6.4) under Outcome 6 (Social Policy, Evidence
budgets include allocations to child priorities.
and Evaluation) following a recommendation
of the mid-term review of the CP. The PSN was A nominal budget of USD 75,000 was made
approved by the GoN in October 2021. This output available for the work programme under this
was formalized in the CPAP in the Addendum to output.
CPAP.92 The output is to be achieved via four key
actions, viz.:
40
36 37
35
35
30
30
25
20 20
19
20
16 17
15
14
15
13 13 13
10
10
8
5
1
0
Improving the capacity of Strengthening the capacity Improving the partnerships Meeting the sub national
national institutions for of national and local with and between national priorities on Social
robust measurement, governments to deliver an institutions and civil society Protection (n=79)
analysis and evidence on expanded and improved to promote policy change
reducing child poverty, child-sensitive social for children (n=79)
vulnerability and exclusion protection system (n=79)
(n=80)
stnednopser
fo
oN
Figure 4.5: Perception on effectiveness of UNICEF Social Policy programme
Figure 4.5: Perception on effectiveness of UNICEF Social Policy programme
Very unsatisfactory Moderately unsatisfactory Moderately satisfactory
Very satisfactory Unable to assess
92. UNICEF Nepal and Government of Nepal, ‘Country Programme Action Plan (2018-2022) Addendum’, p.4, 2020.
UNICEF Nepal Country Programme Review 43
Summary of reported achievements of outputs Local Governance Support Programme (PLGSP);
(see Annex 4.2 for more): Under this output, there the interactions were limited but were aimed at
are six key actions. Of the six, the annual target introducing the subject of federalization into child-
relating to one key action (functioning mechanism sensitive programmes.
for child/community participation in local planning)
has been achieved. All other activities are not on
“UNICEF efforts to streamline work in
track.93
provinces is well recognized. However, there are
number of constrains, in particular staffing and
“We started with zero status to establish
resources to fully implement the programmes.
a well-functioning rural municipality by
There are differences between federal and local
formulating necessary acts, regulations,
governments as well.”
operational manuals, policies and guidelines
Senior official, sub-national agency
during our tenure with the support of UNICEF.
UNICEF has helped us to enhance our
A programme was also launched to commence
knowledge and skill to deliver services as per
a dialogue with sub-national agencies to apprise
the expectation of local citizens.”
them on the modalities of incorporating activities
An elected representative from a rural municipality
that address child priorities in provincial planning.95
Although at a nascent stage, some Palikas have
Local governance also appears as systems
taken up this in a positive manner.
strengthening in other outcome areas; the
achievements in those outcome areas are UNICEF NCO provided technical support to
reflected separately. In summary, these the sub-national agencies to assist them with
interventions addressed increasing the number achieving the targets set out in UNICEF NCO
of local governments with comprehensive/ work plans on local governance, in particular on
integrated sectoral plans; sub-national agencies planning, monitoring, and budgeting (for children’s
using particular frameworks or monitoring tools/ needs). UNICEF NCO also identified five provinces
mechanisms; development and use of policy to target piloting the child-friendly budgets.
instruments at sub-national level, and budget
allocation monitoring and citizen participation in Stakeholder perceptions of local governance
budget processes at local level. Compared to the work: The majority expressed satisfaction/
overall NCO results, sectoral local governance moderate satisfaction on local governance
indicators are somewhat less strong, with several interventions of UNICEF NCO. Overall satisfaction
not on track for 2021 targets. WASH, DRR, and ranged from about 55 per cent to 70 per cent.
nutrition appear to have stronger results on this. About 25 per cent showed dissatisfaction (very
unsatisfactory plus moderately unsatisfactory)
Assessment of achievements: UNICEF NCO has on local planning, budget allocation for children,
been the only UN agency to explicitly examine and inclusion of child priorities in local budgets
children-specific, local governance issues at the (see Figure 4.6).
Palika level.94 Given that this review covers the
(b) Cross-cutting areas
period up to December 2021, there has been
less than one year for UNICEF NCO to implement
Equity and gender equality
the actions. During this period, UNICEF NCO
Equity: UNICEF is committed to support, on a
collaborated with MoFAGA to mainstream child-
priority basis, the most disadvantaged children,
friendly local governance within the Provincial and
93. UNICEF, ‘Results Assessment Module’, 2021.
94. KII with UNICEF staff.
95. It is acknowledged that UNICEF NCO actively assisted local agencies in planning, even before federalization came into force. These include the 14-
step planning and baseline development.
44 UNICEF Nepal Country Programme Review
Figure 4.6: Perception on effectiveness of UNICEF Federalization programme
Figure 4.6: Perception on effectiveness of UNICEF Federalization programme
30
15
Participation in joint annual reviews (n=86) 31
9
1
39
Preparation of multisectoral baseline for 29 Palikas 14
22
(n=88) 12
1
26
Development of operational guidelines for convergent 16
33
Palikas (n=89) 12
2
20
Development of child friendly local governance (CFLG) 21
31
operational guideline (n=88) 12
4
Capacity development of Sub-national government 15
15
representatives on child friendly local governance 47
9
(n=89) 3
Sub-national governments with functioning 16
11
mechanisms for child/adolescent and/or community 42
17
participation in local planning, budgeting and… 2
16
Sub-national governments with budget allocated to 11
43
child priorities (n=89) 16
3
Sub-national governments with development plans that 13
14
include specific activities that address child priorities 45
17
(n=89)
0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50
No. of Respondents
Unable to assess Very satisfactory Moderately satisfactory
Moderately unsatisfactory Very unsatisfactory
and all UNICEF approaches are expected to have UNICEF has also developed tools to identify
a focus on equity. UNICEF follows the principles marginalized children based on evidence; however,
in the CRC; there is evidence that focusing on the a paucity of the requisite data precludes the use of
most disadvantaged children is a cost-effective such tools in the wider society. Although UNICEF
approach for overall development and towards NCO uses the Deprivation Index to identify Palikas,
achieving the SDGs. there are limitations in its use in identifying the
most marginalized children.96 The proportion of
The situation in Nepal where gender, ethnicity, differently-abled persons in Nepal is estimated
disabilities as well as geographical isolation (or at 1.94 per cent, however, recent studies indicate
difficult-to-reach areas) fits well into UNICEF’s that this figure is an underestimation as there are
equity domain. The deprivations resulting from unrecognized/unreported cases.97 Children with
extreme income poverty affects the access functional difficulties are estimated at 10.6 per
to basic services such as health and nutrition, cent in Nepal.98
education, and sanitation and hygiene.
96. KII with GoN officials indicated that there are external pressures to influence the identification of beneficiaries in donor programmes, particularly in
the provinces that need the services.
97. Social Science Baha, ‘Social Protection of the Disabled in Nepal’; Resilient Social Protection for Inclusive Development; Himal Books, Chapter 9, 2021.
98. Nepal Multiple Indicator Cluster Survey (MICS) 2019, National Planning Commission and Central Bureau of Statistics.
UNICEF Nepal Country Programme Review 45
In the current programme, UNICEF NCO has Field Offices and Chief District Administration
adopted UNICEF’s equity policies to the extent Office to resolve the issue of citizen certificate
feasible.99 For example, during the COVID-19 of marginalized communities (such as Mushar,
pandemic, it provided, with GoN approval, Chhepang, Rahute, Dome, etc.) to expand the
emergency assistance to Dalit communities coverage of the child grant.100
and some others in difficult-to-reach areas. All
thematic areas strive to focus on equity in their The review however noted that some geographical
interventions. areas of the country and some marginalized
communities are not adequately serviced by the
In general, except in child protection and the donors (e.g., Karnali and Madhes Provinces; Dalit
COVID assistance mentioned above, the current community for wasting). This is an area where
programme does not differentiate between the UNICEF NCO may work with development
marginalized and non-marginalized communities. partners and GoN authorities to develop a strategy
In child protection, only marginalized and poor to cater to those marginalized groups more fully.
families are provided cash grants. In order to
be eligible to receive child grant, marginalized/ A recent UNICEF study has reaffirmed that social
poor families are required to submit citizen spending, specifically social protection, has
certificates, which many marginalized families do lowered absolute poverty and inequality. 101
not have, due to lack of knowledge and access,
The results of the perception survey on UNICEF
which has impeded in effectively implementing
NCO’s equity approaches in the programme are
child protection programme including expanding
included in this report (see Figure 4.7). In the five
coverage and improving inclusion of children.
parameters examined, about 75 per cent of the
This is the only programme where UNICEF NCO
respondents indicated “very satisfactory” (ranging
is facing a problem to expand the coverage.
from 29 per cent to 38 per cent) and “moderately
Discussions are underway between the UNICEF
satisfactory” (40 to 46 per cent).
Figure 4.7: Perception on effectiveness of UNICEF equity approaches
Figure 4.7: Perception on effectiveness of UNICEF equity approaches
UNICEF generates communications for equity 7
33
inclusion and creates awareness amongst the 37
16
citizenries (n=94) 1
UNICEF considers inclusion and empowerment 6
33
of persons with disabilities in programming 39
15
(n=94) 1
UNICEF has created an enabling environment for 6
28
including of equity in programming in partners 43
16
(n=94) 1
5
UNICEF requires all programmatic interventions 36
39
to include aspects of equity (n=94) 13
1
4
UNICEF brings up equity aspects regularly in our 33
42
collaborations (n=94) 14
1
0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50
No. of Respondents
Unable to assess Very satisfactory Moderately satisfactory
Moderately unsatisfactory Very unsatisfactory
99. UNICEF, ‘Narrowing the Gaps to Meet the Needs’, 2010.
100. Information from KII.
101. UNICEF, ‘Strengthening the Evidence on the Correlation Between Fiscal Equity and Social Outcomes for Children’, 2021.
46 UNICEF Nepal Country Programme Review
Gender equality: UNICEF NCO follows its global The Review notes the uneven situation with regard
gender equality principles and the thematic to the availability of gender disaggregated data. It
sections are cognizant of the need to focus on was the view of senior government officials that
gender equality in programme planning. However, UNICEF NCO should undertake a more detailed
gender mainstreaming in the programmes is gender analysis and better integrate gender-
uneven. Indeed, the annual reports do not reflect responsive elements in planning. The Review
the NCO’s approaches and results on gender Team concurs with this suggestion, as has been
mainstreaming per se across the thematic areas, corroborated by an independent study.104
aside instances of reporting on GBV and gendered
plans of GoN. Data related to the perception of stakeholders on
gender equality and social inclusion in UNICEF
The review notes that the acknowledgement of programming is included below (see Figure 4.8).
gender equality amongst both federal and sub- In the eight parameters examined, the majority
national agencies is uneven. At the sub-national expressed moderate satisfaction and very
level, inadequate funding precludes them from satisfied ratings. However, about 20 per cent of the
making explicit gendered interventions. Overall, respondents were unsatisfied (largely moderately
gender awareness at the sub-national level has to unsatisfied) on the parameter, particularly on
improve for them to make a concerted effort to gender budgeting and gender parity. This aspect
mainstream gender in their initiatives. needs attention.
It was the view of the federal level officials Concluding remarks: In both equity and gender
that UNICEF NCO should adopt a more robust equality, programmatic interventions are uneven
gender responsive approach rather than the largely due to a lack of data, diffused programmatic
current gender sensitive approach so that the focus, and technical and financial resources.
interventions will appear to have a stronger
Social and behaviour change
gendering element, which will be useful to GoN
officials as an “eye opener”. The Review concurs UNICEF converted its Communication for
with this observation. Development (C4D) Network to support delivery
of more focused social and behaviour change
In the CPAP, many indicators are gender
programmes. This requires improved institutional
segregated; however, RAM reporting does not
backing and operational and programmatic
reflect disaggregated data for many indicators.
approaches.
The findings of this review mirror a number of
UNICEF Nepal has identified C4D as an enabler
areas highlighted in a gender programmatic review
and has included strategies using direct
undertaken in 2019,102 and the NCO has faced
outreach, mass and social media, etc., to deliver
staff and funding challenges to fully implement
the programme effectively. The output (7.4:
the recommendations.103
Communication for Development) covers the
current, rebranded SBC work.
The Review also noted the need for enhanced
resources within UNICEF programmes to
strengthen gender effectiveness on monitoring “UNICEF has added value to our work with
and evaluation to ensure that NCO regularly RCCE (social listening, swift content creation
monitors and reports on UNICEF NCO’s and debunking of rumour in pandemic period),
contributions towards gendering GoN actions which was a learning experience for us.”
supported by UNICEF. Federal government health official
102. UNICEF ROSA, ‘Gender programmatic review of the UNICEF Nepal Country Programme’, 2019.
103. KII with UNICEF NCO staff.
104. UNICEF ROSA, ‘Gender Integration and Effectiveness of the UNICEF COVID-19 Response in South Asia’, 2021.
UNICEF Nepal Country Programme Review 47
SBC was very active during the COVID-19 pandemic
“Even health workers refused COVID vaccine
with its Risk Communication and Community
based on misinformation. UNICEF work
Engagement (RCCE), and the stakeholders have
managed to dispel these myths and improve
commended UNICEF work.
vaccination rate.”
During COVID-19, SBC provided RCCE Guidelines Sub-national official
which were endorsed by the GoN.105 These
guidelines are considered very useful by all levels Of particular interest is SBC work on developing
of the Government. UNICEF NCO also supported M&E capacity on SBC components. However, the
the development of the ‘Corona Capsule’,106 a Review noted the need to re-examine and fine-
media product aimed at controlling spread of tune SBC indicators to enable better performance
myths and misinformation on COVID-19, which has tracking.107
been appreciated by the sub-national agencies.
Figure 4.8: Perception on effectiveness of UNICEF's gender equality and social inclusion
Figure 4.8: Perception on effectiveness of UNICEF’s gender equality and social inclusion
10
UNICEF supports policies to protect gender 29
35
parity and equality (n=94) 19
1
16
UNICEF contributes towards gender 22
34
budgeting/Citizen budgeting (n=94) 22
10
UNICEF participates in advocacy and policy fora 31
38
(n=94) 14
1
UNICEF generates awareness and 6
33
communication for gender equality and social 37
16
inclusion (n=94) 2
4
UNICEF supports promotion of sex- 36
35
disaggregated data collection (n=94) 17
2
UNICEF creates enabling environment for 6
36
gender equality and social inclusion in 33
18
programming in partners (n=94) 1
UNICEF supports interventions with gender 6
31
considerations that make a difference in gender 39
18
equality and social inclusion on the ground…
3
UNICEF brings up gender equality and social 39
34
inclusion regularly in our collaborations (n=94) 17
1
0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45
No. of Respondents
Unable to assess Very satisfactory Moderately satisfactory
Moderately unsatisfactory Very unsatisfactory
105. UNICEF NCO, ‘RCCE Guidelines’ (in Nepali) , 2020.
106. ACORAB, ‘Corona Capsule: An innovative radio initiative in times of pandemic’, Kathmandu, 2022.
107. Some guidance is available in the document: UNICEF ROSA, ‘Checklist on SBC integration in CP evaluations’, undated.
48 UNICEF Nepal Country Programme Review
The SBC unit services the other sections of Indicators
UNICEF NCO based on the funding availability.
The indicators in the CPAP have not been fully
Thus, the use of SBC is uneven across thematic
transferred to RAM for reporting. Thus there is
areas. For example, SBC is very much integrated
disconnect between CPAP indicators and RAM
into the WASH programme, and its success at the
indicators, on which NCO reports. In regard to
Palika level is partially attributed to its strong SBC
the outcome indicators, the Review notes the
element. In health, SBC is embedded in all outputs;
following:
however work on psychosocial support is yet to
n Most indicators are long-term national
begin. Other programmes such as nutrition and
indicators to which UNICEF contributes.110 The
education have indicated their desire to engage
targets use the same basis, and the UNICEF
SBC more closely in their work. Inadequate
programme is therefore expected to achieve
staff (only two staff members) and funding are a
these targets. Lack of national data precludes
constraint for enhanced engagement of SBC with
NCO to report on progress, as evident from
other thematic areas. Nonetheless, it is evident
RAM. In the circumstances, the staff show an
that closer engagement of SBC in other thematic
indifference to these indicators.
areas will help in delivery of the respective
n Some programmes track provincial and local
programmes.
level indicators (e.g., open defaecation), which
On a positive note, SBC did not find any barriers in have been used to demonstrate programme
implementation due to federalization; perhaps as effectiveness at the local level.
they work directly with the communities. n In some instances, the geographic scope of
the indicator is unclear; some appear national
indicators, but some others appear to be of
“We are very pleased that we had an
different spatial scope.111
opportunity to work with UNICEF on SBC
work – we created community platforms n Based on the available evidence, it is unlikely
during COVID-19 to dispel myths and convey that NCO will be able to report on the outcome
scientific information. It was a good learning targets due to a paucity of national data.
curve.”
Implementing CSO “We are in a continuing dilemma on the
indicators and are not comfortable about
(c) Programme management them.”
UNICEF NCO implements its programme through Senior staff member, NCO
the different levels of the Government and through
CSOs. Reporting
Reporting in RAM is uneven; reporting of outcome
The Results Framework of the CPAP provides
indicators is inadequate, but often stated as
the basis for tracking progress.108 This framework
“approved”. There is lack of clarity on annual targets
sets out well-defined indicators with baselines
and corresponding reporting. The review found
(2018) and the targets for 2022. The Integrated
several instances in narrative reports (e.g., annual
Monitoring and Evaluation Plan provides annual
reports) where the same achievement is reported
activities.109 There have been difficulties for data
in consecutive years. Furthermore, the narrative
gathering in 2020 and 2021 due to COVID-19
reports do not provide information for tracking.112
pandemic.
108. See Annex 1 of CPAP.
109. Ibid; Annex 3.
110. An example is the outcome indicators of education. It has Grades 3, 5, and 8 reading and comprehension baselines and targets.
111. The Review was unable to elicit information on the historical aspects of planning.
112. UNICEF NCO indicated that due to word limits, the annual reports do not carry full information.
UNICEF Nepal Country Programme Review 49
Reporting on disaggregated provincial data would The perception of stakeholders on UNICEF NCO
also be useful in gauging programme performance programme management is shown below (see
in the provinces. Fig. 4.9). Whilst about 65 per cent indicated their
satisfaction on programme management, about
Programme monitoring 24 per cent were unhappy; the dissatisfaction is
largely due to inadequate monitoring at the field
Monitoring and evaluation (M&E) plans are
level, and not sharing the monitoring reports.
available across all thematic areas and the reports
have been made in a timely manner. However,
(d) Communications/outreach
there are contradictions in M&E and RAM
reporting largely due to issues in indicators. In general, the outreach materials produced by
UNICEF NCO are well received by stakeholders.
The review noted shortcomings in progress The Review noted that some partners appreciated
monitoring at the field office level; whilst the the fact that UNICEF NCO shares reports for
office uses internal HACT for monitoring, actual their comments. Yet, there were a number of
on the ground monitoring was found to be sub- organisations who felt that the reports are not shared
optimal. Progress vis-à-vis workplans has not and requested report highlights in Nepali language.
been tracked regularly due to shortage of staff
and the consequent delays are not recorded. A number of sub-national agencies indicated
This shortcoming is reflected in the difficulties that they do not receive information/reports from
faced by Field Offices on timely delivery of UNICEF NCO.114
outputs at the sub-national levels.113 The Review
(e) Partnerships
notes inadequate resources in the Field Offices
to implement monitoring protocols. The CSO UNICEF NCO partners with many agencies in its
partners will also find it useful if UNICEF Field work. Of them, 81 per cent were satisfied (36 per
Offices could be more proactively engaged in field cent marking very satisfied) with their partnerships
monitoring of activities on an agreed schedule. in implementing the Programme.
40
36
35 34
32 32
30 28
25
25
20
17
15 14 13
10 10 9 9 7 8
5
2
0
UNICEF Nepal has an effective UNICEF Nepal provides adequate UNICEF Nepal shares with its
monitoring system to ensure timely monitoring to ensure delivery for partners its monitoring reports
delivery of its work programme to its allocations to the Federal (n=92)
the accepted quality (n=92) Government, Provinces, and
Municipalities (conditional grants)
(n=92)
stnednopseR
fo
.oN
Figure 4.9: Perception on effectiveness of UNICEF Programme Management
Figure 4.9: Perception on effectiveness of UNICEF Programme Management
Very unsatisfactory Moderately unsatisfactory Moderately satisfactory
Very satisfactory Unable to assess
113. KII with field office staff and sub-national government staff.
114. KII and Perception Survey.
50 UNICEF Nepal Country Programme Review
Aside from GoN agencies, UNICEF NCO uses
n 69.1 per cent of the respondents
civil society organizations (CSOs) and NGOs for
were satisfied with UNICEF
implementing their work programme, particularly
NCO’s sharing of information
in the provinces (implementing CSOs/NGOs).
and reports. (Perception Survey)
NCO has a database of CSOs but this has not
Quotes from the Perception Survey been updated recently.115 The Review noted that
CSOs are an important partner in implementation
n “Share valuable information clearly
as they are familiar with the communities and
about progress, challenges and way
have regular dialogue with them. Notwithstanding
forwards”. (NGO)
that, there were reservations expressed by sub-
n “More work can be done to share national officials on the capacity and commitment
the findings apart from posting on of the CSOs to further UNICEF’s goals. Many
UNICEF’s website”. (Partner) were unaware of the selection process of CSOs,
which perhaps led to their perceptions on the
n “UNICEF’s extensive use of
capacity of CSOs.
e-technology and, more recently, all
work through the paperless system
These findings corroborate the findings relating to
(KOBO tools etc.) and the notification
the selection of partners in the partnership review
mechanism is very effective and
undertaken by UNICEF NCO.116
efficient”. (Partner)
n “No communications. We are not The CSOs themselves were of the view that their
aware of what (is) happening”. partnership with UNICEF NCO was beneficial to
(Municipality); “No regular sharing them as they were able to “learn the trade” and
is happening in sub-national level”. be a part of a larger programme.
(Sub-national official)
Concerns were also expressed by sub-national
n “A more collaborative approach officials on the process adopted to recruit short-
to knowledge management and term consultants and their competency. Currently,
learning is the key. Focusing more their Terms of Reference is cleared by the
on how KML actions can support respective GoN agencies, but they are not involved
programmes and actions not just in the selection process. The Review noted that
limited to the UN system, but useful some of the reservations expressed by GoN
to other like-minded organizations as officials on the suitability of the consultants may
well. Collaborate on joint research in fact be a reaction to their lack of engagement in
actions and diffusion process”. the selection process.
(INGO)
There are a number of INGOs with significant
n “Would be good to get right
investments in thematic areas covered by UNICEF
information on time. Sometimes
NCO. There is a sense of competition amongst
we have faced significant delay to
them, and the Review noted the desire of those
receive the information”.
INGOs interviewed to collaborate with UNICEF
(Implementing partner) NCO particularly in education, nutrition, child
protection, WASH, and in social policy.117
115. KII with UNICEF staff.
116. ‘UNICEF’s Partnership Review, Draft Report’, 12 October 2020.
117. KII with INGOs and Senior Government Officials.
UNICEF Nepal Country Programme Review 51
n “UNICEF has been providing not only financial support but also technical support in
every step that enhances the capabilities of a NGO/CSO and thus producing better
programme output”. (Implementing CSO)
n “UNICEF should focus on the local government agencies and organizations who have
large networks. NGOs and CSOs now in Nepal are not effective like before in terms
of their performance and transparency”. (Federal government agency)
n “I think many of the CSO lack adequate experience and they are also expensive.
If the money is given direct to the government, more work can be done”. (Federal
government agency)
n “In my opinion the opportunity to work as a partner of UNICEF is a satisfaction for
every organization”. (Implementing CSO)
n “They (CSOs) focus only on budget; sometimes we are not sure whether they are
competent; partners are not very good in their job [capacity]” (5 similar comments all
from provincial government agencies)
Quotes from the Perception Survey
6.3 Factors Influencing the example, the Federal Education Act is yet to be
Achievement (or not) of the Nepal passed; as a result, there is uncertainty over the
Country Programme Results roles and responsibilities of the education staff
at federal and sub-national levels, and thereby
This section summarizes the factors, both internal constraining the work at the sub-national level.
as well as external, which have a bearing on Likewise, as a result of the delays in enacting
programme implementation. the Civil Service Act, Palikas are unable to
recruit staff. As a result, key positions in the sub-
Federalization and the planning process
national agencies, required for delivery of UNICEF
As elaborated elsewhere, the Programme has programme, are vacant, and there is rapid staff
been constrained by the lukewarm ownership turn-over necessitating UNICEF to “retrain” staff.
expressed by some of the sub-national agencies
COVID-19 pandemic
due to the fact that the Programme has been drawn
up and agreed with the Federal Government. COVID-19 significantly affected programme
delivery in 2020 and 2021. With regular
Added to this situation is the low level of lockdowns, community work was not possible.
engagement of UNICEF NCO at the Provincial Schools were closed for a long period, and most
Government level.118 of the education work with school communities
could not be undertaken. Given its position in the
On the other hand, programmes such as WASH
country, UNICEF was able to garner additional
and education have better acceptance at the local
donor funds for a suite of actions to help GoN
level, and the successes of the WASH model have
manage the pandemic and was able to repurpose
been brought to the attention of the development
the programme. UNICEF carried out a number
partners
of activities including surveys to establish the
situation of children to mitigate the effects.
Programme delivery is also affected by delays in
UNICEF actions are narrated elsewhere in this
enacting legislation related to federalization. For
report (see Section 4.4), but it noted several
118. Key stakeholders were of the view that UNICEF NCO does not adequately engage with provincial governments – rather they are by-passed in dealing
with Palikas.
52 UNICEF Nepal Country Programme Review
n “I think to support federalization process in WASH, more focus is needed on
strengthening systems at municipal level for operation and management of WASH
services for sustainable, efficient and effective service delivery, enhancing capacity
for better governance. Municipal governments need to be in the leading position to
implement. Support agency should provide technical and financial support”. (Secretary
of a federal ministry)
n “It would be great if UNICEF could consider addressing the local context-specific
problems and local priorities instead of only engaging so extensively through federal
level ministries”. (Development partner)
n “UNICEF consulted federal ministry but no provinces”; “They consult federal ministry
for agreements”; “UNICEF plans are approved by federal government and not by us”.
(Three sub-national officials)
n “Currently we are working together with UNICEF help local level government to
formulate WASH Plans. This intervention is very important because it will help local
level government to plan WASH activities in their areas”. (Implementing CSO)
lessons for working under emergency situations Fund allocation
and for the next Country Programme. Overall, the
The International Development Cooperation Policy
programme implementation suffered a set-back,
of the GoN sets out aid mobilizing modalities.119 In
but the pandemic also provided new opportunities
general, it is expected that all types of international
for UNICEF NCO to work with the GoN.
development cooperation will be incorporated
UNICEF funding and government allocations in the national budgetary system. However, the
development partners and donors use different
The CPAP and the Addendum to CPAP are based
modalities for funding sub-national efforts. These
on the premise of funding of USD 150,270,000
include: direct payment to the Treasury, payment
(made up of Regular Funding of USD 36,010,000
to provincial entities and Palikas directly, or working
and Other Funding (donor funding) USD
through third parties. Some development partners
114,260,000). The OR component is 76 per cent,
will reimburse GoN entities after the work is done,
which is somewhat high. Figure 4.10 (a): Funding Situation (USD X '000))
rather than providing funds upfront.
Overall, only about 50 per cent of OR funds have
Fig20u0re00 40.10 (a): Funding Situation (USD X ‘000))
been realized up to December 2021 (against
prorated budget up to December 2021) (see Figure 150000
4.10 (a)). This is reflected in a reduced OR budget
100000
for health, nutrition, education, and to a lesser
degree on child protection. In WASH, the expected 50000
OR funds have almost been realized (see Figure
0
4.10 (b)). Some of the donor funds (e.g., European RR OR Total
Union funds for the Nutrition Programme) have
Expected funding -CPAP Realised up to 2021
been redirected to the GoN leaving UNICEF NCO
with reduced funds for technical assistance only.
119. Ministry of Finance, Government of Nepal, ‘International Development Cooperation Policy’, 2019.
UNICEF Nepal Country Programme Review 53
30,000
25,000
20,000
15,000
10,000
5,000
-
UNICEF NCO and the sub-national entities have
regularly experienced instances of inordinate
delays in transfer/receipt of funds. The Review
notes instances where about six months have
been taken for transfers; as result of these delays,
the work plan could not be completed in time,
and the funds had to be rolled over to next year.
The Review noted an instance where about 80
per cent of the allocation had to be rolled over.
The Review also noted that UNICEF has adopted
various fund transfer mechanisms to overcome
the issues with mixed results; delays in releasing
funds at UNICEF NCO are also evident.
The constraints noted above are common to all
development partners and donors. INGOs are able
to adopt a different approach and overcome some
of the difficulties, as they mostly work through
national NGOs as local implementing partners.
Much of the UNICEF NCO programme
implementation is through an on-budget, off-
treasury mechanism and are normally implemented
either directly through GoN agencies or through
120. Sub-national Treasury Regulatory Application (SuTRA) is a planning, budgeting, and accounting software developed by the Ministry of Finance of
the GoN. It is a web-based system developed for facilitating and implementing a structured financial management procedure of the sub-national
governments.
121. UNICEF Office of Innovation.
etamitsE lautcA etamitsE lautcA etamitsE lautcA etamitsE lautcA etamitsE lautcA etamitsE lautcA etamitsE lautcA etamitsE lautcA etamitsE lautcA etamitsE lautcA
Health Nutrition Education Child WASH Social Policy Evidence Programme Governance Operations
Protection Effectiveness
000,1
X
DSU
Figure 4.10 (b): ProFgirgaumre m4.1e0 f u(bn):d Pirnoggr uamp mtoe 2fu0n2d1in g(U uSp Dto X20 ‘2010 0(U) S-Dco Xm '0p0a0r)i -scoonm opfa reissotnim ofa etsetdim vaetersdu vse rasucstu aaclt ubaul bdugdegtet
RR OR
CSOs. There are very few activities that are
reflected on-budget, on-treasury, and these also
have delivery challenges both at the government
as well as at UNICEF NCO level.
The GoN has several mechanisms to increase
the efficiency and transparency of fund transfers.
These include: Red Book transfers; direct transfers
to Palikas, the SuTRA system;120 technology
innovation through block chain technology121
to leverage innovative financing models to
distribute resources, and increase the efficiency
and transparency of internal processes. UNICEF
NCO has an opportunity to examine these tools
to identify the best option to streamline fund
transfers.
6.4 Adjustment of Programming within
a Changing Context
This chapter examines UNICEF NCO’s adaptations
during the current programme cycle to the
following changing contexts:
n COVID-19 pandemic;
n Federalization.
54 UNICEF Nepal Country Programme Review
6.4.1 Changing context caused by COVID-19 the Government’s efforts fully. A recent study
pandemic noted that the Government adopted contrasting
response strategies between the first wave
As in other parts of the world, COVID-19 caused
(2020) and the second wave (2021).123 These
an unprecedented impact on lives and livelihoods
strategies were centralized by the federal
in Nepal. Initially, the country went for about
government, largely on the basis of a lack of clear
a four-month lock-down, one of the longest in
statutes to delegate functions to the sub-national
South Asia. A large number of Nepalis returned
agencies resulting in shortcomings in timely and
from India causing pressure in the borders to
effective delivery. However, during the second
manage safe flow of people and imposing on the
wave, the roles were much clearer with a better
Government to provide employment to them.
decentralization with the federal government
All economic activities slowed down including
liaising with donors for vaccines and other medical
overseas remittances from employment. Families
supplies while sub-national agencies taking the
with children were significantly affected. A survey
responsibility of isolation, quarantine, health care,
involving 7,500 households showed that 61 per
and administration of vaccines.124
cent had no earnings during the preceding three
months.122 The same survey shows that about 6
(b) UNICEF NCO response
million children in Nepal faced poverty, which is a
UNICEF NCO adopted an infection prevention
four-fold increase from pre-COVID-19 era. Unlike
control approach to mitigate the COVID-19
adults, children run the risk of irreversible loss of
pandemic. Some of the key response actions
cognitive and physical growth and development.
adopted by the NCO are summarized below:
In terms of UNICEF’s particular interest, it has
been recorded that about 20 per cent of the n Situation monitoring: UNICEF NCO launched
a longitudinal household telephone survey of
children who live in the bottom two quintiles were
7,500 households covering 85 per cent of the
at risk with increased undernutrition with potential
municipalities in the country to assess the
consequences of stunting and wasting. Schools
situation and needs of families with children
were closed for extended periods and the online
during the pandemic and lockdowns (the Child
facilities were difficult in the rural areas. This
and Family Tracker (CFT) survey). The survey
prolonged isolation in homes deprived the children
also included telephone interviews with
of their normal socialization resulting in increased
female health workers in selected districts.
mental stress. There has been an increase in
The first round of the survey in May 2020 is
violence against children, child marriages, and
referred to as the baseline, with five iterations
GBV resulting in disharmony at the family level.
(July, August, October, December 2020, and
Response January 2021). In 2021, there have been two
thematic surveys on job and income loss (May
(a) Government of Nepal response
2021), and public health and social measures
The Government launched a suite of relief (June 2021).
measures including cash transfers to mitigate n Real-time data collection: UNICEF NCO also
economic hardships faced by the citizenry. Nepal gathered real-time data on health services
has had episodes of national calamities, the through mobile data collection during 15 May
latest being the earthquake in 2015; thus the to 31 August, from 336 health facilities in
Government has much experience in dealing with 35 districts (covering 6 out of the country’s
emergency situations. Yet, COVID-19 stretched 7 provinces) using ONA. This was facilitated
122. UNICEF, Child and Family Tracker Survey, 2020.
123. KII with senior government officials.
124. Thapa, Manish, ‘Government’s response during COVID-19 Pandemic in Nepal’, Munich Personal RePEc Archive (Paper No. 111666), 2020.
UNICEF Nepal Country Programme Review 55
through the three field offices. Data is available vaccine doses, and the logistics of procurement and
online.125 A report on this task notes several logistics of delivery are well appreciated at all levels
lessons that are very relevant for any service- of the GoN and other development partners.128 In
based data collection during an emergency, nutrition, UNICEF NCO maintained its tempo on
and include: (i) weekly data collection was the normal programme, and the achievements of
too much of a burden for health workers Vitamin A administration which reached 85 per cent
and data collectors; (ii) one call with health in spite of COVID-related difficulties are considered
facility staff would take a minimum of 30 a model by UNICEF. It continued to support work
minutes (the questionnaire had 36 questions) on reducing stunting and wasting by convincing
and if one person alone did not have all the MoHP to restart outpatient treatment centres
information it could take an hour and involve (OTC) and nutrition rehabilitation homes (NRH) to
several people; (iii) refusal of health workers treat SAM, and the resultant 50 per cent reduction
to provide information due to the overload of is a significant achievement to avoid reversal
reporting requirements via different formats; of progress in reducing stunting. The WASH
and (iv) limitations in ONA software for data programme was coordinated by UNICEF as cluster
analysis and exchange. co-lead and provided direct support to over 70 cluster
members on WASH services, critical supplies to
The Review notes that information from CFT
communities, health care facilities, schools, etc.
was useful to GoN authorities in deciding priority
UNICEF’s hygiene promotion campaign reached
actions relating to the deployment of health
3.15 million, and about 125,000 people benefitted
services.126 This information also enhanced
from the installation of 559 contactless hand-
the national knowledge on the situation of
washing stations at border crossings. The training
children during COVID-19. UNICEF NCO did
programmes on WASH were considered very
not significantly change its programming in the
opportune and have long-term benefits on WASH
current cycle based on this information; however,
acceptance by the community. These experiences
the information will be useful in future UNICEF
are well recognized by the sub-national agencies as
programming in the next Country Programme.
replicable efforts.129 In education, UNICEF NCO
Although the analysis took time, the potential of
supported 327 schools in 16 priority Palikas on
these tools in emergencies such as flash floods in
inclusive learning. It switched to virtual training for
smaller geographic areas has been demonstrated.
teachers and introduced a new system for individual
education plans for children with disabilities (CwD),
UNICEF NCO’s thematic area responses are
advocated against use of schools as quarantine
considered timely and important contributions
centres and cleaned 329 schools once they were
towards GoN’s COVID-19 management
reopened. UNICEF brought global experiences to
strategies.127 The following section provides an
determine school opening options and provided
analysis of UNICEF responses.
self-learning materials during isolation. UNICEF
NCO also printed and distributed hardcopies to
In health, NCO supported MoHP with risk
over 200,000 children from 175 Palikas across 7
communication which was considered very useful
provinces and circulated self-learning materials to
and replicated by GoN. Its work on contact tracing
36,000 vulnerable children, including 200 CwD.
and quarantine at federal, provincial, and local levels;
As a specialist agency, UNICEF’s contribution in
PCR testing, case management, and on improving
education during the pandemic has been taken up
laboratory capacities and training of health staff
with much enthusiasm.130 In social protection,
have been swift. It provided 39 million COVID-19
125. See: https://ona.io/bibajracharya/68516/502812#/saved-charts
126. KII with senior GoN Officials.
127. KII with key GoN Officials.
128. Information from KIIs.
129. KIIs with GoN officials.
56 UNICEF Nepal Country Programme Review
UNICEF advocated for protecting social spending, n Investments in preparedness paid off during
in particular planned investments in the Child Grants the COVID-19 response, where Child Club
and launched a direct response with a one-off cash networks and communities who were part of
transfer to 10,000 families. UNICEF also supported the CC DRR programme played a dominant
the roll out of cash PLUS emergency relief through role in relaying COVID messages.
the government system. In emergency/DRR, n CFT was an important source of data on the
UNICEF responded to floods, landslides, and situation and was applied to all programme
cold waves with direct humanitarian assistance interventions. CO anticipates incorporating real-
as well as trained municipal representatives and time learning in the next Country Programme.
community members on DRR, climate change,
and COVID-19. In child protection, UNICEF NCO
supported continued service delivery through Quotes from the
adaptation and scaling up mental health and GBV Perception Survey
responses and early intervention mechanisms.
A new protection-monitoring and reporting n “UNICEF’s work on COVID-19,
mechanism was established. UNICEF NCO scaled especially SBC, has been visible in
up parenting support interventions in response to providing guidance and collaborative
CFT showing that half of all families experienced leadership to the government to
increased stress levels. promote critical life-saving messaging,
and more need-based and regular
COVID-19 related work of the thematic areas information sharing”. (INGO)
was well supported by SBC, which provided n “UNICEF’s work has been supporting
RCCE guidelines endorsed by GoN,131 as well in strengthening Nepal Government’s
as developing the ‘Corona Capsule’,132 a media interventions in the provincial and local
product aimed at controlling the spread of myths context; this enabled the government’s
line agencies to cope with emergency
and misinformation on COVID-19. These initiatives
situation like COVID-19/Flood. The
are well accepted by the sub-national agencies.
programme has also enhanced the
Lessons learned from COVID-19 management capability of local as well as provincial
experience:133 government stakeholders in better
management of information and timely
n The Country Office noted the need for greater
response during emergencies”. (NGO)
flexibility in funding to facilitate repurposing
n “We are very thankful to the excellent
of programmes to adapt to changed needs
COVID-19 response, including
and deliver results on the ground such as in
vaccination, logistics, and supply chain
adjusting geographic locations and specific
management, which were all efficiently
targets. The Field Offices could not make
handled by UNICEF”. (Federal ministry)
these changes without recourse to the NCO
Key Informant
and limited the capacity to effectively respond
in a timely manner. • “UNICEF’s leadership in providing
n Engagement of local leaders on the guidelines for reopening of schools
helped the Government very much;
immunizations led to proactive social
however, the process could have
mobilization, high coverage for the measles
been more efficient if there was better
and Vitamin A campaigns in 2020, and resource
coordination within UNICEF”. (UN
allocations in local annual plans.
Agency)
130. KIIs with GoN officials.
131. UNICEF NCO, ‘RCCE Guidelines’ (In Nepali), 2020.
132. ACORAB, ‘Corona Capsule: An innovative radio initiative in times of pandemic’, Kathmandu, 2022.
133. Annual reports of 2020 and 2021; KIIs.
UNICEF Nepal Country Programme Review 57
6.4.2 Changing context caused by federalization had been devolved during the year, impacting
systems, resources, and capacity at the local level
The Constitution of Nepal was promulgated in
to absorb new functions. Capacity was restrained
2015 creating three non-hierarchical tiers of the
by a lack of awareness, technical expertise,
government, viz., federal, provincial, and local.
and resources. Much was still unclear. In the
This timing predates the planning for the current
meantime, the GoN published a report setting
CP. Nonetheless, UNICEF NCO was cognizant of
out division of responsibilities between the three
the impending transition to a federal system of
levels of the government.137 In the second year
government. The elections in 2017 elected a new
of implementation, UNICEF NCO considered
government, which reaffirmed the transition. The
federalization less as a challenge and more as an
actual roll-out of federalism started with the new
opportunity – even an enabling factor.138 It further
government taking office in early 2018, at the
stated that federalization would allow “greater
same time the Country Programme commenced
engagement with local officials and has resulted
implementation. The devolution of powers
in support being provided directly to government
under the new constitution delegated subjects
officials responsible for implementation”. It noted
of interest to UNICEF into local, provincial, and
the additional human and financial resources
concurrent lists, which provided the legal base to
needed (to service 50 highly diverse and
implement programmes.
geographically dispersed municipalities) as well
as a lack of donor funds were major constraints to
Federalization was expected to improve the reach
service the Palikas.
of support to the most vulnerable communities; it
was also expected to channel resources to Palikas
The mid-term review of UNICEF CP examined
so that the communities stand out to benefit more
the issues and recommended establishing an
in the new process.134
output to support federalization work. The new
output was designed to contribute to enhanced
Federalization has two dimensions viz.,
capacity of the provincial and local governments
conceptual and structural. The devolution of
to legislate, plan, budget, and monitor measures
people’s sovereignty and state powers to every
to addressing the needs of children at the local
level of government is conceptual. The existence
level and was expected to be implemented in close
of two or more levels of government is structural.
collaboration with MoFAGA and the Provincial and
In federalism, every level of government exercises
Local Governance Support Programme (PLGSP).
an autonomous, self-governing, and collective
In addition, governance was mainstreamed across
form of government and no level of government
sectoral areas, in the last output under each
is subordinate to another level. Nepal is a non-
outcome which had a system strengthening focus.
hierarchical federal country, where each level is
All sector PSNs have federalism under assumptions
independent.135
– that the establishment of a federal state with
At the end of the first year of the CP, UNICEF devolution of power will proceed smoothly and
NCO reported federalization as a key constraint that the functional distribution of the different tiers
in implementation and listed a host of challenges of government will happen soon.139 GoN approved
NCO had to manage.136 Functions and financial this output in 2021, thus this review had only less
systems previously managed at the central level than one year’s work to assess.
134. KII with National Planning Commission.
135. The Constitution mentions a cooperative federal system with cooperation, collaboration, and coexistent forms of federalism.
136. UNICEF NCO, ‘Annual Report’, 2018.
137. Unbundling Federalism Implementation and Administration Restructuring Coordination Committee, Government of Nepal, 2019; Unbundling/
Detailing of List of Exclusive and Concurrent Powers of the Federation, the State (Province) and the Local Level Provisioned in the Schedule 5, 6, 7,
8, 9 of the Constitution of Nepal.
138. UNICEF NCO, ‘Annual Report’, 2019.
139. The PSNs are dated 2021 but are likely to have been written before.
58 UNICEF Nepal Country Programme Review
In the PSN for Social Policy, the overall approach The Review noted that many sub-national officials
of UNICEF to federalism and decentralization is regard field offices as de facto UNICEF in Nepal.
described. It is explicitly stated that this is intended As a consequence, their expectation is for the
to be implemented across different sectors, in all Field Offices to function independently and take
programmes and FOs. decisions as the situation demands.
UNICEF support In general, stakeholders were of the view that
field offices do not enjoy a level of autonomy
At the national level, UNICEF NCO supports
required to perform their tasks efficiently and
the Ministry of Federal Affairs and General
effectively. Even small contracts with third
Administration (MoFAGA); Ministry of Education,
parties require approval from NCO, Kathmandu.
Science and Technology (MoEST); Ministry of
Cumbersome administrative and procurement
Water Supply and Sanitation (MoWSS); and
procedures requiring intervention of NCO are also
Ministry of Health and Population (MoHP) to
constraints.140
formulate guidelines and strategies related
to nutrition, education, health, WASH, social
The Field Offices are also understaffed. Where
protection and disaster risk reduction in line
they have to serve more than one province, staff
with the policies of the GoN. At the provincial
are stretched and unable to provide the required
level, UNICEF NCO supported the formulation
service to the expected quality. The technical
of the periodic plan of Lumbini Province,
expertise in the Field Offices is also limited; this is
including policy advocacy, advocacy for public
usually overcome by hiring consultants.
financing for children, and rolling out of sectoral
development plans. At Palika level, UNICEF
Assessment of UNICEF NCO performance under
NCO supports periodic planning, annual plan
federalization
formulation, and advocacy for children’s welfare.
The support includes providing technical advice Implementation of the Programme in the
on programme matters, capacity development federalized system has met with internal and
of sub-national staff, advocacy on the adaptation external challenging situations, which are
of good practices and systems developed under summarized below:
the Child-Friendly Local Governance (CFLG)
Internal challenges
project under the previous CP (2013-2017), budget
analysis, and providing support for national social
n The planning process adopted by UNICEF
protection system planning and system building in
NCO is perceived as a top-down approach,
a decentralized context.
and the Review has been presented with
evidence of exclusion of needs expressed at
Field Offices
the Palika level. The sub-national rolling work
UNICEF Nepal has three field offices servicing plan is agreed with the Federal Government
the provinces in which they work; one of the Field and is a point of dissention amongst the
Offices is responsible for two provinces. On behalf sub-national officials. Furthermore, there has
of UNICEF NCO, the Field Offices also enter into been disagreement on the identification of
agreements with provincial and local governments. Palikas for UNICEF interventions. As a result,
They are important “intelligence” points to pick up there is a degree of reservation at all levels
local level needs for consideration for support and of government about the entire planning
function as the liaison point between NCO and process.
the sub-national government agencies.
140. Sub-national agencies wish to be involved in the selection process of consultants (see Section 4.2.2 (e)).
UNICEF Nepal Country Programme Review 59
n UNICEF NCO has not adequately projects at Palika level results in duplication of
“decentralized” its operations in keeping with efforts by donors.
the federalization to enable field offices to
Concluding remarks
proactively engage in the planning process
and make decisions in implementation. The federalization environment has been
n Capacity development efforts of UNICEF challenging. UNICEF NCO has been constrained
NCO are not well-targeted. There has been no to adjust to the new situation, in spite of the fact
formal sectoral capacity needs assessment that UNICEF NCO has previous experience of
nor assessment of the capacity development working with District Development Councils and
initiatives undertaken by UNICEF NCO. Village Development Councils in planning and
The training modules are often prepared advocating budget allocations before the formal
by implementing partners and not always programme of decentralization was launched.
assessed for quality by UNICEF.141 In the new outputs introduced in 2021, it is too
early to expect changes. While some challenges
n UNICEF NCO’s engagement at the provincial
are external and beyond the control of UNICEF
level is minimal; the provincial needs are not
NCO, there is scope for adjustment of internal
adequately reflected in the work plans.142
mechanisms and procedures to mitigate some of
n UNICEF’s financial year is not synchronized
the constraints faced by NCO.
with that of the Government; on occasion,
this has led to difficulties of reporting.143
6.5 Strategic Positioning
External challenges
UNICEF strategic engagement helps leverage
n As the procedure governing the fund transfer policies and resources for children
system to sub-national levels is based on the
Development Aid Policy of the GoN, UNICEF UNICEF NCO is well regarded amongst the higher
NCO has experienced difficulties in a timely echelons of the Government and enjoys the
transfer of funds to sub-national entities, confidence and trust of the agencies. It is noted
causing inordinate delays in implementation. for bringing global best practices for children’s
welfare. It has a unique position with regard to
n Some key legislations (e.g., Civil Service Act,
child protection, where UNICEF is considered
Education Act) to effectively devolve functions
a specialist agency and leads child protection
are not in place. There is still a lack of clarity on
advocacy in Nepal. UNICEF’s contribution to the
the roles and responsibilities of local authority
education sector is also regarded as very special,
agencies regarding some functions.
cemented by the long-term partnership with the
n Human resources and their capacities (and
Government.
frequent staff turnover) at the sub-national
level are not to the expected level,144 thus
In regard to WASH, health and nutrition and
programme implementation does not receive
DRR, there are a number of other UN Agencies,
full attention of the agencies causing delays
development partners and INGOs who are active;
in delivery. Furthermore, political differences
indeed some bring more investments than
at the local authority level are not uncommon
UNICEF, and not surprisingly, the Government’s
causing implementation difficulties.
positioning of the agencies depends on their
n Inadequate coordination amongst GoN investments.145
agencies as well as with development
141. KIIs with sub-national agencies.
142. Ibid.
143. Ibid.
144. KIIs with national and sub-national agencies.
145. For example, USAID investment in education is very high, compared to UNICEF.
60 UNICEF Nepal Country Programme Review
Quotes from the Perception Survey
n “The provincial governments need to see UNICEF more as a serious partner and having
more junior staff in most of the interactions along with INGO and NGO partners undermines
provincial-level trust and commitment. At the municipality level this works well but to
strengthen the provincial government more professional senior-level engagement is
needed”. (INGO Representative)
n “Not sure whether UNICEF has understood the federalism and its implications for us”.
(Palika)
n “The office cannot make decisions on our requests as it go to head office long time (sic.)”;
“UNICEF take long time to approve our request because of head office Kathmandu” (Both
from Palikas)
n “Child Grant Programme did not consider difficult working areas”. (Palika)
n “Quick and efficient adjustment to increased responsibilities of municipalities”. (Donor)
n “UNICEF agreements are with federal government”. (Provincial ministry)
n “UNICEF shall invest in balanced way with CSOs and governments. Engagement and
strengthening with local mechanisms and local government shall contribute better
coordination with federal and province”. (Suggestion for improvement: Federal ministry)
• “UNICEF is too much involved with issues of federalism; there are other agencies to do
this”. (Federal ministry)
• “UNICEF conducts workshops but we are not sure of results”. (Sub-national official)
• “Fiscal year of government and UNICEF should be similar so that DCT modality will be
helpful”. (Palika)
UNICEF’s influence in launching the Multi- As with many countries, policy changes require
Sectoral Nutrition Plan (currently in Phase II time and much effort. It is known that some key
with a possibility of Phase III) is well recognized policies (e.g., Civil Service Act; Education, Social
by the authorities. It has brought significant Protection) required for smooth implementation
donor funding for implementation and has very of the programmes, particularly at the sub-
much benefitted the poorer communities in the national level, are yet to be finalized. UNICEF NCO
provinces. UNICEF NCO has been successful in has been persistent in its efforts to bring about
leveraging donor funding for the expansion of the the required policy changes, particularly in the
Child Grants Programme from 14 districts to 25 light of federalization. For example, UNICEF NCO
districts, covering an additional 375,000 children. emphasized at the International Development
It also influenced GoN to increase the Dalit Child Partners’ Group (IDPG) the need for enactment of
Grants Scheme. In education, UNICEF NCO has pending bills and acts that are critical in further
been able to provide guidelines on the reopening operationalizing social services at the sub-national
of schools during COVID-19, based on global level.
practices. In the health sector, UNICEF’s influence
on COVID-19 management is very significant, and In the policy arena, there is scope for UNICEF
has been able to provide significant resources to NCO for specific actions. An example is the
the GoN. need to provide adjustments to the legal
UNICEF Nepal Country Programme Review 61
framework to potentially use Social Security Any move out of service delivery should be
Allowances (SSA) during emergencies.146 The phased out, and UNICEF NCO will need to
need has been identified by UNICEF NCO, balance between service delivery and upstream
but the recommendation has not been taken policy work.
forward.147 In Early Childhood Development,
the Review noted the continuing disconnect
Results from the
between the different GoN agencies which are Perception Survey
required to provide inputs toward ECD for holistic
implementation. This inadequate coordination has
been noted in a previous evaluation as well;148 n “UNICEF is not a major donor but has
the trust of the Government as they are
this is an area UNICEF NCO could take focused
seen as being there for Nepal through
action to influence the authorities to have a more
thick and thin”. (Federal Government
effective coordination mechanism.
representative)
UNICEF NCO has also proactively shared its n “Strong technical experts who are
able to advise on policies in high-
good practices with development partners which
level government discussions”. (Sub-
are likely to be adopted by them for national
national government representative)
implementation.149 Its positioning with GoN is
n “UNICEF is very good in providing
demonstrated by GoN invitations to UNICEF NCO
support for policy formulation. It would
in national policy dialogues.150
be excellent if UNICEF support GoN
and other stakeholders during the
The Review noted several instances of high-
development of national policies and
level officials/development partners cautioning
strategies”. (INGO)
that UNICEF needs to “work like a UN agency
n “Since UNICEF has been working with
rather than like an INGO”. This was an interesting
Nepal government at various levels,
observation and further analysis showed that this
the collaboration and coordination with
perception is due to UNICEF competing with
Nepal government has been proved
others for programme implementation. It was
very effective in implementation of
the view of many that UNICEF should focus on
the programme. Also the technical
the policy arena and leave implementation to support from UNICEF and involvement
GoN and CSOs. The sub-national agencies value of Nepal government in every steps
UNICEF’s service delivery mode; any immediate has increased the ownership and thus
disruptions to this limited-service delivery will contributed in the better effectiveness
create a vacuum at the Palika level. An example of UNICEF’s work (sic)”. (NGO)
is MSNP implementation when UNICEF NCO
used donor funds for service delivery, in addition From KII and Perception Survey
to higher level interventions. With the donor
n “UNICEF should not consider itself as
diverting funds to the GoN, field level disruptions
an INGO”. (Development Partner; GoN
to data collection and coordination at sub-national
official; NGO)
level are already evident.
146. Oxford Policy Management Institute, ‘Coverage of Social Security Allowances in areas at risk of floods and droughts’, (evaluation carried out for
UNICEF NCO), 2020.
147. KIIs with GoN officials and UNICEF staff.
148. UNICEF Nepal, ‘Evaluation of the National Early Childhood Development Program’, 2018.
149. IDPG Principals Meeting, 1 April 2022.
150. An example is the UNICEF Nepal Representative being invited for the Opening Remarks at the Local Education Development Partner Group
(Education Sector Budget Review 2022); 18 May 2022.
62 UNICEF Nepal Country Programme Review
Overall, notwithstanding the work done already, it Positioning of NCO strategically within the
was the view of many stakeholders that UNICEF changing context on government plans
should enhance its focus on the upstream policy
Overall, the Review notes that UNICEF NCO is
arena.151
able to adapt itself to the changing demands and
needs of the GoN. This is especially noted during
Convening role of UNICEF
the COVID-19 pandemic which saw UNICEF re-
As stated elsewhere, UNICEF is an important
programming its activities to encompass COVID
partner of the GoN, and its position within the
management work. During this period, UNICEF’s
higher echelons of the Government is well
humanitarian work took precedence, a point well
recognized. UNICEF has demonstrated its ability
recognized by GoN.153
to convene important groups to discuss matters
of national interest; equally, Government agencies However, as noted elsewhere, UNICEF’s
look towards UNICEF’s convening ability as they adaptation to federalization is not as swift and
feel that UNICEF has the influencing ability on convincing. Whilst noting that adaptation to
GoN decision-making.152 Given its normative role federalization is a long-term programme, UNICEF
as a UN agency, its objective and independent could have better demonstrated its focus by
status allows itself to function in a more inclusive enhanced decentralization of its own business
manner compared to other partners. to mirror the GoN federalization process and
introducing better internal coordination to address
UNICEF NCO currently holds important positions
the cross-cutting nature of federalization.
within the International Development Partners
Group as follows: Sub-national coordination is very important,
n Co-Chair, Education Thematic Working Group; especially with regard to horizontal collaboration
n Chair, WASH Group; amongst the Palikas at the sub-national level to
address some of the key gaps in effective service
n Chair, Health Group.
delivery, and also to champion the agenda of
children. This will only be effective with a strong
field presence of UNICEF at the sub-national level.
151. KIIs with different groups of stakeholders.
152. KII with senior government officials.
153. KII with senior government officials.
7
Conclusions
This section contains a summary of findings under the planning framework in RAM is strong: there
the evaluation criteria. are for the most part well-defined indicators,
with baselines and annual targets that seem well
Relevance planned with gradual progress throughout the CP
period.
Overall, the Country Programme is highly relevant
with clear alignment to the Government of Nepal Although UNICEF NCO is expected to use a
policies and strategies, notably the Fourteenth and “bottom-up” approach in designing the CP, the
Fifteenth National Plans. The programme is also in sub-national agencies are not convinced that their
line with UNICEF’s global mandate and addresses real needs are reflected in the CP. The selection of
the relevant international covenants. The work Palikas is also contested by sub-national agencies,
programme addresses the needs identified the level of coordination at the Palika level is sub-
in SitAn 2017; several areas (e.g., coverage of optimal, leading to overlapping work by different
nutrition, WASH, social policy and DRR; inclusion players. The Field Offices do not have the required
of adolescents and women of reproductive age, authority to respond to the immediate needs of
provincial baselines) that could not be covered Palikas. Overall, UNICEF NCO’s engagement with
have been identified. The Programme has added provincial authorities is deemed to be inadequate
federalization to address the issues surrounding in the planning process. These constraints
sub-national capacity to legislate, plan, and somewhat dilute the relevancy of the programme
budget to address the needs of children in the at the sub-national level.
changed context. The Country Programme has
been designed with extensive stakeholder The Perception Survey shows that over 80 per
engagement, and it is notable that the CPAP is cent of the stakeholders are of the view that the
a signed agreement between UNICEF NCO and CP has considered national and provincial needs.
the Government of Nepal, signifying the latter’s Whilst the CP has attempted to provide the needs
acceptance of the relevance of the programme. of children, this review shows the need to expand
programme coverage to some of the marginalized
The theories of change are robust with well-defined communities and difficult-to-reach geographic
national indicators. The relationships between the areas.
outcome and the outputs, in most cases, are valid.
The Country Programme addresses Nepal’s SDGs
Effectiveness
relevance to the thematic areas of the CPAP.
The national indicators in the CPAP are not always
The Country Programme and CPAP have clear reflected in RAM. This shortcoming is a constraint
statements on UNICEF NCO’s intention of for tracking progress and measuring achievements
targeting its programmes to “reach all children”. towards the overall effectiveness and the outcome
However, this intention is not that strongly reflected change envisaged.
in the Results Framework. Notwithstanding this,
64 UNICEF Nepal Country Programme Review
The self-assessed results for the Country Reporting in RAM is uneven; reporting of
Programme are impressive. Overall, five out outcome indicators is inadequate, but often
of the six programme outcomes are reported stated as “approved”. M&E plans are available
to be “on track” by the end of 2021; the fifth is across all thematic areas, and the reports have
the health outcome and is considered “partially been made in a timely manner. However, there
met”. At output level, many results have been are contradictions in M&E and RAM reporting
achieved ahead of time or achieved well above largely due to issues in indicators. In general, the
target. This is impressive having faced two years outreach materials produced by UNICEF NCO are
of the COVID-19 pandemic. Reporting on output well received by the stakeholders.
indicators is uneven; some thematic areas have
not reported on outcome indicators, perhaps due Overall, federalization has also brought about
to lack of data. challenges for implementation. The Programme
has been constrained by the lukewarm ownership
In the thematic areas examined, overall expressed by some of the sub-national agencies
effectiveness of the work programme is due to the fact that the programme has been
demonstrated through contributions towards drawn up and agreed with the federal government.
the outcomes in the respective thematic areas, Aside from issues of planning, difficulties with
although, as stated above, measurements (in modalities of fund transfer to the provinces have
RAM) are somewhat uneven due to a lack of delayed implementation considerably. Programme
reporting on indicators. delivery is also affected by the GoN’s delays in
enacting legislation related to federalization.
Some of the common causes affecting
effectiveness across the thematic areas are: COVID-19 significantly affected programme
inadequate capacity at the sub-national level to delivery in 2020 and 2021. With regular lockdowns,
support implementation, inadequate coordination community work was not possible.
amongst agencies at the Palika level, low
engagement with provincial authorities, and Adjustment of programming within a
ambiguous interpretation of laws and statutes at changing context
different levels of the Government.
As in other parts of the world, COVID-19 caused an
In the current programme, UNICEF NCO has
unprecedented impact on lives and livelihoods in
adopted UNICEF’s equity policies to the extent
Nepal. The Government launched a suite of relief
feasible; however, the Review noted that some
measures including cash transfers to mitigate
geographical areas of the country (e.g., hilly areas
economic hardships faced by the citizenry.
of Karnali and Sudurpaschim provinces) and some
GoN adopted contrasting response strategies
marginalized communities (e.g., Badi, Musahar)
between the first wave (2020) and the second
are not adequately serviced by the donors. UNICEF
wave (202). During the second wave, the roles
NCO follows its global gender equality principles
of national and sub-national agencies were much
and the thematic sections are cognizant of the
clearer with a better decentralization for delivery
need to focus on gender equality in programme
of services. UNICEF NCO’s response was swift
planning. However, gender mainstreaming
and well-coordinated. Whilst it re-programmed
in the programmes is uneven. Furthermore,
its work plans for 2020 and 2021, it launched a
acknowledgement of gender equality amongst
survey to collect data on the status of children,
both federal and sub-national agencies is uneven.
and collected real-time data on health services.
Integration of gender in monitoring and evaluation
Its contributions in all thematic areas are well
is inadequate, and gender disaggregated data is
recognized and complemented GoN efforts in
not always available.
its management of the pandemic. UNICEF also
brought global practices to Nepal. Uninterrupted
UNICEF Nepal Country Programme Review 65
Vitamin A supplementation during the pandemic Strategic positioning
has been recognized as a model. Vaccine and
UNICEF NCO is well regarded amongst the higher
other medical supply logistics are considered very
echelons of the Government, and enjoys the
efficient. Overall, UNICEF NCO adjusted well to
confidence and trust of the agencies. Introduction
the situation resulting from the pandemic.
of global best practices for children’s welfare is
The Country Programme was designed prior to well noted, and it holds a unique position with
enacting federalization; in the initial years of the regard to child protection. Its contribution to the
CO, federalization was listed as a key constraint education sector is also regarded as very special.
with many challenges for implementation. The CP In WASH, health and nutrition, and DRR, there
has continued to struggle with these challenges, are number of other UN Agencies, development
many of which are beyond the purview of UNICEF partners and INGOs who are active; indeed some
NCO. The Country Programme has not been bring more investments than UNICEF, and not
able to fully adjust to the new conditions. Firstly, surprisingly, the Government’s positioning of the
its own operations are not decentralized to the agencies depends on their investments.
level expected by sub-national agencies that
UNICEF has demonstrated its presence in Nepal
expect UNICEF to respond to the needs of the
strongly; its convening power is demonstrated
provinces. In planning itself, there is a degree
by the number of high-level committees it chairs,
of dissatisfaction amongst the stakeholders,
and the expectations of GoN and indeed other
particularly those in the provinces, about inclusion
stakeholders for UNICEF to take leadership in
of “real issues” of the provinces in UNICEF NCO
exploring matters of national interest related to
work-plans. The situation is exasperated by the
children.
low level of liaison between UNICEF NCO and the
provinces. Secondly, UNICEF NCO is working in a
In terms of federalization, there are UN Agencies
changing environment due to federalization as the
and donors who are well equipped to support the
sub-national agencies are also struggling to cope
GoN in improving service delivery resulting from
up with the changes. There is inadequate capacity,
federalization. UNICEF NCO’s role in federalization
rapid staff turnover, and delays in enacting the
is to advocate on child sensitive policies and
necessary legislation which hamper smooth
strengthen the institutional and organizational
implementation. UNICEF NCO is caught between
capacities of sub-national governments in order
the power sharing struggle of the three tiers of
to improve service delivery of aspects relating to
the Government. Although it responded by adding
children’s welfare.
an output on federalization with a nominal budget
(0.37 per cent of 2021 budget), it has not been
able to fully embrace the spirit of federalization
required to adjust its programme design and
implementation at the sub-national level.
66 UNICEF Nepal Country Programme Review
lapeN
FECINU
©
8
Lessons Learned
The analysis of the evidence gathered during the resulting in very close collaboration. Whilst
review provided insights into both positive and this acknowledgement may be due to more
negative lessons, which are briefly documented obvious on-the-ground results (e.g., reduced
below. They should be read together with the open defaecation, online learning), the modus
recommendations. operandi employed in these sectors could be
used in other programmes as well.
1. UNICEF NCO should have adapted and built
3. Local level changes to improve the lives
upon its past experience in decentralization.
of children due to interventions are well
UNICEF NCO had been working with
recognized by GoN agencies. The Results
District Development Councils and Village
Framework, agreed with GoN, uses national
Development Councils before federalization
indicators to measure progress and show
came into effect. With its experiences on
results. Due to a lack of data on these national
local level implementation of programmes for
indicators, UNICEF NCO has experienced
children, UNICEF NCO missed an opportunity
difficulties to demonstrate the changes
to work more closely with PLGSP to strengthen
sought in the CPAP. On the other hand, whilst
the local governance systems by carving out
most local authorities are not familiar with the
its own area of support required for fulfilling
indicators in the CPAP, they have appreciated
the needs of children. PLGSP will come to an
the changes brought about by UNICEF NCO at
end in the near future, but UNICEF NCO has
the district and local level. This is largely due to
the opportunity to collaborate and learn from
the fact that local conditions are well known
the Project’s experiences to focus its own
to the elected officials, and any improvements
niche for interventions in the next programme
towards a better life for children are politically
cycle to improve programme implementation
welcome and are therefore well recognized
in the provinces.154
via-a-vis changes to the national indicators.
2. Some thematic sectors have better adapted
4. Changes in funding modalities by donors.
to work in the federalization milieu. The
The diversion of donor funding of MSNP show
Review notes the performance of WASH
that such changes in the funding modalities,
and education in the provinces. The closer
especially supporting the government through
dialogue with local authorities is appreciated
on-budget-on-treasury modalities are likely to
by them, and there is a better sense of
occur again, as more donor funds are likely
programme ownership by the local authorities
to be channelled to the Treasury in the future.
demonstrating the working modalities with the
UNICEF NCO needs to take this instance as
three tiers of the Government. The success of
a lesson to have alternate plans to keep the
Vitamin A supplementation programme during
momentum of the programme without abruptly
COVID-19 is attributed to weekly meetings of
discontinuing existing mechanisms which will
the Nutrition Cluster at the sub-national level
negatively affect programme implementation.
154. During the Review, the Review Team learned that PLGSP may be extended beyond 2023.
68 UNICEF Nepal Country Programme Review
9
Recommendations
The following recommendations are based on n Coordination of planning by development
the analysis of data and information gathered partners: In order to avoid duplication at the
during the Country Programme Review and local level, formulation of work plans jointly by
are provided to inform the development of the development partners is recommended
the next programme cycle. The development (UNICEF may take this up with other
of these recommendations followed a series development partners), particularly in thematic
of consultations with the stakeholders. These areas where other development partners are
recommendations were presented to the UNICEF also active. In this regard, UNICEF NCO should
NCO senior management at a meeting held on 16 take the lead in establishing Sectoral Clusters
June 2022. with representation from development
partners at the province level for enhanced
Programme strategy and design
coordination.
Recommendation 1: In the new programme n Developing rolling work plans with the
cycle, UNICEF NCO should focus on actions that provinces: UNICEF NCO should adopt a
will facilitate programme design and planning decentralized planning approach and develop
to enhance consideration of federalization provincial-level rolling work plans (or 30-month
concerns. In this regard, the following actions are work plans) to ensure that provincial needs
proposed for the next country programme: are adequately captured in the work plans
n Collaborate with the Provincial and Local (e.g., area-specific plans). The consolidated
Governance Support Programme (PLGSP): provincial rolling work plans would be used
UNICEF NCO will benefit in its decentralization for agreements with the federal government.
work by collaborating with PLGSP to n Selection of Palikas for project interventions:
effectively implement sectoral programmes in The NCO needs to develop, in consultation
the provinces/Palikas and strategically identify with the relevant government agencies, clear
UNICEF’s inputs into decentralization efforts, criteria for selection of Palikas for project
taking into consideration the work of PLGSP. interventions, and such criteria should be
n Decentralization of UNICEF operations: shared with the local government authorities.
UNICEF should ensure that its operations are n Capacity development at local level:
more decentralized in keeping with federal UNICEF should focus on building capacities
structures, with enhanced planning and at the local level to deliver UNICEF specific
implementation responsibilities devolved to actions relating to children and social
the Field Offices to ensure that the needs of development aspects relating to them (some
children at sub-national level, including those of these specific needs have been identified
in remaining pockets of unreached areas and as: capacity of the legal practitioners at the
excluded communities are truly reflected in sub-national level to address child protection
the programme. concerns; updating databases to promote
evidence-based decision-making processes
70 UNICEF Nepal Country Programme Review
and in formulating annual plan and periodic is expected to address some of the gaps
plans, budgeting and monitoring; nutrition observed in the current programme between
supplementation; support to technical interventions at output level and very high-
committees). level outcomes relating to the contribution
towards achieving the national targets;
It is also recommended that a capacity needs
assessment be undertaken jointly with n Develop provincial Programme Action Plans
participating agencies and the effectiveness or province/district-specific strategies with
of capacity development efforts be assessed SMART provincial and/or local indicators to
using appropriate tools. clearly demonstrate the programme results at
the sub-national level; and
n UNICEF NCO must improve its engagement
with provincial governments/ministries. n The outcomes and outputs are measurable
considering the availability of data.
Action: UNICEF NCO
Action: UNICEF NCO
Recommendation 2: In regard to equity and
Recommendation 4: Expanding social and
gender equality, UNICEF NCO should focus on
behaviour change (SBC) approaches across
actions in programming to comply with the
the programme. UNICEF NCO should consider
minimum standards in UNICEF ROSA strategy,
expanding the use of SBC approaches for better
subject to availability of funding.
programme delivery, particularly in thematic areas
n In Gender, UNICEF NCO must adopt a
which have not received adequate SBC support.
more robust gender responsive approach
Additionally, the SBC programme will benefit from
rather than the current gender sensitive
including appropriate performance indicators,
approach to ensure that interventions have
either separately or in other outputs, to ensure
a stronger gendering element; additionally,
that SBC work can be tracked effectively.
disaggregated data collection in programmatic
Action: UNICEF NCO
work, particularly at the sub-national level and
difficult-to-reach areas is required for better
Recommendation 5: Upstream work: Given
gender-sensitive analysis.
UNICEF’s position in the country, it should increase
n In Equity, addressing issues of disadvantaged its efforts on policy development and influencing
children is a priority, particularly in the the Government on policies and strategies to
remaining pockets of unreached areas and address the needs of children.
disadvantaged communities (particularly hilly
Action: UNICEF NCO
areas of Karnali and Sudurpaschim provinces
as well as communities adversely affected by Recommendation 6: In the new Country
caste and other social considerations). Programme, UNICEF NCO may consider the
n The gender and equity strategies to be areas and interventions identified during this
adopted by UNICEF NCO in different review and presented in Section 3.4.
programmes should be reflected in the Action: UNICEF NCO
respective Programme Strategy Notes (PSN).
Action: UNICEF NCO Programme delivery
Recommendation 3: In the new country Recommendation 7: Before the launch of the
programme, develop theories of change and next Country Programme, the NCO should
result frameworks where: review the following programme delivery
aspects:
n The ToC clearly shows how the planned
interventions converge to demonstrate n Staff capacity in the Field Offices:
UNICEF NCO’s contribution towards the UNICEF should review the staff needs in
changes reflected in the ToC. Such an approach the Field Offices based on the portfolio of
UNICEF Nepal Country Programme Review 71
the Field Office and must ensure that there Recommendation 9: The partnerships and
is adequate staff capacity to undertake the internal arrangements set out below should
work programme, both in terms of thematic be critically reviewed to optimize delivery of
and geographic coverage. Where indicated, the CP:
Field Office operational teams should be n Fund transfer mechanisms to GoN entities:
strengthened (e.g., Bhairawa Field Office). UNICEF NCO should critically review the
n CSOs: In selecting CSOs for field current procedures and mechanisms on fund
implementation, the focus should be their transfers to GoN entities in order to streamline
competency and the field presence to provide NCO processes to expeditiously release
the requisite services. UNICEF Operations funds. As some issues of fund transfer are
should also maintain a database of potential common to other development partners, it is
CSOs and should be proactively involved in recommended that UNICEF engages with the
their selection. As a part of the engagement, key donors/development partners to identify
UNICEF must strive to build CSO capacities, and address constraints in speedy fund
particularly in specific technical areas such as transfers for smooth implementation. The
nutrition, WASH, health, and child protection. areas include: synchronizing financial years
n Consultants: When contracting consultants, of UNICEF and the GoN; Red Book transfers;
particularly in the provinces, UNICEF must direct transfers to Palikas, reviewing the
ensure that GoN agencies have no reservations SuTRA system at the local level with a focus
on the competency and suitability of the on UNICEF work; technology innovation
selected candidates. through block chain technology155 to leverage
innovative financing models to distribute
n Need-based support: UNICEF must ensure
resources, increase the efficiency and
that the technical support provided via the
transparency of internal processes.
Field Offices are need-based rather than on a
predetermined basis. Action: UNICEF NCO and GoN
Action: UNICEF NCO
n Internal programme coordination: UNICEF
NCO has to strengthen internal sectoral
Recommendation 8: Delegation of Authority
coordination mechanisms to optimize delivery,
(DoA) to the Field Offices should be reviewed
particularly in cross-cutting areas.
to improve delivery of the provincial and Palika
programmes. The Field Offices are somewhat n Partnerships with INGOs: In the new
constrained in approving changes to the work programme cycle, UNICEF NCO should
plans requested by the local authorities as these engage with other INGOs who are active in
require final approval from NCO. NCO may Nepal and have secured substantial funding,
consider it useful to review the DoA limits to sometimes more than UNICEF NCO, for
ensure that changes sought by local authorities work in thematic areas which are in the core
can be attended to in an expeditious manner, programme of UNICEF. Joint work with such
if the changes are justified and are within the INGOs will add value to developing solutions
framework of the work plan. for children’s problems and will also allow
UNICEF to allocate funds to niche areas
Action: UNICEF NCO
where UNICEF enjoys special interest.
Action: UNICEF NCO and INGOs
155. UNICEF office of Innovation
72 UNICEF Nepal Country Programme Review
Recommendation 10: Improve the reporting
Action: UNICEF NCO and ROSA
in RAM (and elsewhere) towards better
consistency and ease in tracking progress. Recommendation 11: Improve programme
n In reporting progress in RAM and annual implementation monitoring to ensure timely
reports, annual achievements of indicators delivery of the programme and to the expected
should be consistent with repeated reporting quality, particularly in the Field Office operations.
on indicators to allow ease of tracking, Action: UNICEF NCO
including reversal of progress appropriately
Sharing of results and knowledge
noted.
n Given the limitations on reporting in RAM
Recommendation 12: UNICEF NCO has to
and the annual reports, NCO should develop
improve its communications with stakeholders,
internal tracking tools for progress on
in particular with its implementing partners
indicators, together with process milestones
on the Country Programme content, results,
for early detection of implementation delays.
and highlights of achievements together with
n As RAM does not capture the performance improvements made to the lives of children.
of field offices, appropriate performance Providing this information, particularly in Nepalese,
indicators should be included in the RAM. will bring a close rapport with the stakeholders
n Measurement of system strengthening is not which will build confidence and trust amongst
adequately reflected in RAM and inclusion of the implementing partners. Additionally, sharing
appropriate indicators is recommended. monitoring reports with partners will build their
n Provincial disaggregation of reporting is also confidence.
weak and NCO should focus on that to capture Action: UNICEF NCO
the important work of the Field Offices.
UNICEF Nepal Country
Programme Review
United Nations Children's Fund
Regional Office for South Asia
P.O. Box 5815
Lainchaur, Lekhnath Marg
Kathmandu, Nepal
Telephone: +977 1 441 7082
Facsimile: +977 1 441 9479
E-mail: rosa@unicef.org
www.unicef.org/rosa