Formative Evaluation of the Girls’ Access through Female
Teacher Education (GATE) Scholarship Programme
Afghanistan: 2015 – 2019
Final Report
July 2021
Dr Rosaria Kunda Marron
Education and Development Solutions
Contributors
This formative evaluation of the GATE Programme commissioned by UNICEF Afghanistan's Country Office was
conducted by Education and Development Solutions (EADS) with support from Assess, Transform and
Reach (ATR) Consulting. The lead evaluator was Dr Rosaria Kunda Marron, and she was supported by Dr
Pauline Lyseight-jones, and the EADS quality assurance team.
The purpose of this evaluation was to facilitate the mutually reinforcing purposes of both accountability
and learning for UNICEF and implementing partners, and the copyright for this report is held by UNICEF.
Acknowledgements
EADS would like to acknowledge the support of the team from UNICEF who supported and assisted in the
design and execution of the evaluation, particularly Simon Peter Aturia, Kadijah Bahram, Ivan Ssenkubuge,
Minaa Ryan and Stanley Gwavuya. EADS also thanks ATR Consulting in Afghanistan who provided
invaluable support throughout the entire process. Specifically, EADS thanks Mr. Fayaz Amiri (ATR
Consulting) for the overall coordination of the field work, and the entire team from ATR for their time and
support in collecting and analysing the data.
EADS also thanks the officials from the Afghanistan Ministry of Education,particularly officials from the
national Teacher Education Directotate and the participating Provincial and District Education
Directorates for their support and interest in the evaluation. EADS particularly thanks the participating
Teacher Training Colleges for their assistance in facilitating the evaluation at field level.
EADS also thanks all the students and graduates of the GATE Scholarship Programme, the principals in the
TTCs, the headteachers and teachers who are working with graduates of the GATE Programme, the School
Management Shuras who support the GATE Students and the pupils taught by the GATE Programme
graduates for their time and substantial input during the data collection for this evaluation.
i
Abbreviations and Acronyms
ALCS Afghanistan Living Conditions Survey
ALC Accelerated Learning Centre
ATR Assess, Transform and Reach Consulting
BEGE Basic Education and Gender Equality
CADE Convention against Discrimination in Education
CBS Community Based School
CEDAW Convention on the Elimination of all forms of Discrimination against
Women
CFS Child Friendly School
CPAP Country Programme Action Plan
CRC Convention on the Rights of the Child
EADS Education and Development Solutions
EFA Education for All
EQRA Education Quality Reform in Afghanistan
GIZ Gesellschaft für Internationale Zusammenarbeit
GPE Global Partnership for Education
MDG Millenium Development Goals
MoE Ministry of Education
NESP National Education Strategic Plan
NGO Non-Governmental Organisation
SDG Sustainable Development Goals
SMS School Management Shuras
TED Teacher Education Directorate
ToC Theory of Change
ToR Terms of Reference
TTC Teacher Training College
UNGEI United Nations Girls Education Initiative
WASH Water, Sanitation and Hygiene
ii
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY vii
1.0 INTRODUCTION 1
1.1 Context: Gender in Education 1
1.2 Girls Access through Teacher Education (GATE) Programme Overview 6
1.3 Programme Alignment 11
1.4 Formative Evaluation of the GATE Programme 14
1.5 Structure of the Report 16
2.0 EVALUATION DESIGN 16
2.1 Evaluation Questions 17
2.2 Evaluation Methodology 19
2.3 Data Analysis 27
2.4 Limitations 28
2.5 Ethical Issues 29
3.0 EVALUATION FINDINGS 31
3.1 Relevance 31
3.2 Coherence 37
3.3 Efficiency 41
3.4 Effectiveness 45
3.5 Sustainability 56
4.0 CONCLUSIONS: RESPONDING TO EVALUATION PRIORITIES 59
4.1 Relevance 59
4.2 Coherence 60
4.3 Efficiency 60
4.4 Effectiveness 61
4.5 Sustainability 62
4.6 Integration of Gender, Human Rights, and Equity 63
5.0 LESSONS LEARNED 64
6.0 RECOMMENDATIONS 66
BIBLIOGRAPHY 70
APPENDICES 73
Appendix 1: GATE Programme Draft Theory of Change (UNICEF Afghanistan, 2020) 73
Appendix 2: Terms of Reference: (Request for Proposal), 9th April 2020 74
Appendix 3: Evaluation Matrix 87
Appendix 4: Data Collection Instruments 112
Appendix 5: Evaluation Team 162
Appendix 6: Evaluation Mission Schedule 164
Appendix 7: UNICEF Research Ethics Approval Certificate 167
Appendix 8: Proposed Reconstructed Components for the GATE Programme ToC 168
Appendix 9: Key Informants - Meetings via Zoom 170
Appendix 10: Documents Reviewed 171
Appendix 11: Consent/Assent Forms 173
iii
Appendix 12: Snap Survey Data 179
Appendix 13: Stories of Transformation 199
FIGURES
Figure 1: Gender Parity Index (GPI) for student enrolment 3
Figure 2: Culturally Responsive Evaluation Framework 17
Figure 3: Schematic depiction of Theory of Change 32
Figure 4: Sources from where scholarship recipients first heard about the GATE Programme 45
Figure 5: Percentage distribution of contract types 47
Figure 6: Perceptions of scholarship recipients on an increase in number of girls in schools 52
Figure 7: Scholarship recipients' perceptions (in numbers) of lecturer support 185
Figure 8: Age range of mentors 189
Figure 9: Graduate teacher perceptions of how supportive headteachers are in their schools 197
G RAPHS
Graph 1: Trends of public teachers by gender (EMIS/MoE: 2018) 5
Graph 2: Female primary school teachers in Afghanistan 6
Graph 3: Student enrolment onto the GATE Programme between 2015 - 2020 8
Graph 4: Number of organisations supporting girls’ education in Afghanistan 39
Graph 5: Perceptions on how active PED and DED are in supporting the GATE Programme 42
Graph 6: Percentage of students enrolled during 2015 - 2019 46
Graph 7: Number of pre-service scholarship recipients between 2015 – 2019 47
Graph 8: Percentage graduates by type of school they are teaching in 48
Graph 9: Percentage of graduates for different durations before being retained on 48
government payroll after graduation
Graph 10: Percentage of scholarship recipients hoping to work in hard-to-reach areas after 49
graduation
Graph 11: Perceptions of scholarship recipients on increase in number of female teachers in 50
schools in their communities
Graph 12: Perceptions of scholarship recipients on increase in number of female teachers in 50
their communities by province
Graph 13: Community attitudes towards female participation in school activities outside the 55
classroom
Graph 14: Perceptions of scholarship recipients on whether females participate in activities 56
outside school
Graph 15: Percentage of scholarship recipients in different age ranges 180
Graph 16: Percentage of age distribution of scholarship recipients in seven provinces 180
Graph 17: Teaching experience of scholarship recipients prior to being awarded the GATE 181
scholarship
Graph 18: Scholarship recipients ranking of six scholarship support components 182
Graph 19: Number of recruited lecturers each year from 2015 – 2019 183
Graph 20: Number of male and female lecturers in seven provinces 183
iv
Graph 21: Highest qualifications of lecturers (in numbers) in seven provinces 184
Graph 22: Scholarship recipients’ perceptions of lecturer support 184
Graph 1: Perceptions of gender responsiveness (in numbers) of teaching and learning 186
materials by province
Graph 24: Satisfaction with five aspects of pedagogy 186
Graph 25: Satisfaction with five aspects of inclusiveness/participation 187
Graph 26: Number of male and female mentors in each of the seven provinces 188
Graph 27: Number of students and mentors in each of the seven provinces 189
Graph 28: Highest qualifications of mentors by province 190
Graph 3: Perceptions of mentorship support on three aspects 191
Graph 30: Percentage of scholarship recipients and frequency of meeting with their mentors 191
Graph 31: Percentage of scholarship recipients visited by mentors after graduation 192
Graph 32: Percentage of lecturers who reported that they have/have not received training 193
as part of the GATE Programme
Graph 33: Number of students in GATE Programme classes observed 194
Graph 34: Adequate physical environment in classes observed 195
Graph 35: Female students and number of female toilets in each TTC observed 195
Graph 364: Graduate teacher perceptions about the quality of their relationships with other 198
teachers in their schools
TABLES
Table 1: Gross Enrolment Ratio (EMIS, 2018) 3
Table 2: Notable indicators for education (including primary and secondary) 4
Table 3: Outcome components of projects included in formative evaluation 8
Table 4: Focus of Questions in ToR 19
Table 5: GATE Evaluation Sampling Frame 20
Table 6: KII Respondents 22
Table 7: FGD Respondent groups 23
Table 8: Field Researchers 26
Table 9: Recommendation Priority, Timeframe and Accountability 69
Table 10: Number of direct beneficiaries of GATE Programme by province 179
v
Map of Afghanistan highlighting provinces with GATE Programme Beneficiaries
vi
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
Overview of the context
The right to education is recognised by the Government of Afghanistan in its constitution,1 and gender
has been identified as one of the main disparities particularly impacting the education sector (Ministry of
Education, 2019, p. 33). Gender inequality in Afghanistan’s education sector is further reflected in the
presence or absence of female teachers. The shortage of teachers—particularly female teachers—has
been identified as a major bottleneck for access, attendance and retention of girls in learning spaces. Rural
areas are most affected by the shortfall of female teachers with some provinces having less than 5% of
teachers being female and half of the districts having no female teachers at all (UNICEF Afghanistan, 2014).
Overview of the intervention
UNICEF has been providing financial and technical support to the MoE’s Teacher Education Directorate
(TED) through the GATE Programme to complement to the government’s initiatives and to develop a
sustainable strategy for increasing female teachers in rural areas. Practically, the programme is
implemented by the TED at provincial and district levels (as primary duty bearers) and participating
Teacher Training Colleges (TTC) (as secondary duty bearers). It provides an opportunity for a two-year
scholarship on a teacher training programme based in a TTC for both pre-service and in-service female
teachers who have Grade 12 as their highest qualification to achieve a Grade 14 qualification, which is the
minimum requirement for teachers in Afghanistan.
Scholarship recipients are drawn from provinces with the lowest numbers and percentages of female
teachers and low enrolment rates for girls, and they are supported by mentors and lecturers who receive
training (as part of the programme) around gender responsive teaching and coaching skills (UNICEF
Afghanistan, 2014). The GATE Programme was initially implemented as a standalone initiative between
2014 - 2017, but was subsequently subsumed as part of an integrated programme (UNICEF Afghanistan,
2020, p. 6) comprising two interventions as discussed in section 1.2.1.
Evaluation purpose, objectives and intended audience
This evaluation sought to respond to two overarching dimensions (UNICEF Afghanistan, 2020, p. 5):
• Assess progress of the programme in relation to increasing female teacher presence in hard to
reach areas, girls participation in learning spaces and retention; and
• Identify gaps along the results chain and recommend remedies to improve and inform scale up
of the programme
As a formative evaluation, this assignment looked at the GATE programme to explore possibilities of
improving and/or strengthening it using the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development
(OECD) Development Assistance Committee (DAC) criteria including relevance, coherence, effectiveness,
efficiency and sustainability. The evaluation also provided an independent platform for stakeholders to
1 Articles 17, 43 and 44
vii
contribute towards programme design and implementation through their experiences, thoughts and
recommendations.
Findings from the evaluation will be used for accountability, programme improvement and learning.
Primary users are UNICEF and the MoE who will use the findings to assess and report on the programme’s
performance and results that have been achieved so far. The findings will also be used as a learning tool
by providing insight into programme achievements and lessons learned that are based on evidence to
inform strategic decision making. Secondary users will include other key stakeholders and implementing
partners including the Local Education Group (LEG).
Evaluation Methodology
The evaluation questions have been addressed through both quantitative and qualitative research,
complemented by an analysis of key programme documents as secondary data sources. This approach
consolidates the findings from qualitative and quantitative evidence gathered from multiple sources to
cover the breadth and depth of the evaluation in a comprehensive and rigorous manner.
The evaluation team comprised 2 international consultants and a national consultant based within a local
research company to help administer the data collection tools. Data collection was organised in a tiered
approach to mitigate logistical challenges.
In total, 577 people were interviewed either individually or in groups during the inception and data
collection phases. This included 346 surveys, 226 key informant interviews, 27 focus group discussions
and several meetings via zoom. As suggested in the ToR, the seven participating provinces were
purposively selected by UNICEF—Badghis, Helmand, Khost, Laghman, Nangarhar, Paktia, and Wardak—
on the basis of them having high numbers of GATE Programme active students and graduates.
Key findings
Programme Processes
• Value and demand for the GATE Programme: There appears to be significant demand for the
scholarship programme and the need to provide scholarships to females for teacher training may
be substantively greater than the current demand. The findings of this evaluation attest to the
motivation by females to study to become teachers as well as the programme’s contribution to
an increased number of qualified female teachers. The high programme retention rates,
graduation rates and the low drop out rates all speak to this.
• Adequacy and relevance of the GATE Programme components:The programme has very
practical strategies and components which encourage potential students to enrol onto the
programme and also those already on the programme to continue and complete their training.
Overall, the transport allowance was highlighted as the most important aspect of the programme
by all respondents because of the large distances that students often need to travel to access the
TTC’s and presumably the expenses incurred as a result.
viii
• The existence of an enabling environment for programme graduates to teach: The graduates
who are teaching are working in enabling and supportive environments, and have no major
bottlenecks affecting their work as teachers.
Programme Performance
• Programme targets: The programme exceeded its targets in terms of numbers of scholarship
recipients, qualified lecturers to teach the students, and mentors to support the scholarship
recipients.
• Short Term Outcome: The qualitative evidence suggests that the programme has increased the
number of female teachers in hard-to-reach areas. During the period under evaluation 1,105
(68%) of the scholarship recipients had graduated from the programme including 366 (33%) pre-
service students who had been recruited as teachers after graduation.
• Linking two projects into one programme has been strategic: The evaluation noted that the GATE
Programme was initially implemented as a standalone initiative (UNICEF Afghanistan, 2020, p. 6).
It later combined two projects (Refer to Section 1.2) to strategically focus on girls education within
Outcome 5 of UNICEF’s Country Programme Action Plan, 2015 – 2021. This strategic shift re-
aligned the GATE Programme within UNICEF ACO’s overall education strategy by re-framing it as
an exit strategy for the Community Based Education (CBE) Programme that would catapult girls
and female teachers into the formal education system in Afghanistan. It also aligned the
programme with the intent of the Girls’ Education Policy to ‘co-ordinate interventions, avoid
duplication and position girls’ education as a priority in the planning and strategic actions to
contribute to the NESP III objectives’ (UNICEF Afghanistan, 2020, p. 8).
• Collaboration and coordination with stakeholders is an effective strategy for the programme:
UNICEF’s partnership approach to programming with the MoE provides a good foundation for
programme implementation— and potentially scale up —which could be leveraged further to
respond to the need for more females to be trained as teachers. The findings from this evaluation
also show that the various GATE Programme interventions are complementary and harmonized
with those of other relevant stakeholders or donor agencies, other UN agencies, NGOs, and
government education departments at central, provincial and district levels.
• Significance of community support for the programme: The evaluation found that community
members and leaders are supportive of the GATE Programme in spite of the absence of deliberate
engagement component, and that they play an important role in their communities to promote
awareness of the importance of education and to support girls’ education and female teacher
training. With complex issues including religious and cultural dynamics, communication and
engagement with communities is an important approach to ensure that the programme remains
relevant and adaptable.
Gaps along the results chain
• Female graduates are not supported or guaranteed recruitment on completion of training: The
GATE Programme does not specifically support the recruitment of programme graduates as
teachers in any way despite the intent in the ToC to do so through graduate networks.
• None of the mentors on the programme have been trained: None of the mentors on the
programme have been trained.
• Feedback mechanisms need stregthening: The evaluation did not find any evidence of the
involvement of the programme beneficiaries in providing feedback to the programme.
ix
• Programme monitoring can be strengthened: Despite UNICEF’s exeptional outreach and
presence in the targeted provinces through the zonal offices, the evaluation did not come across
an M&E strategy for the programme. Where available, the information/data were fragmented,
out of date or incomplete.
Existing Theory of Change
• The Draft ToC is moderately descriptive, and portrays a reasonable, defensible, and sequential
order from implementation strategies or activities and on to outputs, outcomes, and impacts. It
also includes clear indicators at output level and outcome level.
• Applicable assumptions and risks at the various stages are not outlined clearly and it is difficult to
link relevant considerations for outputs, outcomes and impact or to monitor, track and/or act
upon potential and emerging issues that may affect the achievement of outputs, outcomes and
impact.
Extent to which cross-cutting issues (gender, equity, human rights) are integrated into the programme
• As a gender in education initiative, the GATE Programme intentionally focused on female students
as the scholarship recipients.
• In terms of equity and the realisation of human rights, the GATE Programme was designed to
target and impact areas with low attendance and participation rates for girls and very low
numbers of female teachers.
Conclusion
The programme is effective in training female teachers and increasing the number of female teachers in
Afghanistan, which in turn contributes to an increase in the number of girls in learning spaces. The GATE
programme has established itself as a key intervention to address some of the needs and priorities of
Afghanistan’s education sector. Through the scholarship components, female students are provided with
the opportunity to train as teachers and they are supported to do so. Programme beneficiaries also
indicated that the number of girls’ in schools has been increasing though progress is minimal. The
evaluation concluded that the GATE Programme has potential to increase the number of female teachers
in hard-to-reach areas.
Recommendations
Based on the results of this study, the evaluation provides several recommendations2 to strengthen the
quality of the GATE Programme. These are outlined below in order of proposed priority;
1. Reconstruct the (draft) Theory of Change to include specific assumptions and risks between the
strategic activities, outputs, outcome and impact, streamline the conceptualisation of the
programme, and make it more self-explanatory and predictive.
2. Revise, outline and clarify the targeting in the recruitment focus between pre-service and in-
service teacher training scholarship recipients: The GATE Programme aims to recruit more
female teachers and also to upskill female teachers who do not have the G 14 qualification. The
ToC does not clearly spell out the two intentions and does not appear to be deliberate in recruiting
specific numbers of pre-service and in-service teachers.
2 Refer to Table 12 which outlines all the recommendation priorities and proposed timeframes for action
x
3. Put in place a deliberate component or pathway to support the programme graduates to get
employed: Graduate recruitment should be included as a component in the GATE Programme as
the graduate networks do not appear to be supportive enough.
4. Purposefully aim to recruit more female mentors: The evaluation noted that several key
stakeholders highlighted the importance of having female mentors for the female students and
graduates especially given the cultural norms in Afghanistan. In its current form, the GATE
Programme does not intentionally recruit female mentors and the evaluation determined that
this was possibly due to available capacity in the target provinces. However, the programme
would benefit from recruiting more female mentors for the students.
5. Engage and collaborate with other stakeholders and programmes either formally or informally
eg. CBE, World Bank (Education Equality Reform in Afghanistan - EQRA- Programme) and MoE
(WEE Programme): The evaluation found that linkages with other organisations and stakeholders
in female teacher education is low.
6. Strengthen the capacity building component of the programme for lecturers and mentors or
advocate to incorporate an extended or regular training component in the regular in-service
teacher training provided by TTCs: The evaluation found that though there were no apparent
issues with the capacity of the mentors and lecturers on the programme, the implementation of
this critical component was rather weak and inconsistent. Given the important role that the
lecturers and mentors are playing in the programme, building their capacity in providing different
types of support at various stages can further enhance programme results.
7. Strengthen and include a component for active community engagement: Though it is evident
that the communities in which the programme is implemented have positive perceptions of the
programme, it does not appear to have engaged with community members at any level. The
evaluation recommends that the programme develops and includes a deliberate community
engagement strategy and possibly link with or borrow from sectors that have successfully
engaged with wider communities.
8. Develop mechanisms for beneficiaries to provide feedback: The evaluation found that the
participation of rights holders in accountability and provision of feedback to service providers and
duty bearers is weak. The inclusion of this element can provide the programme with timely and
relevant feedback to assist with even more efficient programme implementation.
9. Develop an M&E strategy and a database to collect and organise programme monitoring
information for the GATE Programme: The evaluation found that the programme lacked a
database to monitor, collect and track programme implementation activities. The evaluation
recommends that at a basic level, an activity output tracking system should be implemented for
the GATE Programme at provincial level and district levels, which could be consolidated at
national level. This could be used for operational assessment—to monitor progress made, targets
reached, identify gaps (e.g. which district or province), or where to focus efforts for improvement
or to enhance coordination. The evaluation also recommends that the programme should collect
granular data on the employment of programme graduates.
10. Conduct an investment case or cost benefit analysis: The GATE Programme, if it is to be scaled
up or replicated, needs accurate data to enable value for money to be assessed with confidence—
a pre-requisite for this is a robust monitoring framework or database. An investment case or cost
benefit analysis would capture the resources needed to implement the GATE Programme so that
policy makers in Afghanistan and other stakeholders have a complete understanding of the
xi
intervention. It could also be a first step for advocacy for the inclusion of GATE Programme
components in the mainstream MoE budget as well as an important point for leverage in advocacy
for fundraising for scaling up the programme, given that UNICEF is well positioned to leverage
advocacy for budget line inclusion and fundraising due to its global experience and reputation.
xii
1.0 INTRODUCTION
This is a report of the formative evaluation of the Girls Access through female Teacher Education (GATE)
Programme that is implemented by the United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF) Afghanistan Country
Office (ACO), and funded by the Government of Korea (2014 – 2019) and also with UNICEF’s Regular
Resources (2014 – 2017).
The evaluation assessed the extent to which the GATE Programme has progressed between 2015 – 2019
in relation to its intended objectives—increasing female teacher presence in hard to reach areas, and in
turn increasing girls’ participation in learning spaces (UNICEF Afghanistan, 2020, p. 5)—against the OECD
DAC criteria, and was commissioned by the UNICEF Afghanistan Country Office (ACO)
1.1 Context: Gender in Education
Research on issues around gender in education in many countries has shown that educating girls and
women is critical to economic development (Alkman & Unterhalter, 2005; UNGEI, 2005; UNGEI, 2010;
UNICEF, 2007). Various studies have shown that female education creates powerful poverty-reducing
synergies and yields several inter-generational gains. Interventions to reduce gender gaps in access to
education can produce economic and social benefits for individuals, families and for the society at large.
In many countries in the global south, females represent an untapped source of human capital for
development (Herz & Sperling, 2004; UNICEF, 2004; UNICEF, 2005; UNICEF, 2006).
Girls’ access to education has been highlighted as a development issue in international conventions3 and
international commitments4 including the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). The SDGs present
gender equality as a cross-cutting issue with targeted actions for meaningful and sustainable
development. Notably, SDG 4 seeks to ensure inclusive and equitable quality education and to promote
lifelong learning opportunities for all, and SDG 5 seeks to achieve gender equality and to empower all
women and girls. These international instruments encourage nations to improve systemic access to
education and participation in learning spaces.
1.1.1 National Commitments to Gender in Education
The right to education is recognised by the Government of Afghanistan in its constitution.5 Gender has
been identified as one of the main disparities particularly impacting the education sector (Ministry of
Education, 2019, p. 33), and girls’ education has been identified as a priority (Ministry of Education, 2019;
UNICEF Afghanistan, 2018; UNICEF Afghanistan, 2017). The relative but persistent under-visibility of
females in learning spaces has prompted the development of strategic interventions to address these two
issues—increasing the numbers of girls having access to education and participating in schooling, and
increasing the number of female teachers in the education system.
3 The Convention on the Elimination of all forms of Discrimination against Women (CEDAW), the Convention on the Rights of the Child (CRC),
the Convention against Discrimination in Education (CADE), and the international Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights
4 including Education For All (EFA), the Dakar World Education Forum, the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) and the Sustainable
Development Goals (SDGs)
5 Articles 17, 43 and 44
1
To accommodate the Sustainable Development Goal (SDG) requirements, the Ministry of Education (MoE)
has shifted its approach from programme-based service delivery to a more holistic and priority-based
approach (Ministry of Education, 2019). The Government of Afghanistan’s most recent National Education
Strategic Plan 2017 – 2021 (NESP III) references key policies relating to equitable access of education for
all. It includes initiatives aimed at addressing gender disparity as a priority and recognises the
interdependence of girls’ education and the presence of female teachers in learning spaces. It consists of
specific strategies aimed at improving access to learning and retaining girls in learning spaces such as plans
for pilot schemes aimed at the deployment of female teachers to rural areas (Ministry of Education, 2016,
p. 55) and providing incentives such as housing, salary supplements, inclusion of family members, special
security provisions, etc.
In the NESP III, the MoE plans to adopt a “best available” strategy, especially for the recruitment of female
teaching staff in rural areas. Among the available strategies is one that identifies women to work as
teachers (e.g., in community-based schools) in under-served areas even if they do not meet the normal
teacher recruitment criteria (Ministry of Education, 2016, p. 55). The MoE would accept initial entry into
the system of recruits who do not have the minimum required grade 14 education or have no formal
training in pedagogy. This includes the top graduates of grade 12 in rural areas who will be given chance
to apply for teaching positions in the local community and at the same time be enrolled in an in-service
teacher education programme. The GATE Scholarship Programme is a complementary intervention which
has provided a flexible way to increase the number of female teachers (UNICEF Afghanistan, 2020; UNICEF
Afghanistan, 2018; UNICEF Afghanistan, 2014).
1.1.2 Challenges in Girls’ Education
In an interview with The Global Fund for Education in Emergencies, the Afghanistan Minister of Education
highlighted progress made—from approximately 800,000 students and very low numbers of girls in
schools in 2001 to more than 9 million students in 2020,of whom 39 per cent are girls (Education Cannot
Wait, Interview with Afghanistan’s Minister of Education H. E. Rangina Hamidi, April 9, 2021). Though
noteworthy progress has been made to ensure, maintain and improve access to education for girls
(UNICEF Afghanistan, 2014), there are significantly more girls than boys who have never and will never
attend school (at any level) (UNICEF Afghanistan, 2020). The Afghanistan Living Conditions Survey data
(Central Statistics Organisation, 2018) suggests that girls at all ages are less likely to attend school than
their male counterparts, and the differential that begins in primary school continues throughout. The
difference in percentages of girls and boys who are out of school increases steadily from grades 7 - 14
(MoE and UNICEF Afghanistan, 2018: p. 20). The older the out-of-school girl is, the less likely it is that she
will complete her education (UNGEI, 2019).
2
Grades Male Students Female Students
1 - 6 3,797,303 2,513,107
7 - 9 1,145,098 675,972
10 - 12 675,142 330,830
13 - 14 116,510 51,295
Table 1: Gross Enrolment Ratio (Education Management Information System, 2018)
The 2018 Education Sector Review (Ministry of Education, 2019) reports substantial progress in education
reform and rehabilitation over a 15 - year period. The number of children in school has risen by almost 9
times to more than 9.6 million—of which 38% are girls— and the number of education centres has
increased from 3,400 in 2001 to 18,073 in 2018 (Ministry of Education, 2019, p. 19). And EMIS data shows
‘an increase of 30.3% in enrolled students between 2010 and 2017’ (Ministry of Education, 2019, p. 26)—
suggesting an increase of approximately 3.8% year on year. The review also highlights an upward trend in
gender parity for primary and lower secondary enrolment in government schools.
Figure 1: Gender Parity Index (GPI) for primary and lower secondary student enrolment from 2003 -
2017
More recently, Grade 12 pass rates have improved with females scoring better than their male
counterparts by 0.13 percentage points (Ministry of Education, 2019, p. 26). Challenges in the sector
remain, however. The education sector review reports that 60 - 75% of the 3.7 million out-of-school
3
children in Afghanistan are girls (Ministry of Education, 2019, p. 9), and UNICEF Afghanistan’s Gender
Strategy (UNICEF Afghanistan, 2019, p. 4) reports that from an estimated 3.7 million children who are out
of school 60% are girls. Table 1 below shows some key indicators for education in Afghanistan.
Indicator Male Female Overall
Net Enrolment Rate 87.0% 57.0% 72.0%
Gross Enrolment Rate 95.7% 62.6% 79.6%
Net Attendance Rate 65.0% 41.0% 53.0%
Gross Attendance Rate 73.0% 47.0% 61.0%
Table 2: Notable indicators for education (including primary, secondary and upper secondary) (Ministry
of Education/Education Management Information System: 2018)
These indicators and corresponding issues have been discussed, researched and reported on widely, and
multiple reasons have been highlighted as contributing factors (Dunbrack, 2018; Ministry of Education,
2019; Schulze, 2020; Women and Children Legal Research Foundation, 2019; UNICEF UNGEI, 2019). In
both the Education Sector Review (Ministry of Education, 2019) and the Girls’ Education Strategy (Ministry
of Education, 2019), access, continuity and retention have been listed as significant problems that have
an impact on girls' education. The challenges for accessing education and participating in learning spaces
are influenced by a range of factors which have a day-to-day impact on whether and how long girls will
attend school. These include the fear of violence, home or child labour, lack of access to suitable hygiene
facilities and socio-cultural viewpoints about girls’ education (UNICEF Afghanistan, 2018; UNICEF
Afghanistan, 2014). Available evidence to support the strategic need to increase the numbers of female
teachers in Afghanistan is compelling (Jantzi et al., 2019; MoE, 2016; MoE, 2014, UNICEF Education SitAn,
2013; UNICEF, 2014; UNICEF, 2019; UNICEF, 2017; and WCLRF, 2019).
Gender norms dictate that more often than not, the male family members are the main decision makers
in terms of whether girls in Afghanistan continue their education. An analysis of the challenges to girls’
access to education found that 64% of girls who participated in the study indicated that they were forced
by male family members to leave school and ‘at least 40% of parents of girls who were out of school
indicated that the decisions were made by the fathers of their children’ (Women and Children Legal
Research Foundation, 2019, p. 34). These gender norms are fuelled by a perception that higher education
for females is unnecessary and this perception leads to a low demand for higher education for girls
(Women and Children Legal Research Foundation, 2019, p. 29).
Poverty has also been noted as a deterrent to girls’ access to education or participation in schooling.
However, recent attendance data for adolescent girls across Afghanistan has shown that ‘some of the
provinces with the highest net attendance rates for girls are also amongst those with the highest poverty
rates and also some provinces with the lowest poverty rates are amongst those with the lowest net
attendance rates ’ (UNGEI, 2019, p. 5). This means that there are factors—other than poverty—which are
impeding girls’ access to education. One of these factors is the lack of female teachers possibly as a result
4
of gender norms, a lack of capacity development and security concerns. For instance, the lack of female
teachers affects girls access to education and participation in learning spaces because, in the traditional
Afghan society, parents are not comfortable with their girls being taught by a male teacher (James, 2020;
Shayan, 2015).
1.1.3 Shortage of Female Teachers
Gender inequality in Afghanistan’s education sector is further reflected in the presence or absence of
female teachers. The shortage of female teachers in rural and hard-to-reach areas is mainly due to a
growing proportion of trained teachers avoiding insecure areas, and also because the current salary level
is not attractive enough for educated females from the cities to meet the living expenses in a new location
(UNICEF Afghanistan, 2014, p. 9). The shortage of teachers—particularly female teachers—has been
identified as a major bottleneck for access, attendance and retention of girls in learning spaces. Rural
areas are most affected by the shortfall of female teachers with some provinces having less than 5% of
female teachers and half of the districts having no female teachers at all (UNICEF Afghanistan, 2014).
Graph 5: Trends of public teachers by gender (EMIS/MoE: 2018)
In recent years, the number of female teachers has increased but it is still low. A situation analysis on
challenges and opportunities for girls’ access to education in Afghanistan reported that only 32% of
teachers—and 17% of primary school teachers—are female (Women and Children Legal Research
Foundation, 2019).. Data from subsequent years shows that the percentage of female teachers increased
slightly to 33% (UNICEF Afghanistan, 2017) and to 36% in 2018 (UNESCO Institute for Statistics, 2019).
Despite the gaps in data, available information suggests an upward trajectory overall between 2000 -
2018.
5
Graph 6: Female primary school teachers in Afghanistan as a percentage of total primary education
teachers including full-time and part-time teachers
(Source: https://tradingeconomics.com/afghanistan/primary-education-teachers-percent-female-wb-
data.html )
The comparatively small number and percentage of female teachers in remote areas has consequences
but it also has causes. Cultural issues have been identified earlier in the report but there are other
constraints which are part of living within a fragile environment. The education sector review (Ministry of
Education, 2019) drew attention to the differences in female teacher presence between provinces as well
as urban and rural areas. The differences in female teacher presence in rural and urban areas—which
range from 1.8% to 74%— have been attributed to security issues and proximity of front lines. This makes
it difficult to deploy qualified teachers to rural areas and also for girls to attend school. The constant fear
for personal safety and the resultant lack of provision of quality education because of the limited numbers
and capacity of female teachers means that an unfortunate cycle is created.
1.2 Girls Access through Teacher Education (GATE) Programme Overview
UNICEF has been providing financial and technical support to MoE’s Teacher Education Directorate (TED)
through the GATE Programme to complement to the government’s initiatives and to develop a sustainable
strategy for increasing female teachers in rural areas, which will in turn improve girls’ access and retention
to education in rural areas. The GATE Programme is implemented by UNICEF ACO with the MoE as the
key implementing partner. Practically, the programme is implemented by the TED at provincial and district
levels through the PED and the DED (as primary duty bearers) and participating Teacher Training Colleges
(TTC) (as secondary duty bearers). The TED provides management and programme monitoring support,
while the TTCs provide the lecturers and the actual classes in which the scholarship recipients are
trained.The roles and responsibilities of the key stakeholders are outlined in the table below.
6
Duty Bearers Role
MoE through TED Fulfill the obligation of the Government of Afghanistan to
provide education by providing an enabling environment for
the GATE Programme to be implemented
UNICEF Provide funding support to the MoE to implement the GATE
Programme and facilitate capacity building for TTCs
PED and DED Fulfill their obligation as managers of teacher training in
Afghanistan, and provide management and support
supervision to the GATE Programme at provincial and district
levels
TTCs Fulfill their obligation as providers of teacher training for the
Government of Afghanistan, and provide the lecturers and
the actual classrooms in which GATE Programme scholarship
recipients are trained
Community Members Fulfill their obligation to provide an enabling environment for
the GATE Programme scholarship recipients to attend class
and for programme graduates to teach at learning centres in
their communities
Rights Holders Role
Female scholarship recipients Exercise their right to access and participate in the teacher
training and support provided by the GATE Programme
1.2.1 GATE Programme Components
The GATE Programme provides an opportunity for females to train as teachers through a supported
scholarship scheme, and the scholarship recipients are drawn from provinces with the lowest numbers
and percentages of female teachers and low enrolment rates for girls. The programme provides a two-
year scholarship on a teacher training programme for females, including those who are already teachers
but did not attain the expected Grade 14 (UNICEF Afghanistan, 2014) to make progress. The training is a
full time course and follows the semester system which is in place in all TTCs in Afghanistan. There are
two semesters in an academic year—which is 9 months—with winter and summer breaks in-between hot
and cold climate provinces. The GATE Programme students are taught as a distinct cohort and follow the
same curriculum as other government TTCs. The scholarship recipients are supported by mentors and
lecturers who receive training (as part of the programme) around mentoring, responsive teaching and
coaching skills, gender issues, professional roles and responsibilities (UNICEF Afghanistan, 2014).
Between 2015 - 2020, the programme was implemented in 17 of Afghanistan’s 34 provinces— Badghis,
Bamyan, Daykundi, Farah, Ghazni, Ghor, Helmand, Kandahar, Khost, Kunar, Laghman, Nangarhar, Paktia,
Paktika, Urozgan, Wardak and Zabul —and provided scholarships to 2,210 females.
7
2500
2210
2000
1500
1000
583
500 405 374
254 311 283
0
2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 Total
Graph 7: Total student enrolment each year onto the GATE Programme between 2015 - 2020
Figures at the time of the evaluation indicate that 50% of the 2,210 scholarship recipients had graduated
(1,105), and 5% (120) of them had dropped out. The programme is ongoing and 45% (985) females were
still enrolled in the GATE Scholarship Programme and engaging in their teacher training studies.
The GATE Programme was initially implemented as a standalone initiative between 2014 - 2017, but was
subsequently subsumed as part of an integrated programme (UNICEF Afghanistan, 2020, p. 6)— Together
in partnership to improve access to quality education for girls in Afghanistan. This re-aligned the GATE
Programme within UNICEF ACO’s overall girls’ education strategy. The programme components, which
are central to this evaluation, are drawn from two main projects and their respective outcome
components, these being:
PROJECT PROJECT PERIOD BUDGET EXPECTED OUTCOME
Girls’ Access through January 2014 – USD 4,493,556 1,887 females with
Female Teacher December 2017 (Government of the grade 12 qualifications
Education (GATE) Republic of Korea) enrolled in teacher
training in Paktika,
USD 10,684 (Other donors)
Khost, Wardak, Bamya,
Ghazni, Helman, Zabul,
Badghis, Ghor,
Nangarhar, Laghman,
and Kunar provinces
8
Together in December 2017 – US$4,000,000 (Government Improved access to
partnership to improve November 2019 of the Republic of Korea) quality education for
access to quality girls in Afghanistan
education for girls in
Afghanistan
Table 3: Outcome components of projects included in formative evaluation
1.2.2 GATE Theory of Change (ToC)
The GATE Programme Draft ToC (Appendix 1) was developed as a standalone document to show how the
programme interventions contribute to a chain of intermediate results and ultimately to the intended
outcomes—in this case to increased access to education for girls in Afghanistan, through increased
numbers of female teachers, particularly in rural or remote areas. It brings together all components in the
individual logic frameworks presented in two separate project proposals (UNICEF, 2014: p. 25; UNICEF,
2017: p. 27) and appears to have been derived from an unstated yet tacit understanding of how the
programme works. The table below provides information on the various implementation strategies in the
GATE Programme, showing actual output against planned targets for each of these components at the
time of this evaluation.
Strategic Activity Planned Target Actual Output
Identifying and selecting 1,200 scholarship recipients 2,210 scholarship recipients
scholarship recipients, and recruited
Providing scholarships and
mentors to 1,200 female
teachers through outreach TTCs
Providing incentives to 224 232 lecturers 232 lecturers
lecturers in 12 TTCs and 120 120 mentors 167 mentors
mentors 12 TTCs 5 TTCs
Building capacity of 224 224 lecturers 120 lecturers
lecturers in 12 TTCs and 120 120 mentors No mentors trained
mentors 12 TTC’s 5 TTCs
Establishing a network of GATE No targets set No data available
graduates to advocate for
employment opportunities
Details of the respective GATE Programme implementation strategies included in the ToC are discussed
below:
Identifying and selecting scholarship recipients
The Provincial Education Directorate (PED) in the target provinces plays a key role in the selection of
students for the scholarship programme. The PED puts together an announcement or notice to introduce
9
and explain the programme after which interested females go to one of the participating TTCs or to the
PED and register their interest.
The pre-service candidates need to apply to be recruited by the PED as contract teachers before they are
considered for the scholarship, and the in-service teachers need to be contract teachers with a Grade 12
qualification. The respective TTCs and UNICEF review the list of students selected by PEDs before
confirming enrolment onto the programme. The selection criteria for scholarship recipients were
underpinned by the following guidelines;
1. Ideal scenario: Must be female, must be teaching in a Child-Friendly School (CFS), Community-
Based School (CBS), or an Accelerated Learning Centre (ALC), in that order of priority (in the target
provinces) at the time of selection, and must be a Grade 12 graduate.
2. Not ideal but acceptable scenario: For provinces where it is not possible to identify adequate
numbers of females who meet the ideal selection criteria, the applicants have to be Grade 12
female students in the community.
3. Minimum acceptable scenario: Where the criteria for the previous scenarios were not met,
Grade 10 female graduates could be considered. This group would go through a two-year
preparatory programme before enrolling into a TTC on the GATE scholarship programme. During
the period under evaluation, 10 students in Urzgan Province were enrolled onto the programme
with Grade 10 qualifications in 2017.
Providing scholarships and mentors to 1,200 female teachers through outreach TTCs
At the time of the evaluation, the programme had provided scholarships to 2,210 females. The female
student teachers were paid a transport allowance of $60 per month for a period of 9 months each year
for two years to attend the teacher training programme, and the funding for these allowances was
provided by UNICEF through the MoE. The students attended specific teacher training programmes at
respective TTCs as a distinct group outside of the general pool of student teachers.
Providing incentives to 224 lecturers in 12 TTCs and 120 mentors
At the time of the evaluation, 232 teacher training lecturers were part of the GATE programme. These
were selected from the provincial or district TTCs and they taught the GATE Programme Students outside
the regular TTC programmes. As an incentive, they were paid $150 per month for 10 months each year in
which they took part in the programme. Funding for this was provided by UNICEF.
Mentors provide support to the students during the practical aspect of the training programme. The initial
plan between 2015 – 2017 was to have 1,000 mentors to provide support to groups of 4 – 5 students each.
However, this number was revised to one mentor for 10 students in 2018 because of the available
numbers of qualified personnel especially in the remote areas . The total number of mentors participating
in the programme at the time of this evaluation was 167. For the in-service teacher training students, the
mentors were selected from among the experienced teachers in the schools in which the GATE Scholars
are already teaching. For the pre-service students, the mentors were selected from amongst the lecturer
10
cohort from the TTC at which the GATE Programme Scholars were enrolled. The mentors were paid an
allowance of $50 per month for 6 months for overtime and transport between 2015 – 2018, and this was
increased to $60 a month for 9 months in 2019. Funding for these allowances was provided by UNICEF.
Building capacity of 224 lecturers in 12 TTCs and 120 mentors
The GATE Programme includes capacity building and support for the lecturers and mentors. This is to
enhance specific professional skills and to enable them to support the new in-service and pre-service
teachers effectively. The mentors and lecturers were trained in gender-responsive pedagogy and relevant
teaching and learning strategies in 2016, at a 3-day workshop. The workshop for lecturers from Paktya,
Paktika and Urozgan was conducted in Kabul and it was facilitated by the UNICEF Education Specialist.
The workshop for lecturers from Badghis and Ghor was conducted by a group of core trainers from the
TED. The training also included focal points from the participating TTCs and the respective PED to enhance
their capacity to conduct support supervision and monitoring visits to the GATE Programme. As part of
the programme, UNICEF provides the funds to facilitate the monitoring visits.
As part of the GATE Programme the five satellite TTCs in Paktya, Paktika, Badghis, Ghor and Urozgan
received computers, projectors and printers to assist with producing and securing teaching materials
and for communication. These were procured by UNICEF and supplied to the respective TTCs.
Establishing a network of GATE graduates to advocate for employment opportunities
The GATE Programme aims to set up networks for graduates to advocate for employment opportunities.
These networks have been established at class level to support the students with employment
opportunities after graduation.
1.3 Programme Alignment
The GATE Programme is set within the overall UNICEF global strategy of Child Friendly Schools (CFS), and
it is implemented as part of the multi-sectoral approach to the Girls Education Initiative, with project
interventions including WASH, Nutrition and Education seeking to ensure the overall development of girls
(UNICEF Afghanistan, 2020, p. 4). The priority given to work on girls’ education in Afghanistan, particularly
through addressing shortfalls in the number of women in teaching, means that there are notable national
and organisational commitments and policies with which the GATE Programme strategically aligns. This
section discusses the programme’s alignment with UNICEF, Afghanistan national priorities and global
education priorities.
1.3.1 Alignment of the GATE Programme with the UNICEF ACO Country Programme
The GATE Programme sits within Outcome 5 of UNICEF’s Country Programme Action Plan, 2015 - 2021—
'Girls and boys of school age, especially vulnerable children in deprived provinces and areas, access
primary education that is progressively child friendly and demonstrates improved learning outcomes’
(UNICEF Afghanistan, 2014, p. 23). It is in alignment with UNICEF ACO’s Basic Education and Gender
Equality (BEGE) work, and it is relevant to other activities relating to girls’ education and working with
children who are out of school (UNICEF Afghanistan, 2018). For instance, it complements and supports
the transition of girls from the CBS and the ALC to the formal education system by providing additional
11
qualified female teachers in areas where the lack of female teachers may be a factor in low access and
participation rates for girls.
This relevance and alignment of the programme to pre-existing projects and activities was formally
represented in a 2017 proposal to improve access to ‘quality education for girls in Afghanistan’ (UNICEF
Afghanistan, 2017). Incorporating the GATE Programme into the 2017 proposal gave a coherence to the
work, placing it firmly within UNICEF ACO Education’s Theory of Change (UNICEF Afghanistan, 2017). This
substantially extended the possible reach and influence of the programme as part of an integrated and
coherent approach to girls’ education.
1.3.2 Alignment of the GATE Programme with Afghanistan’s National Commitments to Gender in
Education
There are a number of elements to the national commitment to improving the education of girls and
women. A key intervention strategy of the Government of Afghanistan’s 5-year National Education
Strategic Plan (NESP III) is increasing the availability of female teachers. Within this plan, the MoE plans
to recruit about 30,000 new female teachers through the Women’s Economic Empowerment (WEE)
Programme to contribute to an increase in girls’ access to education. As a key partner to the MoE, UNICEF
has been providing support through the GATE Programme since 2015. UNICEF’s primary implementing
partner is the TED of the MoE, together with the TED representation within Provincial Education
Directorates (PED) and District Education Directorates (DED).
Other key elements to Afghanistan’s commitment to girls’ education include the National Policy on Girls’
Education (2019), the Teacher Education Policy (2019), and the Girls’ Education Strategy (2019).
National Policy on Girls’ Education: The most notable and specific national commitment to girls’
education is the development of the National Policy on Girls’ Education (Ministry of Education, 2019). Key
objectives include:
• addressing challenges towards education for women and girls,
• decreasing the gap between boys’ and girls’ rates of attendance,
• positive discrimination for female teachers and staff of the MoE.
This policy provides the guiding principles for the Girls Education Strategy (Ministry of Education, 2019),
and it also identifies barriers and challenges to girls’ education. The GATE Programme is a key action to
address specific barriers and challenges and addresses key areas outlined in policy.
Girls’ Education Strategy : More recently, interventions for girls’ education have been incorporated into
a broader Girls’ Education Strategy with a budgeted action plan for 2020-2021 (UNICEF Afghanistan, 2020;
Ministry of Education, 2019). This change identifies girls’ education as ‘a flagship programme for the
Ministry of Education’ (UNICEF Afghanistan, 2018, p. 4) This strategy (Ministry of Education, 2019) draws
out and develops some of the contextual features which affect girls coming forward to be educated in a
school setting and being successful: ‘working children, children living with disabilities,..children affected
by conflict…since girls are the largest population that is marginalized from education, gender can and does
exacerbate these other vulnerabilities’ (Ministry of Education, 2019, p. 4). It cites the low number of
female teachers as one of the challenges to securing girls’ education and comments positively on the
12
political will, set out in NESP III, which recognises constraints and supports action for change (Ministry of
Education, 2016).
Teacher Education Policy: The Teacher Education Policy (Ministry of Education, 2019) specifically cites
the need to encourage and support women into teaching. The policy makes the link between quality
teachers and quality student outcomes. It makes clear that effective education leadership is necessary to
drive forward expected change and that this leadership would be expected from females and males. This
is an important marker as it states that the ambition for women teachers does not stop at professional
entry level. The policy also sets out deployment requirements for teachers, noting that this is in line with
gender of the school. Exceptionally, a male teacher may be recruited to a teaching post which is intended
for a female. This is important as single gender schools and single gender teaching are common in
Afghanistan: ensuring that there are sufficient female teachers will have a direct impact on the
acceptability of education provision for some families.
The teacher education policy makes a distinction made between minimum qualifications for teachers
dependent on locality and age of pupils. This is in line with the intent of the GATE as its focus is on female
teachers in remote areas and in supporting them to reach grade 14 (tier II). The minimum qualification
for ‘big cities’ and grades 10-12 is a BA degree, grade 1-3 teachers in ‘under developed cities and district
townships’ can be grade 12 graduates and for grades 4-9 can be grade 14 themselves (Ministry of
Education, 2019, p. 33).
1.3.3 Alignment of the GATE Programme with Global Commitments
Education has been guaranteed as a human right in various international agreements, including those that
have been ratified by the government of Afghanistan. The GATE Programme aligns particularly well with
the Convention on the Rights of the Child (CRC), the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Descrimination against Women (CEDAW), the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) and the United
Nations Girls Education Initiative (UNGEI) through the Afghanistan Country Office Gender Strategy
(UNICEF Afghanistan, 2019).
Convention on the Rights of the Child (CRC) and Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Descrimination against Women (CEDAW): UNICEF’s work on gender equality and the empowerment of
girls and women is grounded in the CRC and the CEDAW, and the GATE Programme links the two
conventions strongly by strategically tackling access and participation of girls in learning spaces through
supporting an increase in the numbers of qualified female teachers available in various provinces. The
CEDAW is the most specific and substantive treaty with regard to the normative content and legal
obligations of states towards gender equality in education (Women and Children Legal Research
Foundation, 2019, p. 7).
Sustainable Development Goals (SDG): UNICEF’s Global Strategic Plan (2018 – 2022) is underscored by
SDG 4 on Quality Education and SDG 5 on Gender Equality. These SDGs inform UNICEF Afghanistan’s
education programme outcomes. The MoE’s recent comprehensive and ambitious education reform
13
agenda (Ministry of Education, 2019) aims to deliver education in a more holistic and priority-based
approach to accommodate the SDG Targets 4 and 5. The GATE programme is strategically placed within 3
of the 8 the key elements within this agenda, these being;
• Decentralisation and a higher involvement of local community and civil society in the supervision
and implementation of educational service delivery,
• A more equitable and inclusive education provision,
• Increased civil society participation in supervision and management of education service delivery
at school level, as well as in the recruitment of teachers.
United Nations Girls Education Initiative (UNGEI): Afghanistan’s education equity profile for girls (UNGEI,
2019) underpins all the GATE programme components. With a very high but declining fertility rate and a
very young population, Afghanistan’s demographic profile depicts the classical population pyramid. This
situation is set to change as Afghanistan enters a demographic transition that will result in ‘a steady
reduction in birth rates and a steady increase in the working age population leading to an economic
window of opportunity’ (UNGEI, 2019, p. 3). Therefore, the GATE Programme is timely as it places girls
and women in an advantageous position through the investments in their education to prepare for the
‘adolescent bulge’ entering the labour market in coming years, and essentially contributing to unlocking
Afghanistan’s extra growth potential.
1.4 Formative Evaluation of the GATE Programme
1.4.1 Purpose of the Evaluation
This formative evaluation serves the mutually reinforcing purposes of both accountability and learning, to
inform strategic decision making. It looks at the GATE Programme to explore the possibilities of improving
and/or strengthening the programme (UNICEF Afghanistan, 2020). Broadly, it aims to;
• finetune the programme model by clarifying key elements and linkages from inputs to
activities, and processes to outputs, outcomes and impacts.
• identify issues that have arisen during implementation and offer recommendations for
adjustments based on feedback from programme beneficiaries and stakeholders.
• determine efficacy and effectiveness by providing an assessment of whether desired
outcomes are being achieved—or likely to be achieved.
Accountability: UNICEF and the MoE— as the primary users of the evaluation findings — will be guided
by the evaluation to assess and report on the programme’s performance and results that have been
achieved so far. This will include both intended and unintended results or achievements which may
provide valuable information and recommendations for programme design, implementation and possibly
scale up. The evaluation will inform and support discussions with funders to ensure that programme
implementation is in line with intended objectives and desired results.
14
Learning: The evaluation will use evidence to show the reasons why applicable results have been achieved
by the programme, and will derive good practices and lessons learned to inform strategic decision making
for the improvements in girls education in Afghanistan. The evaluation may also be used by other key
stakeholders and implementing partners—including the Local Education Group (LEG)—as an independent
platform for them to contribute towards programme design and implementation through their
experiences, thoughts and recommendations.
1.4.2 Objectives of the Evaluation
This formative evaluation focused on five main objectives as outlined in the ToR (attached as Appendix 2),
these being :
• Assess programme process (ie. The way in which the programme is implemented),
• Evaluate programme performance based on coherence, relevance, effectiveness, efficiency and
sustainability,
• Identify gaps along the results chain and make recommendations for scale up,
• Review existing Theory of Change, and
• Assess the extent to which cross-cutting issues (gender, equity, human rights) are integrated into
the programme (UNICEF Afghanistan, 2020, p. 5).
During the inception stage, some changes were made to the ToR based on the availability of relevant data
and information. The changes included the extent to which some of the evaluation criteria and questions
were to be explored in the evaluation such as the cost sustainability aspects of the programme and
programme’s cross-cutting and integrated aspects such as nutrition and water, sanitation and hygiene
(WASH) interventions.
1.4.3 Scope of the Evaluation
The evaluation focused on the GATE Programme implementation between 2015 – 2019. The selection of
study sites, participants/stakeholders and documentation were based on a purposive sampling strategy
for all levels. The sites were selected based on feedback and information received during the elaboration
of the inception report and in consultation with UNICEF and the MoE stakeholders with knowledge and
familiarity with the GATE Programme and the context. Two main criteria were used in selecting
participating sites and sources of information, these being:
• The richness of information (Are the respondents sufficiently familiar with the programme to
provide insights, and are the documents relevant to the GATE Programme?)
• Accessibility (Can the stakeholders or sources of information be accessed by the evaluation team
safely and without reprisals?)
The data collection for the evaluation took place in 7 provinces— Badghis, Helmand, Khost, Laghman,
Nangarhar, Paktya, and Wardak— which were selected by UNICEF based on the presence of programme
graduates and the high number of active GATE students.
15
1.5 Structure of the Report
After this introduction, Section 2 presents our evaluation design. This includes our evaluation framework,
questions, methodology including research considerations, limitations, and our ethical considerations.
Sections 3 presents our evaluation findings in line with the evaluation objectives, and Section 4 presents
the evaluationconclusions.in line with the OECD DAC criteria focusing on relevance, coherence,
effectiveness, efficiency, and sustainability, and incorporating gender, equity and human rights as
outlined in the ToR. Section 5 highlights the lessons learned and Section 6 presents the evaluation
recommendations.
2.0 EVALUATION DESIGN
The evaluation strategy for this evaluation is guided by Stake, who defines an evaluation as the pursuit of
knowledge about value (2004: 16)6. It uses Stake’s (1975) responsive approach to evaluation, which places
particular emphasis on the importance of personalizing and humanizing the evaluation process (Patton,
2015: 207)7.
Because it is a Formative Evaluation8, and in line with the OECD principle of contextualising the evaluation,
it is strategically aligned with the Culturally Responsive Evaluation Framework (Refer to Figure 2). This
puts the local and cultural contexts of Afghanistan at the centre of the study and includes the meaningful
engagement of programme teams and programme beneficiaries. The nine steps in this framework visually
highlight the practical aspects of the Evaluation Team’s strategy, and gives a step by step guide to how
the evaluation proceeded.
6 Stake, E. Robert. (2004). Standards Based and Responsive Evaluation. USA: Sage
7 Patton, Quinn Michael. (2015). Qualitative Research and Evaluation Methods: Integrating Theory and Practice. Thousand Oaks CA: Sage
Publications
8 Formative evaluations focus on ways of improving and enhancing programmes and innovations, getting them stabilised, standardaised and
ready for a summative evaluation (Patton, 2011, p. 207)
16
Figure 2: Culturally Responsive Evaluation Framework (Frierson, Hood and Hughes, 2010; and Hopson,
2009 as cited in Bledsoe and Donaldson, 2015: p. 9)
Data analysis began at inception stage with the development of an analytical framework which underpins
data processing and analysis for both quantitative and qualitative data. The starting point for constructing
the initial template was the evaluation TOR—the set of question areas, probes and points that the
evaluation seeks to explore. This guided and focused the evaluation to certain data while increasing
consistency and reliability during the coding process.
As the commissioner of the evaluation, UNICEF ACO developed the ToR together with key stakeholders to
identify the purpose of the evaluation, which was further enhanced with the Evaluation Reference Group
and the Evaluation Team during the inception stage. The Evaluation Team worked together with the ERG
to finalise the design, and also to select and adapt the data collection instruments. The programme
beneficiaries were engaged through a pilot of the evaluation tools. This exercise provided useful feedback
which was used in the development of the data collection tools. The Evaluation Team collected and
analysed the data, and the findings were disseminated by UNICEF.
2.1 Evaluation Questions
The questions and their corresponding sub-questions in the ToR (UNICEF Afghanistan, 2020) aimed to
respond to the overall objectives of the evaluation (Refer to section 1.4), and sought to respond to two
overarching dimensions:
• Assess progress of the programme in relation to increasing female teacher presence in hard to
reach areas, girls participation in learning spaces and retention; and
17
• Identify gaps along the results chain and recommend remedies to inform scale up of the
programme
The evaluation questions adopted the OECD DAC Evaluation Criteria to disaggregate these questions to
address the GATE Programme’s coherence, relevance, efficiency, effectiveness and sustainability. In
addition to the adapted DAC criteria, the evaluation also focused on gender, human rights, and equity.
The evaluation tools were developed and finalized at inception stage, based on the evaluation questions,
available information from programme documents and liaisons with key stakeholders including the ERG.
A key change to the ToR during the inception stage was the revision of the sustainability criteria—the
evaluation team and the ERG excluded the cost component of the programme.
Table 4 below provides an overview of the key questions as described in the ToR, and a detailed matrix
with all evaluation questions is available in Appendix 3. The Evaluation Matrix gives a detailed description
of the categories, key questions, indicators and data sources that were used to collect and analyse data.
Additionally, this matrix was the basis for the analytical framework used in the evaluation, and served as
the foundation of the evaluation process. Cumulatively, the evidence available for each question and the
corresponding indicators provided responses to the respective evaluation questions and objectives.
GENERAL ToR SUB QUESTIONS
QUESTION/CRITERIA
Assess programme • Does the GATE Programme have the potential to increase the
performance in relation to number of female teachers in hard-to-reach areas?
increasing female teacher
• Does the GATE Programme have the potential to contribute to
presence in hard-to-reach
increased access and participation of girls in learning spaces?
areas and girls’
participation in learning
spaces
Relevance: Assess the • Does the programme’s ToC reflect the broader national education
programme’s alignment policy priorities in Afghanistan?
with identified/existing • Is the existing ToC well conceptualised?
issues • Is the current programme design suitable to tackle the key
challenges faced by girls and female students (including students
with disability) in the country, especially in the targeted provinces?
• Did UNICEF, in its programme development, identify the needs and
priorities of the girls/communities experiencing the greatest
exclusion or inequality, through needs assessments and
participatory consultations?
• To what extent is the programme guided by relevant theories and
appropriate strategies?
• Is there any evidence that has been produced to inform GATE
programming and approach?
• How can the GATE Programme objectives, approaches be most
relevant and adapted to the country context for scale up?
18
Coherence: Assess extent • Does the programme theory of change reflect the broader national
to which the programme education policy priorities i.e. girl’s education policy, teacher policy
complements broader and NESPIII, etc.
stakeholder priorities
• Are the various programme interventions complementary and
harmonized with those of other relevant stakeholders including
donor agencies, other UN agencies, NGOs, government education
departments at central, provincial and district levels, etc.
Efficiency: Assess • To what extent are the resources (financial and human) allocated to
implementation and the GATE Programme appropriate to support the implementation
management of strategies and the achievement of the expected results?
• Could the same or better results could have been achieved using
different strategies?
Effectiveness: Assess • How does the available evidence highlight what works and what
programme achievements does not in the GATE Programme in Afghanistan? How effective is
against targets it?
• Did the GATE Programme contribute to progress towards the
achievement of children’s rights, especially girls, their
empowerment and greater gender equality? How?
• Did the intervention contribute to the reduction of inequalities and
exclusion especially for marginalized in hard to reach areas?
• Have communities and community leaders increased their
awareness on the importance of education especially for the girl
child and the presence of female teachers in their communities?
• How has the Government positioned itself to increase the numbers
of qualified and competent female teachers in the education
sector?
Sustainability: Acceptance • How sustainable is the GATE Programme in terms of acceptance by
by communities and communities and employment opportunities of the GATE graduates
employment opportunities into government payroll and other private ventures?
of graduates • What mechanisms and policies exist that will sustain the
programme initiatives?
Table 4: Focus of Questions in ToR
2.2 Evaluation Methodology
The evaluation questions were addressed using a mixed-methods approach to limit potential biases and
also to consolidate the findings from qualitative and quantitative evidence gathered from multiple sources
including surveys, key informant interviews and focus group discussions. The research design ensured that
diverse perspectives were included through the KII’s and FGDs, and that participation from different
groups of stakeholders was promoted. An integrated mixed-methods analysis was used to cover the
breadth and depth of the evaluation in a comprehensive and rigorous manner.
This section provides details of our approach to collecting and analysing the primary data, and how we
made use of existing data to contextualise and support the primary research findings.
19
2.2.1 Sampling: Research Sites and Respondents
As suggested in the ToR, seven provinces were purposively selected by UNICEF—Badghis, Helmand, Khost,
Laghman, Nangarhar, Paktya, and Wardak—on the basis of them having high numbers of GATE
Programme active students and graduates.
Research Sites: Research sites within each of these provinces were purposively selected and finalised in
consultation and coordination with UNICEF and the MoE, and was based on a range of factors including
the setting (i.e. urban or rural), security, accessibility, and the number of respondents in each area. The
selection of TTCs was based on the presence of scholarship recipients and lecturers or mentors who have
been trained as part of the GATE Programme. The selection of schools was based on the presence of
scholarship graduate teachers and mentors participating in the programme.
Respondents: Respondents were selected randomly and purposively (depending on the data collection
instrument) from samples of 1,216 scholarship recipients, 63 TTCs and 789 schools/learning spaces—
based on their participation in the GATE Programme either as direct or indirect beneficiaries or
programme implementers.
Scholarship Scholarship TTCs Participating Schools/Learning Participating
Recipients Recipient Sampling TTCs Spaces Sampling Schools/Learning
Province
Sampling Participants Frame Frame Spaces
Frame
Wardak 73 40 9 0 16 3
Paktia 316 50 11 1 8 1
Laghman 103 55 6 1 11 1
Helmand 251 50 5 1 7 4
Nangarhar 100 50 17 1 22 3
Badghis 269 50 4 1 9 2
Khost 104 51 11 1 5 1
TOTAL 1,216 346 63 6 78 15
Table 5: GATE Evaluation Sampling Frame
2.2.2 Evaluation Methods and Tools
As the focus of the assignment was to collect valuable and in-depth information, the following data
collection tools (Refer to Appendix 4)—which were piloted and tested to ensure suitability and
appropriateness to the local context —were used.
Primary Data Collection
Survey
9 Some GATE Programme TTCs are based in schools/learning spaces
20
A standard survey questionnaire was administered to a total of 350 of the female students and graduates
of the programme as an exploratory exercise. The survey data was used to summarise basic features of
the programme, assess the Theory of Change (ToC), describe characteristics of the project population and
measure progress on the achievement of programme outcomes. The questionnaire comprised both
closed and open-ended questions to capture the programme’s key thematic areas, and was administered
by the Evaluation Team’s research assistants. The surveys took place at the respondents’ homes, schools,
mosques and TTCs.
Respondents were selected using systematic random sampling and comprised 25 current students and 25
graduates in each of the 7 provinces. The sample size was based on Krecjie and Morgan’s equation10 to
ensure a low margin of error of +/- 4.56 and a confidence level of 95%.
Key Informant Interviews – Semi-structured
Key informant interviews (KIIs) were administered to elicit information at individual level around the key
evaluation questions. Purposive sampling from the lists of students, graduates, mentors and lecturers that
had been provided were used to select participants for the KIIs.
Respondents included the following direct programme beneficiaries;
1. Current scholarship beneficiaries in training: This was to explore the programme outputs, strategy
and performance with scholarship recipients as direct beneficiaries of the GATE Programme in
terms of usefulness, relevance and effectiveness.
2. Past scholarship beneficiaries who have completed training and are currently teaching: This was
to explore the programme outputs, strategy and performance with scholarship recipients as direct
beneficiaries of the GATE Programme, and to particularly explore issues around employment
prospects after graduation, practical experience working as a teacher and to gauge progress in
the overall outcomes of the GATE Programme.
3. Past scholarship beneficiaries who have completed training but are not currently teaching: This
was to explore the programme outputs, strategy and performance with scholarship recipients as
direct beneficiaries of the GATE Programme, and to particularly explore issues around
employment prospects after graduation to gauge progress in the overall outcomes of the GATE
Programme.
4. Mentors who are currently supporting scholarship beneficiaries: This was to explore the
mentorship aspect of the GATE Programme in terms of strategy and performance in terms of
relevance and usefulness.
10
X2𝑁𝑃(1−𝑃)
𝑆=
d2(𝑁−1)+X2𝑃(1−𝑃)
Where S = required sample size, X2 = the table value of chi-square 1 degree of freedom for desired confidence level, and N = size of the
population
21
5. Lecturers who are currently training and supporting scholarship beneficiaries: This was to gain
insight into the environment within which the scholarship recipients are being trained or taught,
and also to explore the performance of the capacity building aspect of the GATE Programme.
Respondents included the following indirect programme beneficiaries;
6. Headteachers in schools where programme graduates are teaching: This was to gain insight into
the environment within which the scholarship graduates are working on completion of their
training and explore their working environment as a factor in numbers of female teachers in
schools.
7. Teachers who are working with programme graduates: This was to gain insight into the
environment within which the scholarship graduates are working on completion of their training,
and explore the environment as a factor in numbers of female teachers in schools.
8. Key stakeholders who are working on the programme. These were selected purposively and
included UNICEF staff, the District Education Directorates and Provincial Education Directorates.
The purpose of these interviews was to gain insight into the practical aspects of programme
performance and the environment in which the programme is being implemented.
RESPONDENTS NUMBER PER GROUP TOTAL
Female students in colleges 5 (per province) 35
Female graduates who are currently 5 (per province) 35
teaching
Female students who are not currently 5 (per province) 35
teaching
Mentors 5 (per province) 35
Lecturers 5 (per province) 35
Headteacher and teachers in 10 schools 10 headteachers 30
where female graduates are teaching 20 teachers (two per school)
Key stakeholders 7 Provincial Education Directorate (PED) 21
7 District Education Directorate (DED)
7 UNICEF Staff
Table 6: KII Respondents
Focus Group Discussions (FGDs)
Focus group discussions were conducted with female students, female graduates who are currently
teaching, School Management Shuras (SMS) and pupils who are being taught by the female graduates.
1. Female students and graduates: The purpose was to elicit joint meaning and understanding of
the GATE Programme from beneficiary groups, and to triangulate information around programme
strategy and performance with information emerging from the KIIs and the survey.
2. SMS: The purpose was to gauge the level of community acceptance and engagement with the
aims and objectives of the programme.
3. Pupils being taught by GATE Programme graduates: The aim was to assess relevance and
usefulness of the programme, while also exploring performance and progress towards
22
programme outcomes. Participants were randomly selected from classes being taught by GATE
Programme graduates and FGDs were separated by gender.
RESPONDENTS NUMBER PER PROVINCE TOTAL
Female students in colleges One FDG per province 7 FGDs
Female graduates who are currently teaching One FDG per province 7 FGDs
School Management Shura One FGD per province 7 FGDs
If possible, pupils of female graduates teaching in Up to 6 schools (3 female and 3 6 FGDs
schools male)
Table 7: FGD Respondent groups
Stories of transformation
Individual GATE Programme scholarship recipients and lecturers were also selected and interviewed from
each province (up to 7) to explore programme contribution at individual level. In depth interviews were
undertaken to understand their personal stories of transformation attributed to the programme.
Direct Observation
Additional data was collected using direct observation of a lesson being attended by scholarship recipients
in 6 TTCs in Khost, Laghman, Helmand, Nangarhar, Badghis and Paktya, and were conducted using
observation checklists. The purpose of this exercise was to gain insight into the environment within which
the students are being taught and the interactions that occur within the students’ learning environment.
This was also a useful means of triangulation of data from the KIIs and/or FGDs.
Secondary Data Collection
Document Review
A review of relevant documents was used to provide general descriptions, theoretical constructs,
understandings and definitions of key aspects of the GATE Programme. It also provided information on
programme processes and how they came in to being. The Evaluation Team requested documents from
UNICEF’s Programme Team including programme reports, evaluation documents, implementation
documents, monitoring documents, funding proposals, etc. The Evaluation Team also searched for
documents on accessible institutional databases (that contained documents that had been used in design
and support of girls’ education particularly for Afghanistan) using key words. The search was delimited by
looking at documents that were only relevant to gender in education and female teacher training.
2.2.3 Research Considerations
The evaluation team consisted of two international consultants and a national consultant/project
manager based within a local consulting company in Kabul—ATR Consulting—to assist with mobilisation
for the evaluation and to help administer data collection tools in order to mitigate the language barriers
23
and logistical challenges, especially that travel restrictions were in place because of the COVID-19
pandemic.
Quality Assurance
The evaluation team was mindful of the strengths as well as potential challenges associated with
conducting social research in general, and administering KIIs and FGDs in particular. The team constantly
assessed the importance of positionality in the research by strategically focusing on cultural
responsiveness (Refer to Figure 2), using a robust Quality Assurance (QA) process and triangulation of
data during analysis.
Quality assurance began at the outset of the project with the establishment of effective working
relationships and co-operation between EADS, ATR and UNICEF staff. The data collection tools were
piloted during the inception stage (11 - 12 October, 2020) in order to validate their fitness for purpose
and their practical application in the field. The testing was done in Nangahar Province and the activity
contributed to the development of the data collection tools and of the digital platform—SurveyCTO—for
data management. The revised tools were then tested again after ethical approval was given (14 – 17
February, 2021) to refine the tools and the digital platform for data management.
As part of the quality assurance process, particular attention was paid to the following:
• Identifying and gaining access to the most appropriate informants, drawing on the team’s
understanding of the programme’s implementation processes from the documents reviewed and
meetings/discussions with key stakeholders;
• Selecting an appropriate range of data collection tools and respondents to ensure key and divergent
views are captured and findings sufficiently triangulated;
• Use of a data management platform that incorporated automatic control checks on the data entered
in real time to detect any patterns of errors and address them relatively quickly;
• Application of semi-structured interview guidelines to ensure systematic data collection and optimal
use of time, while allowing for new emerging findings;
• Recruiting and selecting enumerators and interviewers who had experience in administering the
evaluation tools in the target provinces, and also training and familarising them with the tools for this
particular evaluation before the data collection exercise;
• Adherence to all ethical considerations and appropriate personal conduct during the data collection
process (see also Section 2.6 on ethical issues).
Methodological rigour in this research was not achieved through statistical inferences, but rather through
a ‘systematic and self-conscious research design, data collection, interpretation and communication’
(Mays & Pope, 1995, p. 2). This evaluation was guided by a number of key considerations:
• A clear sampling strategy was developed that explained the justification for the identification of
research sites, key informants, and individuals for FGDs, highlighting any limitations. These were
carried out in consultation with key stakeholders, including the MoE and UNICEF.
24
• Each field researcher was required to report daily to their respective supervisors through phone
and/or short messages summarising activities, observations, remarks and difficulties encountered.
The supervisors then inputted this data daily into the web-based interface so it could be available to
the interface users in Kabul. This allowed the Team Leaders and the Project Manager to address any
issues arising and investigate and respond to them.
• The research teams in Kabul transcribed all the qualitative data after the fieldwork.
The evaluation team also carried out a comprehensive peer review process including internal and external
reviewers during design, implementation, analysis, and report production.
Gender, Equity and Human Rights
Gender, equity and human rights are at the core of the GATE Programme and are therefore integrated
into the over-arching evaluation criteria.
Our evaluation team comprised two females and one male on the core team, including specialist skills in
girls’ education. Similarly, three of the four field researchers in each province were female. Considering
that the GATE Programme primarily targets females, and taking the socio-cultural norms of Afghanistan
into consideration, the evaluation team felt that this gender composition would be better suited to our
field work. Given that all scholarship recipients are female, most of the respondents in this evaluation
were female and would respond better to female data collectors in the KIIs, FGDs or surveys. The male
research assistants conducted KIIs with government officials including the PED, DEO, Head Teachers and
Mentors in each province. They also conducted the FGDs with the School Management Shuras (SMS) as
the composition tends to be mostly male dominant. As such, our process as well as our findings have been
formulated to account for existing gender issues.
In terms of the human rights perspective, this evaluation identified and referred to the SDGs as a key
feature of the evaluation and in the analysis. The SDGs present gender equality as a cross-cutting human
rights issue. SDG 4 seeks to ensure inclusive and equitable quality education and to promote lifelong
learning opportunities for all, thereby identifying access to education and participation in education as
universal human rights. SDG 5 seeks to achieve gender equality and to empower all women and girls.
These international instruments are at the core of the subject of this evaluation and within them, human
righst were a key thread running through the process.
Where possible and relevant, the evaluation tried to disaggregate the data and present the findings from
the analysis that accounted for gender and equity. This is discussed in the forthcoming chapters.
2.2.4 Data Collection
The international consultants liaised with Kabul level stakeholders, reviewed the pre-existing
documentation, and analysed the UNICEF GATE Programme Database. They also interviewed stakeholders
outside UNICEF and the MoE who had an interest in the provision of programmes or projects focusing on
gender in education including the World Bank and the German Agency for Technical Cooperation
(Gesellschaft für Internationale Zusammenarbeit - GIZ).
25
The national consultant (Evaluation Project Manager) and the local consulting company provided insights
and local perspectives to the processs, and worked with district based field researchers and enumerators
who were able to speak the respective languages in the target provinces and were able to travel to the
targeted sites without excessive security concerns. The Field Team Leaders were trained from 15 – 17
February and the field researchers were trained from 16 – 20 March by the Evaluation Project Manager
in Kabul and the Evaluation Team Lead (who joined the training remotely) prior to the fieldwork in rigorous
and interactive training sessions. Both groups were trained on general methods and best practices of data
collection, research ethics and consent, the purpose of this evaluation, the specific research questions,
and the relevant research tools. During the training, in-field piloting was also conducted to ensure that
researchers were familiarised with the tools and that they were adequately prepared for data collection.
The pilot session with the field team leaders was also used to finalise our research tools.The teams from
each of the seven provinces comprised 3 females and 1 male (Refer to Table 8 below), and were
supervised by Field Team Leaders and Quality Assurance Assistants (Refer to Appendix 5: Evaluation Team
Organogram).
Enumerator Survey KIIs FGDs Observation
Female 1 50 surveys in
each province
with current
students and
graduates
Female 2 Female students in Female students in colleges
colleges
Female graduates Female graduates
who are currently
teaching
College Lecturers
Mentors Teachers where female
graduates are teaching
Female 3 Teachers where
Graduates are
teaching
Female students in Pupils being taught by GATE
colleges graduates
Female graduates
who are not currently
teaching
College Lecturers Class
observation
Male UNICEF
PED
DED
Head Teachers SMS
Table 8: Field Researchers
26
The research teams ensured that data was gathered with due regard to principles of ethical research such
as confidentiality, anonymity, and informed consent. These tenets are discussed in detail in Section 2.6.
Together with the national consultant, the trained teams of researchers and enumerators carried out the
data collection exercise in the seven provinces. The sites visited during the evaluation and the Evaluation
Mission Schedule are detailed in Appendix 6. In total, 577 persons were interviewed either individually or
in groups during the inception and data collection stages, and included 346 surveys, 221 key informant
interviews and 27 FGDs.
2.3 Data Analysis
2.3.1 Emergent Themes
Because the evaluation did not focus on a singular intervention, the data analysis consolidated and
presented the data in three themes that emerged during the inception stage. These themes incorporated
all the questions from the TOR into three groups of central topics that would be useful for key
stakeholders:
• Programme Outputs (in terms of programme processes, strategic activities undertaken within the
programme, integration of cross-cutting issues such as gender, equity, human rights)
• Programme Strategy (including the ToC/the results chain, coherence and relevance)
• Programme Performance (including efficiency, effectiveness and sustainability)
The themes were developed reflectively from practical deliberation and consideration of the information
pooled from initial meetings, key informant interviews with key stakeholders including UNICEF
programme staff and representation of the MoE by the Directorate of Teacher Education, and also a
comprehensive review of relevant programme documents11.
2.3.2 Analytical Framework
In addition to framing the analysis and discussions within these themes, they also provided the basis on
which the template of analysis was developed from the Evaluation Matrix (Refer to Appendix 3). All data
was triangulated and analysed using this framework.
The qualitative data was transcribed, coded and compiled into the analysis template. The quantitative
data was analysed for descriptive statistics using STATA, and the data was extracted onto an excel
spreadsheet for response analysis. The qualitative data was included in the template for analysis which
was structured to respond to the evaluation matrix categories and questions.
The evaluation team employed the 6 steps of template analysis (King, 2004) to analyse the qualitative
data and triangulate it to generate findings. A summary of the steps involved is given below:
11 Refer to Appendix 3: Documents reviewed
27
• Defining a priori themes, categories (from the key objectives and criteria outlined in the ToR) and
codes (indicators): This was based on the ToR, initial meetings with key stakeholders and a review
of key programme documents
• Analysing the qualitative data and transcribing the KIIs and FGDs
• Carrying out initial coding of data by applying a priori codes (indicators) where appropriate. If
there was no relevant theme, existing themes were modified, or new ones developed
• Producing the initial template with finalised themes, categories and codes
• Applying the template to the full data set
• Using the ‘final’ template for interpreting and writing up findings together with the quantitative
data
Conclusions were constructed through iterative triangulation using information from all data collection
sources.
2.4 Limitations
2.4.1 Study Limitations
In general, the evaluation process was able to keep to the intended plan and methodology and the
evaluation team is confident in the robustness of the identified results. The evaluation benefitted from
the existence of significant programme documentation including the UNICEF GATE Programme Database.
However, there were some key gaps in available information and data, including an absence of
programme monitoring documents.
Although care was taken in the selection of the evaluation sites to ensure maximum diversity and
representativeness, the overall sampling strategy used does not necessarily allow for statistical inferences
to be made. The study sites were selected based on high numbers of students and programme graduates,
and therefore findings may not be generalisable to other provinces . Also, the approach did not include a
statistical survey and therefore the data extracted from the targeted respondents should be considered
more indicative than generalizable.
2.4.2 Field Work Limitations
• Space and Timing of Interviews
The research team sought to conduct all interviews and FGDs in private to ensure a safe space for the
respondents. However, because of safety and security in some areas, the tools for students and graduates
were administered in the respondents’ homes and mosques where possible. In the PED and DED offices,
minimal interruptions were reported when the interviews were taking place but it was difficult to
administer the tools to few of the officials who were not available at the arranged and agreed times for
the interviews. In these cases, the interviews were re-scheduled and where it was not possible to do so,
the interviews were conducted with alternative respondents from the sampling frame.
• Sampling difficulties
Although the evaluation team had developed a clear sampling strategy for the evaluation, it was not
always possible to follow this plan as the contact information that was available was not always current.
The field team found that almost half of the respondents listed in the sampling plan were not reachable
as their contact numbers were wrong. In these instances, the field researchers contacted the TTCs in an
28
effort to get updated contact numbers and whereabouts of the respondents. The TTCs were able to
provide valuable assistance through the GATE Programme focal points. However, some graduate students
are no longer living in the target provinces and these were replaced with those who were available from
the list of alternative respondents in the sampling frame whenever possible. In Mehterlam District
(Laghman Province), the team was unable to trace any graduate students but managed to trace some
graduates in Qarghae District. However, the target was not met.
Also, not all respondents from the PED, DED and among the mentors provided consent to participate.
Where this was the case, the research assistants conducted the interviews with alternative respondents
from the sampling frame who were willing to participate and provide consent.
As these examples demonstrate, we could not always follow our sampling plan for engagement as part of
the evaluation. Nonetheless, the research assistant teams were flexible and adaptive on the ground,
implementing alternative strategies to ensure that the evaluation could be conducted properly.
• Staff Turnover
Given a system of administrative and bureaucratic shuffles and reshuffles, where government officials are
regularly moved from one department to another, it was not always possible to track specific officials who
had been involved in implementing the earlier GATE programme aspects such as recruitment of students.
Where this was the case, the field teams interviewed current PED and DED personnel who have been
involved with the programme. As such, although we were able to gauge the current issues in our target
districts and provinces, we have had to assume that these findings are also consistent with, and extensions
of, the GATE Programme during the period covered by the evaluation.
• Safety and security
The ongoing conflict in Wardak Province meant that for their own safety, the research assistants could
not collect data as planned. Where it was relatively safe to do so, the team were able to collect some
data. The team found that some of the respondents had moved from the province and TTCs and schools
were closed. However, the team was able to trace some of the students and graduates who had moved
to District 13, Kabul and respective tools were adminsitered to them there.
2.5 Ethical Issues
Ethical considerations influence the entire evaluation process, including evaluation design, composition,
recruitment, and management of the evaluation team, as well as consultations and interviews with
informants and data storage and use. This evaluation ensured that appropriate ethical safeguards were in
place including confidentiality, avoidance of harm and compliance with applicable codes for participants
as required in the United Nations Evaluation Group (UNEG) Ethical Guidelines for Evaluation (United
Nations Evaluation Group, 2008). This approach safeguarded the responsible use of power and resources,
and added credibility of the findings. Given the particularities of the evaluation’s context as well as the
involvement of children as research participants, the proposed methodology was also developed and
aligned with UNICEF Procedures for Ethical Research Involving Children (ERIC). The research plan for this
assignment underwent an appraisal by the HML Institutional Review Board (IRB) on 04 – 13 January 2021
during the inception phase. Approval was obtained and the certificate is attached as Appendix 7.
All members of the evaluation team were briefed on and familiarized with the appropriate guidelines for
ethical research during their training and before the field work commenced, including the ATR Guidelines
29
for Interviewing Children (ATR Consulting, 2020) which include the key principles outlined in UNICEF’s
Procedures for Ethical Research Involving Children (ERIC) and the UNEG Ethical Guidelines. The guidelines
included obligations of the researchers including independence, impartiality, credibility and
accountability. All field researchers were prepared to ensure that there was no conflict of interest for any
of them, that there was no explicit or implicit coercion for potential respondents, and that participants
could make an informed and free decision on their possible involvement in the fieldwork.
Practically, our ethical considerations included:
Ensuring the safety of participants: We were mindful that the environment in which research was
conducted was physically safe at all times.
Recognising that participants are vulnerable: All researchers were made aware of local conditions and
we made sure that the exercise and interactions were carried out in a manner respectful to all
respondents.
Ensuring that people understand what is happening at all times: This was ensured through the use of
local research assistants, so that research was conducted in the appropriate language and dialect through
fieldworkers who were familiar with local customs and terminology.
Clarifying the purpose: We ensured that potential respondents were given enough information about the
research. The research assistants communicated clear parameters to the respondents and each
engagement started with a clear introduction to ensure that all participants were aware of these
parameters. Information provided to all respondents included information about the purpose of the data
collection, issues of confidentiality and what this means in the context of the evaluation.
Informed consent: All researchers were trained to ensure that there was no explicit or implicit coercion
so that potential respondents could make an informed and free decision on their possible involvement in
the fieldwork. Respondents were informed that they could choose to not respond to all or any of our
questions at any time. We took explicit oral consent from each respondent before conducting any data
collection activity except from the children, from whom assent was attained in writing as guided by the
UNICEF Procedures for Ethical Research Involving Children (ERIC). Where the respondents did not provide
consent, substitute respondents were sought from a list of alternatives from the sampling frame, and they
were interviewed if they provided consent.
Anonymity: Given that research respondents could share considerable amounts of personal information
with us, it is our responsibility to ensure that their confidentiality is maintained and personal information
is protected. This has been operationalised by ensuring that all datasets are anonymised, in the sense that
all names of people are removed before any data is shared publicly.
Covid-19: In light of the Covid-19 pandemic, safety measures were taken to conduct the data collection
safely and respectfully in line with ATR Covid-19 Prevention Guidelines for the activities of ATR in
Afghanistan (ATR Consulting, 2020), which include relevant aspects in the training of field staff and
protective practices during data collection.
30
3.0 EVALUATION FINDINGS
This chapter discusses the findings from the evaluation in line with the objectives outlined in section 1.4.2
and the focus questions of the evaluation from the ToR as outlined in Table 4. It assesses the programme
processes and identifies gaps along the results chain by looking at the programme beneficiaries, the
programme components, processes and strategic activities. It also looks at the programme’s performance
in terms of the OECD DAC Criteria as outlined in Table 4. In the discussion, the evaluation relies on both
primary and secondary data, including some programme monitoring data collected by UNICEF ACO.
3.1 Relevance
This section looks at the relevance of the GATE Programme as an intervention. It assesses the GATE
Programme’s draft Theory of Change (ToC) and looks at the extent to which it reflects the broader national
education policy priorities in Afghanistan. It also looks at the extent to which the programme objectives and
design respond to the needs and priorities of its beneficiaries.
3.1.1 Programme Theory of Change
Any well conceptualised ToC is ‘explanatory and predictive’ (Patton, 2015, p. 201). It is built on a range of
other actions taking place and allows for remedial actions to be taken to ensure that intended progress
takes place. UNICEF’s supplementary programme note on the Theory of Change (UNICEF New York,
2014)12 provides a schematic description of a ToC as depicted in Figure 3.
12 United Nations Children’s Fund, Supplementary Programme Note on the Theory of Change, Peer Review Group
meeting, 11 March 2014, UNICEF, New York, 2014, p. 4. See www.unicef.org/about/execboard/files/PRG-
overview_10Mar2014.pdf.
31
Figure 3: Schematic depiction of Theory of Change
Within the GATE Programme, the ToC was a late development, constructed after the programme had
begun (UNICEF Afghanistan, 2020), and possibly with the benefit of hindsight. Based on Figure 3 above
this evaluation finds that the current GATE Programme Draft ToC (Refer to Appendix 1) requires
amendment to become fully fit for purpose, and identifies some issues which are discussed in this section.
Overall, the Draft ToC is moderately descriptive, and portrays a reasonable, defensible, and sequential
order from implementation strategies or activities and on to outputs, outcomes, and impacts. It also
includes clear indicators at output level and outcome level.
Implementation Strategies (Inputs)
As discussed in section 1.2.2, there are 5 key activities set out within the ToC. These are:
• Identifying and selecting scholarship recipients
• Providing scholarships and mentors to 1,200 female teachers through outreach TTCs
• Providing incentives to 224 lecturers in 12 TTCs and 120 mentors
• Building capacity of 224 lecturers in 12 TTCs and 120 mentors
• Establishing a network of GATE graduates to advocate for employment opportunities
32
The GATE Programme’s 5 implementation strategies fit strategically within key education sector goals and
obligations—both nationally and internationally—which focus on increasing female participation in
learning spaces and specifically increasing the number of female teachers in rural and hard-to-reach areas.
It also complements other efforts by key stakeholders, and is in line with Afghanistan’s national strategic
education plan (Ministry of Education, 2016).
Strategic Activity Outputs
The key outputs for the strategic activities are listed below:
• 1,200 females receive scholarships and are awarded mentors
• 224 lecturers and 120 mentors receive incentives
• 120 mentors receive training on formative assessment, coaching and mentorship
• 224 lecturers receive training on advanced pedagogy, formative assessment and language
enhancement
• Network is created and all are given access
The activity outputs are directly linked to the implementation strategy. However, the evaluation notes
that though some appropriate and broad assumptions are set out in the Draft ToC, they are not directly
linked to specific implementation strategies and respective intended outputs. Therefore, where the
outputs were not realized, e.g. mentors were not provided with training, we cannot know how much it
has impacted the realization of outcomes, i.e. improved mentors capacity to help GATE gradutes improve
their performance or what else has contributed to the results expected from this particular pathway of
change.
Another missing component in the TOC is interventions on community engagments. Without knowing
assumptions on how the outputs are expected to be realized, it is hard to understand how an intervention
can work with women in a conservative society like Afghanistan without engaging communities. From the
Draft ToC it is not possible to monitor, track and/or act upon all potential and emerging issues that may
affect the achievement of the activity outputs.
The GATE Outcomes
The outcomes included in the Draft ToC include UNICEF’s overall education outputs and therefore reflect
the broader UNICEF ACO’s Education priorities. A key intervention strategy of the Government of
Afghanistan’s 5-year strategic plan for the education sector (NESP III) is increasing the availability of
female teachers. The Draft ToC outcomes reflect Afghanistan’s national education policy priorities in the
NESP III, the National Policy on Girls’ Education and the Teacher Policy by addressing both the supply and
demand side barriers of girls’ education through a focus on increasing the numbers of qualified female
teachers. However, the applicable assumptions and risks are not outlined clearly for all outcomes.
33
In addition, the link between outputs and outcomes are not always self explanatory. For example,
network establishment was achieved but it was not helping graduates get employment as expected. The
assumptions, on what will make the network effective is not outlined and therefore, it is difficult to know
what has affected the effective functioning of the Platforms. Such ambiguities had made it difficult to
monitor, track and/or act upon potential and emerging issues that may affect the achievement of the
outcomes.
The GATE Impact
The final step of UNICEF ACO’s Education Programme ToC is that ‘children, particularly girls and other
vulnerable children, are more likely to access equitable and quality education with improved learning
outcomes’ (UNICEF Afghanistan, 2017, p. 10). The GATE programme impact as set out in the Draft ToC
reflects the broader UNICEF ACO’s Education priorities and it includes various aspects that are important
to achieving the intended aims or programme impact. However, it leaves out a key aspect of the Education
Outcome in the 2015-19 country programme action plan (CPAP) (UNICEF Afghanistan, 2014). For instance,
the intended impact of the GATE Programme was to improve learning outcomes for girls, through
increased access to and utilisation of quality education (UNICEF Afghanistan, 2014, p. 9). The Draft ToC
does not speak to improved learning or quality of education as set out in the key programme documents.
Also, the applicable assumptions and risks are not outlined clearly and it is difficult to monitor, track
and/or act upon potential and emerging issues that may affect the achievement of impact.
3.1.2 Needs and priorities of the girls/communities experiencing the greatest exclusion or inequality
Within the girls’ education priorities in Afghanistan, this evaluation finds that the GATE Programme is part
of a commitment to affirmative action for women and girls in education. The challenge of improving and
expanding access to female education at a range of levels is considerable, and the impact of the activities
which are set out in the GATE Programme are relevant and can contribute to the overall affirmative action
drive. Notably, and as demonstrated by the very fact that UNICEF successfully advocated for the inclusion
of the GATE Programme in prominent government documents eg. NESP III, and managed to fundraise and
allocate valuable resources to the programme , indicate that UNICEF did identify the needs and priorities
of the girls and communities experiencing the greatest exclusion and inequality. It was not clear from the
evaluation participants, however, whether this was done through needs assessments and/or participatory
consultations.
UNICEF ACO, through a Country Programme Document (CPD) mid-term review (2017) and a gender
programme review (2018) identified key programme areas where gender was being integrated (UNICEF
Afghanistan, 2019, p. 2) in Afghanistan. UNICEF identified gender equality and the empowerment of
women and girls as a guiding principle (UNICEF Afghanistan, 2019) and this was reaffirmed in the Gender
Action Plan (GAP) 2018 – 2021. The evaluation noted that the development of the Gender Strategy
(UNICEF Afghanistan, 2019) was an informed commitment to address the needs and priorities of children
experiencing the greatest exclusion or inequality.
In programme development, the GATE Programme’s aims and content complement education and gender
priorities that have been identified in Afghanistan through joint sector reviews and assessments at
34
national, provincial and local levels. Various reports, studies, assessments and sector analyses—of
Afghanistan as a whole and also the target provinces—have shown that important factors and indicators
for low school attendance among girls include the low number and proportion of female teachers (Jantzi
et al., 2019; MoE, 2014; MoE 2016; UNICEF Education SitAn, 2013; UNICEF, 2014; UNICEF, 2017; UNICEF,
2019 and WCLRF, 2019).
The role of community members has been identified as a key issue in supporting girls’ education. A
situation analysis of girls’ education in Afghanistan (Women and Children Legal Research Foundation,
2019, p. 45) found that motivating parents and families was the most highly recommended means of
improving access and participation of girls in learning spaces. This component is not included in the ToC
though it has been mentioned in programme documents. Community engagement may be a strategic
inclusion to address key community and gender norms that impact access to education and participation
in schooling at community level.
3.1.3 Suitability of programme design to tackle the key challenges faced by girls and female students
(including students with disability) in Afghanistan, especially in the targeted provinces
In previous years, the CBE programme appears to have been a positive intervention for low access and
participation rates for girls in education as a response to the supply side factors through the provision of
ALCs. Though the NESP III and the revised CBE Policy describe CBE as a tool in Afghanistan’s education
system, the mid-term evaluation of UNICEF ACO’s Basic Education and Gender Equality Programme (The
Konterra Group, 2019, p. 21) indicated that the CBE was designed as a temporary measure to be instituted
in places for short periods of time after which education would shift to the formal school system within
the MoE. The GATE Programme complements the CBE programme and may support the transition of girls
from the CBE to the formal education system by providing more female teachers in areas with low
numbers of female teachers and low access and participation rates for girls in learning spaces.
Available information accessed during the evaluation has recognised that the presence of female teachers
has a catalytic effect on attendance rates for girls in schools and learning spaces in Afghanistan. The
evaluation also found that the recruitment and retention of female teachers in Afghanistan has been
recognised as a key component for increasing girls’ participation in learning spaces. For instance, the FGDs
with students and graduates revealed that the GATE Programme objectives and approaches are suitable,
relvant and adapted to the country context by bringing girls’ education issues closer to the communities,
and also by implementing the programme components that are sensitive to prevailing cultural beliefs and
practices. The evaluation concluded that in providing additional qualified female teachers in areas with
low access and participation rates for girls, the GATE Programme design suitably responds to one of the
key identified challenges—the lack of female teachers.
The pupils being taught by programme graduates highlighted the importance of the programme in
providing more female teachers in their communities and how this enabled more parents to allow their
daughters to attend school. They indicated that the programme motivated the females to attend the TTCs,
and highlighted the financial support as the major factor for this. Similarly, UNICEF Staff indicated that
the programme promotes the importance and availability of female teachers to teach girls and it
35
encourages families to support female students training to be teachers. These data confirmed that an
emphasis on providing teacher training for females with the view to increasing employment
opportunities, recruitment and household incomes of female teachers is highly suitable to tackle the
challenge of low female teacher and girls presence in Afghanistan’s education system.
On another level—suitability of the intervention as an affirmative action to improve girls education—this
evaluation found that the GATE Programme is suitable as a targeted continuation of affirmative activity
to improve girls’ education through the provision of teacher training for more females to become
teachers. Notable information from key stakeholders indicated that the GATE Programme was designed
to catapult girls from the CBE into the formal education system, therefore affirming the programme as a
temporary measure. A number of elements of the GATE Programme design speak to its temporary nature.
For instance, the training of the females on the scholarship programme did not take place within the
mainstream TTC schedule and the scholarship recipients were taught outside the mainstream TTC classes.
Additionally, funding for the programme had not been placed within the formal MoE on-budget financing,
and allowances for lecturers and mentors were facilitated through temporary service contracts.
In terms of suitability of the programme design to improve quality of education, one of the weakness this
evaluation noted was that the GATE Programme could not specifically target the quality of education
directly or students with disability. There appears to be no specific action which would bring in students
with disabilities, though there is no part of the planned programme which would certainly exclude them.
3.1.4 Evidence informing the GATE Programme approach
A large amount of information is available on the overall situation of children and women in Afghanistan.
The available data on numbers of female teachers and access/participation rates for girls suggests that
there would be significant need and demand for the GATE Programme. The slow progress on compelling
and continuing social aspects—including access to education—have been noted and various documents
have set out the culturally limiting circumstances which have resulted in fewer females accessing
education and/or participating in learning spaces (UNICEF Afghanistan, 2014). UNICEF Afghanistan’s
Gender Strategy (UNICEF Afghanistan, 2019) states that although the number of students going to primary
school has increased in recent years, 60% of those children who remain out of school in Afghanistan are
girls (UNICEF Afghanistan, 2019, p. 6). The strategy further points out that only 16% of all schools are girls’
schools, of which many have inadequate sanitation facilities. However, available data suggests that the
GPI in Afghanistan increased steadily for teachers and pupils/students from 2001 - 2014 (Refer to Figure
1). All this information, and more, has been used to inform UNICEF ACO’s overall approach and indeed
the GATE Programme.
Of particular note is that participatory and community features of Community Based Education (CBE)
including Community Based Schools (CBS), Accelerated Learning Centres (ALC), and Child Friendly Schools
(UNICEF Afghanistan, 2014; UNICEF Afghanistan, 2014) are an important part of UNICEF ACO’s Basic
Education and Gender Equity (BEGE) programme (UNICEF Afghanistan, 2014). Some of these strategies
have contributed to the overall improvement in children’s access to basic education and were
incorporated into and promoted through the GATE Programme. An important aspect from a mid-term
evaluation of UNICEF ACO’s BEGE Programme was the absorption capacity of students from the CBE
36
Programme into Afghanistan’s formal education system including the Hub Schools. The evaluation (The
Konterra Group, 2019, p. 22) found that in most cases the hub schools had an inadequate number of
teachers to absorb all the potentially transitioning students. This, coupled with the extremely low
numbers of female teachers available in mainstream schools, means that the GATE Programme provides
a robust tool with which to increase the numbers of female teachers and improve their skillset to provide
quality education.
Overall, the design of GATE Programme properly identifies the need for remote areas to be targeted. It is
underpinned by an in-depth analysis of the target areas/populations which show disproportionate access
to education and the status of female teachers (UNICEF, 2014; UNICEF, 2017; UNGEI, 2019). It is,
therefore, suitable to tackle key challenges faced by girls and female students in the targeted provinces.
Findings from this evaluation also serve as robust evidence to inform the GATE Programme, and to bridge
the gaps identified in the programme’s approach and implementation. The evaluation explored ways in
which the GATE Programme objectives and approaches are most relevant and have been adapted to the
country context for scale up. All respondents highlighted the importance and relevance of the GATE
Programme to Afghanistan in light of existing structural and cultural environment and affirmed the
necessity of all the programme components. The evaluation identified UNICEF ACO’s partnership with the
MoE as a strong foundation for scale up. UNICEF staff reported that they coordinated well with relevant
government structures and that the programme was implemented with key stakeholder involvement. The
evaluation found that harmonisation and coordination between UNICEF and the MoE/TED at national,
provincial and district levels has been leveraged well in programme implementation, and this could be
further strengthened by coordinating more with other stakeholders implementing related programmes.
This would integrate the various components in the sector, avoid duplication of efforts and provide a
strong basis for scale up. The current policy framework within the NESP III provides for further
collaborations among existing partnerships, especially if the GATE Programme—as a temporary
measure— is to achieve higher impact.
3.2 Coherence
This section looks at the compatibility of the GATE Programme with other interventions within
Afghanistan’s education sector. It discusses the programme’s harmonization with key stakeholders
including donor agencies, other UN agencies, NGOs, and government education departments at central,
provincial and district levels.
3.2.1 Policies and strategies guiding the programme
The results of this evaluation confirmed that the Gate Programme is guided by strategies for attainment
of the objectives, and it is aligned with existing literature on teaching methods and strategies. It was
developed within the context of UNICEF’s overall global strategy for holistic school improvement which
fully references the Convention on the Rights of the Child (CRC). It also sits within a framework which
expects improvements in the quality of Afghani education through the development of child-friendly
schools ‘as an overarching strategy for holistic school improvement’ (UNICEF Afghanistan, 2014, p. 11).
37
As such, it is guided by two components in the NESP III (Ministry of Education, 2016) : (1) Quality and
relevance, and (2) Equitable access.
• Quality and Relevance: Intermediate Outcomes 2.1 (Teachers and educators better qualified,
certified, and deployed according to national standards and regulations) and 2.3 (Support to
teachers and their accountability improved)
A key programme strategy is the capacity building component for participating lecturers to develop
improved teaching skills on advanced or gender responsive pedagogy, formative assessment, and
language enhancement. Another important strategy is the provision of mentors to the scholarship
recipients. The MoE has identified a number of successful approaches to upgrading teacher competencies.
One of the effective approaches at district level is to engage professional teachers to train non-
professional teachers (Ministry of Education, 2019, p. 67); and another is to provide both short term and
long term capacity building programmes for TTC instructors (Ministry of Education, 2019, p. 68).
Therefore, the inclusion of a capacity building component for lecturers in the programme’s TTCs and the
engagement of mentors to support the students and graduates is not only in alignment with the MoE
priorities, but it is also strategic and highly appropriate.
• Equitable Access: Intermediate Outcomes 1.3 (Increased deployment of female teachers in all
areas, especially rural) and 2.1 (School/learner center shuras actively engaged in support for
education and skills learning)
The design and implementation of the GATE Programme in selected provinces in rural areas is strategic in
that the intervention has focussed resources on the provinces with rather low numbers of female
teachers. The MoE acknowledges that addressing the gender-gaps in the teacher workforce will require
far reaching policy reforms and alternative strategies in teacher recruitment to increase the number of
female teachers (and consequently girl students) in rural areas (Ministry of Education, 2019, p. 65). The
MoE points out that targeted recruitment is the most effective tool to increase the number of female
teachers (Ministry of Education, 2019, p. 66). The establishment of graduate networks to advocate for
employment opportunities for female graduates is an appropriate strategy and complements not only the
MoE priorities, but also the work being done by other development partners in Afghanistan, particularly
the World Bank.
Overall, it is evident that the GATE Programme is guided by appropriate policies and strategies. Within
the GATE Programme, the successful provision of scholarships for female students ‘improves
inclusiveness, quality of teaching and learning and girl-friendliness…leading to enhancement of access,
retention and students learning achievements, with a focus on girls from rural areas’ (UNICEF Afghanistan,
2014).
3.2.2 Harmonisation of GATE Programme Interventions
Overall, this evaluation found that the GATE Programme interventions are complementary and
harmonised with those of relevant stakeholders, other UN agencies and government education
departments at national, provincial and district levels. Girls’ access to education and retention are one of
38
the important issues for the MoE, the donor community and development organisations in Afghanistan.
An exploration of the work being done by development organisations on girls’ education found that
various organisations have been providing financial and technical support for girls’ education at various
levels for a number of years.
g 90
n
it
r
o
p
p
u
s
s n o
n
o it
it a c
au
s in d
e
42
36
a g 's
r o
f
lr ig 23 26
o
r
e
b
m
u
N
Technical Educational Advocaacy for Monitoring Unspecified
Support Services for Girls' Girls' Access to
Girls Education Education
Graph 4: Number of organisations supporting girls’ education in Afghanistan (Women and Children Legal
Research Foundation, 2019, p. 39)
The evaluation indicates that the GATE Programme complements the government’s initiatives as a
strategy to increase the numbers of female teachers in rural areas which will in turn improve girls’ access
and retention to education in rural areas. Of particular note is the Women Economic Empowerment (WEE)
programme that is being implemented by the MoE. The WEE aims to increase the percentage of female
teachers from 33% to 42% by recruiting a total of 30,000 female teachers in rural areas in 34 provinces
between 2017 – 2022. Within this programme, the MoE has developed guidelines to organise the
recruitment process, capacity building and salary payment of female teachers in rural areas in a
transparent manner.
All PED and DED respondents indicated that the GATE Programme aligns with government policies and
plans such as the NESP III through its facilitation of increased female teacher presence in schools and
increased access to learning spaces for girls. They further stated that the programme supplements the
government’s efforts to improve access and quality of education through training of female teachers and
building the capacity of the TTCs and lecturers.
Key aspects of the GATE Programme also complement and align well with other interventions being
implemented and supported by key stakeholders in the sector. All UNICEF staff interviewed agreed that
the GATE Programme was well aligned and coordinated with other UN agencies and development
partners supporting and implementing projects around girls’ education. Of particular note is that, in
39
collaboration with UNESCO, ‘UNICEF has contributed to the nationwide curriculum reform process and
supported 966 female students to reach a minimum grade 14 qualification and benefit from enrolment
into teacher training centres’ (UNICEF Afghanistan, 2018, pp. 4, 10). They stated that the programme is
harmonised and has similar objectives with other projects, and complements what other donor agencies
and all relevant stakeholders are doing—including addressing the education needs of communities in
hard-to-reach areas.
Notable development agencies working in gender in education include the German Agency for Technical
Cooperation (Gesellschaft für Internationale Zusammenarbeit - GIZ) and the World Bank. The evaluation
found that the GIZ has worked extensively on girls education with notable success in community
engagement to support girls education through infrastructure and involvement of the School
Management Shuras (SMS). This method is consistent with the GATE Programme’s approach of using the
SMS to advocate and mobilise communities to support girls’ education. More recently, GIZ has supported
TTCs—in collaboration with the Teacher Education Directorate (TED)—to build the capacity of lecturers in
terms of delivery of learner centred methodology and pedagogy. The GATE Programme’s capacity building
component for lecturers through gender responsive pedagogy, mentoring and coaching is consistent with
the work being implemented by GIZ and complements capacity building interventions within the TED.
Similarly, the evaluation found that the World Bank is collaborating with the Global Partnership for
Education (GPE) in a multi-donor programme known as the ‘Education Quality Reform in Afghanistan
(EQRA)’ Programme. Within the EQRA, the World Bank has been working on development of teacher
policy in terms of recruitment, planning (including allocation and management), capacity and
enhancement. The GATE programme complements this intervention and other efforts by the MoE to
tackle the inconsistent recruitment and allocation of teachers, by focusing on supply side issues as well as
the gender imbalance in the teacher workforce.
However, there is no deliberate intention set out in the GATE Programme design and implementation to
link with similar key interventions in Afghanistan, such as:
• The Education Quality Reform in Afghanistan (EQRA) Programme: This is a multi-donor
programme that is being implemented by the World Bank in collaboration with the GPE—which
focuses on the development of teacher policy in terms of recruitment, planning (including
allocation and management), capacity and enhancement.
• The MoE Women’s Economic Empowerment: This intervention is prioritised in the Government
of Afghanistan’s 5-year strategic plan for the education sector (NESP III) to increase the availability
of female teachers in rural areas.
• The GIZ support to TTCs: The GIZ works in collaboration with the Teacher Education Directorate
(TED)—the main implementing partner for the GATE Programme— to build the capacity of
lecturers in terms of delivery of learner centred methodology and pedagogy.
Though UNICEF ACO has recently collaborated with UNESCO in a nationwide curriculum reform process
and support to 966 female students to reach a minimum Grade 14 qualification and benefit from
enrolment into teacher training centres (UNICEF Afghanistan, 2018, pp. 4, 10), the strategic linkage with
the GATE Programme is absent. Similarly, the implied linkage with the CBE has not been outlined.
Increased partnership and coordination would be strategic for the programme.
40
3.3 Efficiency
This section discusses the extent to which the resources (financial and human) allocated to the GATE
Programme are appropriate to support the implementation of the strategies and the achievement of the
expected results. As discussed earlier, UNICEF’s main partner for the GATE Programme is the MoE. UNICEF
staff acknowledged that the organisation was strategically placed to implement the GATE Programme
because it has the resources, the experience and a good working relationship with the MoE at national,
provincial and district levels.
The evaluation was not able to fully assess the efficiency in the use of the available human, operational
(in terms of how well the programme was managed) and financial resources because UNICEF’s approach
to programming generally meant that the operational aspects of the GATE Programme were intertwined
with those of the MoE. Nonetheless, the evaluation found that UNICEF was, to a large extent, able to
implement the programme and achieve the intended results because it invested sufficient financial and
human resources, as well as extensive experience in the education sector.
It is clear that the resources which were allocated to the GATE Programme were calibrated to support the
work on a number of levels, and were in line with country and sector practice as outlined by UNICEF ACO
on the revision of allowances for lecturers and mentors in 201913.
3.3.1 Financial Resources
The GATE Programme had different funding sources as discussed in Section 1.2. UNICEF staff reported
that UNICEF was able to source funds for the programme because it is reputed as a trusted and reliable
organisation that implements programmes according to international rules and regulations. The budget
expenditure report to the Government of Korea (UNICEF Afghanistan, 2018) stated that 50% of the budget
for the two-year project had been received in the first year and more than 50% of that was spent. This
suggests that the expenditure rate was on track at the time. This was affirmed in the final report on
Improving Access to Quality Education for Girls in Afghanistan (UNICEF Afghanistan, 2020) which gave a
utilisation rate of 99.96%.
The evaluation also found that financial resource allocation was sufficiently flexible to respond to the
discontinuities and reconnections in the programme implementation. For instance, money paid to
mentors was revised in 2019 based on consultations with the MoE and the TED, and in comparison, with
other organisations implementing similar interventions.14
13 The mentors were initially paid an allowance of $50 per month for 6 months for overtime and transport between
2015 – 2018, and this was increased to $60 a month for 9 months in 2019.
14 As above
41
3.3.2 Human Resources
At PED level, interviewed respondents believed that there were sufficient personnel to support the GATE
Programme. The PED and DED respondents indicated that their respective departments were very active
in supporting implementation of the GATE Programme components.
le
n
n
o
s r 1 1
e
P
D
E
D
/
D
E
P
f
o
r e 2 2 2 2 2
b
m
u 1 1
N
Badghis Helmand Khost Laghman Nangahar Paktia Wardak
Very Active Active Don't Know
Graph 5: Perceptions on how active PED and DED are in supporting the GATE Programme
UNICEF staff working on the GATE Programme in Helmand, Nangahar and Wardak reported that they
monitored the programme once a month while monitoring was reported to take place once every 4
months by staff members in Kabul. The majority of UNICEF staff interviewed indicated that they
monitored the programme activities once a month.
However, UNICEF staff indicated that capacity within the MoE may be a challenge for various reasons.
Because MoE officials are regularly moved from one department to another, the evaluation found that
some personnel who had been involved in the beginning of the programme were no longer available. One
DED respondent pointed out that this is a challenge particularly for programme monitoring and quality
assessment as the programme was implemented.
3.3.3 Timeliness
All UNICEF staff reported that all activities were implemented well and that there were no major delays
in processing the programme budget or in programme implementation. They indicated that programme
implementation was within the planned timelines and the minimal implementation delays were tied to
student recruitment as it was difficult to find interested females who also met the requirements for the
scholarship programme in some areas. Both PED and DED respondents also said the programme
implementation and support have been smooth, despite a few challenges such as the COVID-19 pandemic.
42
3.3.4 Could the same or better results have been achieved using different strategies?
Within the context of work in Afghanistan it is very difficult to assess, with a reasonable degree of
certainty, whether there would have been the same or better results by using different strategies or
resources. Most activities have areas which can be improved and it is unlikely that the GATE Programme
is the exception. UNICEF staff gave the feedback that the current strategies were the best, and they
suggested that the programme had been very beneficial and employed the best approach to increase the
number of female teachers and build the capacity of in-service female teachers in Afghanistan. The PED,
DED and scholarship recipients felt that the programme would achieve even better results if it was
expanded to more areas.
However, based on the findings, this evaluation highlights some key areas where better results may have
been achieved. These are coordination, collaboration, programme monitoring, implementation, and
awareness and discussed here briefly.
Coordination: Several DED respondents indicated that there was need to review the coordination
approach in different areas because some areas required their own unique, suitable approach. Details of
this were not provided, however. Most PED respondents felt that the programme’s overall coordination
was positive. However, they also stated that there was a need to improve coordination processes such as
‘regular meetings to exchange more opinions between TTCs, Students, Teachers, and Communities’. The
PED and DED respondents also highlighted the need for the teacher recruitment processes to be better
coordinated between the TED and TCCs. They emphasized the need for improved coordination with the
MoE as a means to address the employment prospects of GATE Programme graduates in terms of
recruitment and creating job opportunities for them.
Collaboration: The evaluation found that collaboration between the programme and other related
initiatives has not been strong. There was potential for the GATE Programme to partner and collaborate
with other education sector programmes—both formally and informally—and this has not been well
utilised. For instance, internally within UNICEF ACO there has been no direct link between the GATE
Programme and the CBE Programme. Key UNICEF staff members confirmed that the GATE Programme
was designed as an exit strategy for CBE which was designed as a temporary measure, and aimed at being
a bridge between the CBE and Afghanistan’s mainstream education sector. It was designed to increase
the number of trained teachers in rural/hard-to-reach areas where CBE was being implemented to provide
education where qualified female teachers were not available. Given the importance of female teacher
recruitment in the CBEs and in mainstream education, there is no direct access for GATE Programme
graduates within CBE programming, and no specific access for CBE educators/teachers to benefit from
the GATE Programme scholarships. This potential was previously highlighted in the BEGE mid-term review
(The Konterra Group, 2019, p. 45). This evaluation concluded that better results may be achieved by
improving the partnership and collaboration with other programmes within UNICEF’s broader education
programming, and also with other key stakeholders within the education sector including the World Bank
and GIZ as discussed in section 3.4.
Programme Monitoring: The evaluation concluded that although some programme monitoring
information was available, it was not in one central place and this brought about some challenges of
availability and accuracy of available information and data. Within UNICEF, programme monitoring staff
are based at provincial level, and appear to work with PED and DED personnel. The evaluation did not
43
come across a database to collect and organise monitoring information for the programme, despite
UNICEF having a presence at provincial levels. The evaluation noted that UNICEF, the PED and the TTCs
were involved in scholarship recipient selection and therefore had some student data. UNICEF staff
indicated that the programme had focal points at provincial level who may have some monitoring reports
and that district level monitoring information may be available from the TTCs. However, the evaluation
did not come across these data. The PED and DED respondents indicated that there was need to improve
monitoring and assessment of the programme. Of note was that personnel from within the PED
highlighted budget constraints as an issue that affected frequent monitoring of the programme. The
evaluation concluded that there is a substantial gap in programme monitoring but that there is scope for
innovation and context for appropriate methods of programme monitoring data to be collected and
managed.
Recruitment: The GATE Programme worked at a number of levels of which, arguably, the most important
was the identification of females with the potential to benefit from the teacher training offer and, with
that, the two year scholarship. Available information suggested that there were difficulties in recruiting
sufficient females in some of the provinces but once recruited, there was a high retention rate. What
worked in the most successful recruitment areas will need to be looked at more closely so that the
strategies can be expanded.
Targetting: The evaluation confirmed that the GATE Programme is implemented in rural and hard-to-
reach areas as outlined in the situation analyses detailed in the programme documents (UNICEF
Afghanistan, 2014, p. 8; UNICEF Afghanistan, 2020, p. 6). The evaluation concluded that though the
scholarship programme aimed to recruit both pre-service teachers and in-service teachers, it did not set
out definite targets for each distinct group. Potentially, the programme results could be measured more
clearly if there was a clearer target and rationale on how many pre-service females were to be recruited
and trained, and how many in-service female teachers were recruited and upskilled. Having listed the
measurable key performance indicators at the inception stage of the project could be very helpful.
Employment: The mid-point of the programme’s long-term strategy was the employment of the
scholarship graduates in schools in their communities. However, this does not appear to have been
successful with records for the period under evaluation indicating that only 42% of pre-service graduates
had been employed after graduation, and 69% of graduates who participated in the study indicating that
they are currently employed. The evaluation found that the success of the programme in this area is
unclear for various reasons, of which the absence of support from the programme for the graduates is the
most apparent.
Awareness: Respondents highlighted public awareness campaigns as an important programme
component (Refer to Section 3.1.2). However, available information indicates that the engagement of the
community in raising awareness about the GATE scholarship programme may have been minimal. For
instance, only 14% of the scholarship recipients reported that they had heard about the GATE Programme
through their respective communities.
44
2%
7%
14%
Advertisement
Community
School
Other
77%
Figure 4: Sources from where scholarship recipients first heard about the GATE Programme
Students and graduates also indicated that the programme may achieve even better results by increasing
awareness through other channels within their communities.
“When they are provided public awareness, the numbers of female teachers will be increased in schools.
Also, this point should be mentioned by Mullah Imam as most of our people believe to Mullah Imam.
Therefore, they can provide awareness to the families through the mosques. They should encourage the
people to let their daughters who have been graduated from 12th class to join the GATE programme so
that they could serve for their own as well as the community.” KII Student, Helmand Province.
PED and DED respondents also emphasized the need to scale up the public awareness campaign in places
such as mosques.
3.4 Effectiveness
This section discusses how the available evidence highlights what worked and what did not work in the
GATE programme in Afghanistan. It also looks at whether the programme achieved its objectives.
The evaluation noted that the GATE Programme exceeded its targets on many levels. It reached 1,627
scholarship recipients against the target of 1200, 232 Lecturers against the target of 224, and 167 mentors
against the target of 120. The positive feedback received on the establishment of the GATE Programme
close to the target populations in hard-to-reach areas, and the reported acceptance in communities
highlighted by evaluation respondents spoke high of the success and effectiveness of the programme. The
evaluation concluded that having the students trained as a distinct cohort within or close enough to their
communities has been particularly effective as it allows students to access the teacher training closer to
where they are based and within acceptable social and cultural norms.
45
3.4.1 Increased female teacher presence
During the period under evaluation, the programme had enrolled a total of 1,625 scholarship recipients.
Almost 68% (1,105) of them had graduated, and the total number of scholarship recipients who had
dropped out was 120 (approximately 7%) (Graph 4). It is evident that once scholarships were awarded,
the programme had a high retention rate. Participation in lessons was also positive with 58% of students
who participated in the survey reporting that that they had not missed a day of college within the previous
3 months. This is indicative of a positive commitment by scholarship recipients to train as teachers or
indeed to teach in schools.
80
s t 70
n
e
ip
60
68
ic
e
r
p 50
ih
s
r
a 40
lo
h
c
s 30
e
g
a
t n 20 25
e
c
r
e 10
P
7
0
Graduated Drop Outs Still on Programme
Graph 6: Percentage of students enrolled during 2015 - 2019
The data also confirms that the GATE Programme has made it possible for more female teachers to be
available in Afghanistan. For instance, of the total number of scholarship students during the period under
review, 54% (877) were pre-service students and 46% (750) were in-service students. Of the total pre-
service teachers on the programme, 42% have now been employed as teachers.
46
877Pre-Service
Teacher
Scholarship
Recipients
366Pre-Service
Graduates
Employed
Pre-Service Teacher Scholarship Pre-Service Graduates Employed as
Recipients Teachers
Graph 7: Number of pre-service scholarship recipients on the programme between 2015 – 2019
Out of the 180 programme graduates who participated in the survey, 41% were employed as teachers in
permanent positions and 28% on contract positions (Figure 5).
Figure 5: Percentage distribution of contract types
31%
41%
28%
Not teaching Contract Permanent
Among the graduates who are currently teaching with permanent or temporary contracts, 97% reported
that they teach in government schools, 2% in community schools and 1% in private schools. A breakdown
of these data by province indicated that all the programme graduates in Badghis, Helmand, Laghman, and
Nangarhar provinces teach in government schools, while in Khost the figure is at 94%. The graduates
teaching in community schools are all based in Paktia (3%) and Wardak (8%).
47
100
n 90
i
g
ns 80
ihlo
co
ah 70
ec
t
s e
s
f o 60
t
a s
ue 50
dp
ay
r
g
t
t
40
e g a n e r e 30
t n e f f id 20
c
r
e 10
P
0
Badghis Helmand Khost Laghman Nangarhar Paktya Wardak
Community school Government school Private school
Graph 8: Percentage graduates by type of school they are teaching in
69% of these graduate respondents who were pre-service scholarship recipients indicated that they are
employed as teachers by government or on government payroll. Of this group, 50% of the graduates
reported that they were retained on government payroll 1-3 months after graduating and 24% were
retained over a year after graduation.
50%
s
e
t
a
u
d
a 24%
r
g 20%
e
g
a
t n 6%
e
c 0
r
e
P
1 - 3 months after4 - 6 months after7 - 9 months after 10 - 12 months 13 - 24 months
after after
Duration after graduation before being on government payroll
Graph 9: Percentage of graduates for different durations before being retained on government payroll
after graduation
This indicates that waiting time for employment for 50% of the respondents was been between 1 – 3
months, with only a quarter of the respondents indicating that they had waited over a year.
48
The evaluation also found that a very high proportion of scholarship recipients indicated that they hoped
to continue teaching in rural and hard-to-reach areas in the future. As shown in Graph 10 below, 92%
answered ‘yes’ when asked if they expect to have a teaching career in rural and hard-to-reach areas of
the country after graduation.
% scholarship recipients who hope to teach in rural or hard to reach
areas after graduation
100
90
80
70
60
50
92
40
30
20
10
8
0
Yes No
Graph 10: Percentage of scholarship recipients hoping to work in hard-to-reach areas after graduation
These future aspirations, when analysed together with the high programme retention and high graduation
rate, speak positively to how the GATE Programme is contributing to increased female teacher presence
in rural or hard-to-reach areas in Afghanistan.
The evaluation also noted that broadly, and though subjective, all respondents indicated that the
programme has contributed to an increase in the number of female teachers. This includes the PED and
DED respondents who indicated that the GATE Programme is effective as it provides support to females
in hard-to-reach areas by providing them with an opportunity to train as teachers and contributing to the
increase in numbers of female students and teachers. Also, 87% of the survey respondents felt that there
are now more teachers in schools because of the GATE Programme.
49
55%
s
t
n
e
ip
ic
e
r
p 32%
ih
s
r
a
lo
h
c
s
e
g
a 10%
t
n
e
c 3%
r 1%
e
P
Strongly disagree Disagree Neutral Agree Strongly agree
Graph 11: Perceptions of scholarship recipients on whether there has been an increase in the number of
female teachers in schools in their communities
This data was further broken down by province in the Graph 12 below and shows general consensus
among respondents from all 7 provinces that took part in this evaluation.
14
19 20
24
40
s
t n 50
e Strongly agree
ip 62
ic
e
r Agree
p ih 44
s
r Neutral
a
lo 65
h 80
c s 70 Disagree
e 44
g
a
t 35 Strongly
n
e
c disagree
r
e
P 28
38
6
10
6 2 16 4 4 3
4 4 4 2 2
Badghis Helmand Khost Laghman Nangarhar Paktya Wardak
Graph 12: Perceptions of scholarship recipients on whether there has been an increase in the number of
female teachers in their communities by province
50
3.4.2 Increased access and participation of girls in learning spaces
A recurring view from participants across the provinces was that female teacher presence is a crucial
factor that encourages families to support and motivate females to continue with education. The
scholarship graduates stressed the need for more female teachers to be employed on a permanent basis
to retain them and in turn encourage girls education. They indicated that the presence of female teachers
would build confidence for girls in learning spaces as they would be more comfortable being taught by
female teachers.
The evaluation also noted that all teachers who work with programme graduates reported that female
teacher presence in schools creates a conducive learning environment for girls, and that parents are more
comfortable to send their daughters to school if their teachers are female, especially for girls in 6th grade
onwards. For example, one of the respondents noted:
“We want to increase the number of female teachers in schools because girls do not want to be in class
with male teachers, and this thing has motivated me to train as a teacher.” KII respondent in Badghis
Similar were the views in other provinces. For example, the FGD respondents in Paktia and Nangahar
provinces shared:
“We faced the problems that male teachers taught us, and some of our classmates left the class. So when
we graduated from school, we decided to start on the GATE Programme and the girls who had left their
lessons started this programme with us.” Graduate FGD Discussant from Paktia Province.
“My family and community have been supportive of my training because the area does not have female
teachers.” Student FGD Discussant, Nangahar Province
Pupils (46 female and 1 male) being taught by programme graduates also stated that it is essential for
them to have female teachers as their parents would not allow them to attend school if their teachers are
male.
“I have my example because I wanted to prepare for the Kankor examination. My father had no problem.
I wanted to take the Kankor preparation class and have brought the brochures with me. My father asked
who the teacher is. Is he a male or female? I told him the teacher is male; consequently, I was not allowed”.
Pupil from Laghman
The pupils indicated that they are more comfortable with female teachers and can better express
themselves. Several pupils also suggested that female teachers had more commitment to their teaching
jobs than their male counterparts. For instance, the discussants in the FGD of pupils taught by programme
graduates in Nangahar said female teachers are more understanding and never absent from school unlike
their male counterparts who were often absent and do not check homework and school work regularly.
Noteworthy is that the students and graduates who participated in the evaluation all felt that the number
of girls accessing education in recent years has increased in their respective schools. More than half of the
headteachers who participated in the study attributed the increased enrollment rates in their schools to
the GATE programme graduates teaching there. While data is not collected on the actual change in
enrolment and retention rates, these reports indicate that the presence of female teachers clearly have
an impact on girl children’s participation in learning space.
51
Pupils taught by the programme graduates indicated that their communities support community learning
centres and that more families are now encouraging their daughters to go to school.
“Yes, for sure. People support females to learn and work as teachers as well as they send their girls to go
and study in schools. For example, when my sister goes to school, the drivers stop their rickshaws to take
her to school, which can be a good example of motivation.” Pupil, Laghman Province
“Yes, our community is supportive of encouraging female teachers to work in our community. For example,
our families pay our transportation, stationary, and clothing expenses to go to school and study.” Pupil,
Badghis Province
GATE Programme graduates who are currently teaching also reported that since they started teaching,
there were now more girls in their schools.
There are now more females in this school because of GATE
programme.
Strongly Agree Agree Neutral Disaggree Strongly Disagree
Figure 6: Perceptions of scholarship recipients on an increase in the number of girls in their schools
/communities
All respondents felt that by enabling girls to access education through increasing the number of female
teachers, the GATE Programme has contributed to progress towards the achievement of children’s rights,
empowerment and gender equality. 78% of the scholarship recipients reported that staff members in the
schools in their communities encourage the enrolment of both male and female pupils in schools, and
75% of them indicated that staff also encouraged the enrolment of minority students, students living in
poverty, children with disabilities or special needs and other disadvantaged children who may be at risk
of poor education outcomes.
52
3.4.3 Reduction of of inequalities and exclusion especially for marginalized communities in hard-to-
reach areas
The programme strategy of targeting province with low number of female teachers and proving
opportunities for women in itself contributed towards the reduction of inequalities and exclusion. In
contexts where the proportion of females working as teachers is quite low, the programme trained over
1,200 females as teachers and around two thirds are now working in hard to reach araes which can be
considered a substantial contribution of the programme.
The general view of study participants is also that the intervention has positively contributed to the
reduction of inequalities and exclusion especially for marginalised and hard-to-reach areas. One DED
respondent stated that the GATE Programme had ‘facilitated a cultural reform through the promotion of
gender equality and an increased number of female students in communities, which has almost become
the norm’. Evidently, the programme has created a sense of trust that allows parents to permit their
daughters to attend either schools or TTCs. As another DED respondent said, ‘Some community members
also voluntarily sent their children to the schools, without the scholarship package, due to the perceived
benefits of the programme and education’.
3.4.4 Increased awareness among communities and community leaders of the importance of education
especially for the girl child and the presence of female teachers in their communities
This evaluation demonstrated that communities play an important role in providing support and an
enabling environment for the scholarship recipients, and for children to participate in learning spaces. .
However, this evaluation was unable to determine with any degree of certainty that this is because of the
GATE Programme only. The programme’s community engagement has been implicitly referred to by
UNICEF staff but no details are available on form and the extent of the engagement. The SMS and the
scholarship recipients make mention of community awareness and involvement, but available
information does not directly link specific programme activities with this.
Considering that strict community norms and cultural values can hinder the participation of females in
education in parts of Afghanistan, the support provided by community members and community leaders
can be crucial for the success of the GATE programme.
All respondents felt that the community attitudes and awareness towards girls’ education has changed
positively in recent years, with 96% of the scholarship recipients agreeing or strongly agreeing with this.
All respondents also reported that they had observed positive attitudes within their communities. For
instance, 78% of scholarship recipients reported that staff from TTCs and schools in their communities
make direct contact with families whose children drop out of school or college, or are at risk of dropping
out, to encourage continued enrolment. And 91% of them indicated that when students are absent from
college or school for more than a few days, staff make direct contact with their families to find out what
the issues are and to facilitate their return to school or college as soon as possible.
53
Of particular note is that 91% of the scholarship recipients reported that their communities have an active
SMS, with 78% indicating that the SMS actively supports female students to attend school or college
regularly. The discussants in the SMS FGDs also indicated that the levels of awareness on the importance
of education appear to have increased within their communities and among their community leaders..
Similarly, 85% of the scholarship recipients felt that the adults in their respective communities encourage
them to take education seriously, including staff from their schools and TTCs. This confirms that
community members and community leaders are aware of the importance of girls’ education in their
communities.
DED respondents in particular indicated an ‘increased sense of trust, confidence, motivation, eagerness,
and sufficient awareness, regarding the benefits of education’. A sense of appreciation of female teachers
and satisfaction with the GATE implementers was also highlighted by the PED and DED respondents, which
they felt encouraged parents to send their daughters to participate in the GATE Programme. All
respondents pointed out that more girls are now allowed to go to school and higher education or
universities, and future employment opportunities are now available for females. Reports of more girls
being allowed by family members to attend learning spaces demonstrates that the communities and their
community leaders have an increased awareness of the right to education.
It was reported that the programme was launched based on requests from several communities after
advocacy campaigns for girls’ education. UNICEF staff highlighted that the programme was designed to
consider the communities first and has not faced major challenges because of this approach.
“This programme is in full coordination with the community. In this programme, the school, department
of education, elders of the families, teacher training college, and everyone else who needs to be in this
program is engaged in it. I think this strategy is very effective. If it wasn't so, it would not have been such
a success in so many places.” UNICEF Staff Member
UNICEF staff indicated that the programme has engaged communities through their leaders and
stakeholders to advocate for girls’ education and this has contributed to the success of the programme as
well as to the increased demand for girls’ education beyond the 6th grade in most areas. UNICEF staff also
reported that more communities were requesting for the programme to be introduced in a broader range
of areas – a good indication that their awareness on the importance of educating the girl child had
increased. Both current students and programme graduates reported that cultural beliefs and values
regarding gender sensitive issues had changed in their communities because of the education classes that
had been conducted within communities. Scholarship recipients (both current students and graduates)
also acknowledged that community support is available for girls’ education.
Interesting to note is that 76% of the scholarship recipients appreciated that females are encouraged to
participate in school activities outside the classroom, while only 63% felt that females are allowed to do
so.
54
164
144
s
t
n
e
ip
ic 101
e
r
p 72 70
ih 58
s r 48
a
lo
h 17
c s 6 12
f
o
r
e
b Strongly Agree Agree Neutral Disaggree Strongly
m
u Disagree
N
Females are encouraged to participate in school activities outside the cassroom
(e.g., clubs, sports)
Females are allowed to participate in school activities outside the classroom
Graph 13: Community attitudes towards female participation in school activities outside the classroom
This difference was noteworthy especially within the existing cultural norms and values in Afghanistan—
possibly more so in rural areas— where female participation in public or semi-public spaces is widely
viewed as taboo. A breakdown of the perceptions on being allowed to participate in activities outside
school by province is provided below with data from Khost and Laghman indicating the least favourable
perceptions.
55
4 6 2 2 2
7
14
6
18 18
8 33
s
t
e
n
ip 28
ic e 54 47 24
r
p
ih
47
s 52 8
r a 29
lo
h
c
s
e 36
g
a t 38
n
e 37
c r 42 30
e
P 33
28
20
12
8 7
Badghis Helmand Khost Laghman Nangarhar Paktya Wardak
Strongly disagree Disagree Neutral Agree Strongly agree
Graph 14: Perceptions of scholarship recipients on whether females participate in activities outside
school
From this information, it appears that there has been increased awareness of the importance of education
for girls and the presence of female teachers in their communities
3.4.5 Government positioning to increase the numbers of qualified and competent female teachers in
the education sector
The evaluation illustrated that the Government of Afghanistan has positioned itself well to support the
programme to increase the numbers of qualified and competent female teachers in the education sector
and this is evident in the national commitments discussed in section 1.3.2. The government has provided
an enabling policy environment for the programme to be implemented, with corresponding strategies at
national and provincial levels. A significant approach is the 5-year strategic plan for the education sector
(NESP III) which has prioritised increasing the availability of female teachers through the Women’s
Economic Empowerment (WEE) Programme. The MoE also engaged with the key stakeholders and
development partners to implement these policies and strategies.
3.5 Sustainability
Sustainability in GATE programme can not be approached as for other interventions because it is a
temporary measure to continue affirmative action. This means that the intervention itself need not to be
sustainable but the initiatives within the programme may be. This section looks at the mechanisms and
56
policies that exist and would sustain the GATE Programme initiatives. It assesses the extent to which the
benefits of the programme are likely to continue, and specifically explores how sustainable the GATE
Programme is in terms of cost, acceptance by communities and employment opportunities of the GATE
graduates into government payroll and private ventures.
The evaluation inferred that Afghanistan has taken major strides in achieving gender equity in education
by increasing the numbers of female teachers and the number of girls accessing and participating in
education. National policies exist that can potentially sustain the GATE Programme initiatives. These
include the Constitution (Articles 17, 43 and 44), the Education Law (Articles 3, 4, and 19), the Education
for All agreement (2005) and the NESP III which all have provisions to sustain the strategic interventions
in the GATE Programme. The setting of the GATE Programme within the overall girls’ education strategy
(Ministry of Education, 2019) and planning provides further evidence of the policy commitments that may
sustain the programme. This is because the factors which have an impact of whether, when and how well
girls and females take part in education, especially in rural and remote areas (security, hygiene, household
economy, cultural and other issues) are important and have a gendered impact.
The partnership approach between UNICEF and the MoE appears to be ideal for sustainability of the
programme. Available information in programme documents and from the KIIs suggest that the capacity
building components of the programme could enable the TTCs and the MoE to own the core activities of
the programme—including the training of lecturers and mentors in gender responsive pedagogy—and
this could sustain the programme at the district and provincial levels. The involvement, motivation and
reinforcement of the TTCs is relevant to ensure the strength of the intervention beyond the programme's
lifetime.
3.5.1 Cost
Though the evaluation did not include a cost analysis, available information on adjustments made to cost
components of the GATE Programme in 2019 indicate that in its current form, the GATE Programme
implementation costs are in line with similar interventions in the sector. The programme was funded
through off-budget support to the MoE and was dependent on international donor funding. The
programme components have not been mainstreamed into the MoE’s work and this may be a challenge
to sustain and expand on some of the important gains made by the programme. The evaluation deduced
that in its current form, the programme cannot be sustained without considerable financial support and
long term commitments from donors and implementing partners. UNICEF staff and PED highlighted this
as the major issue that would affect the programme’s performance and possibly impact.
3.5.2 Acceptance by Communities
The evaluation determined that the GATE Programme is widely accepted and appreciated in the
communities in which it is being implemented, and all respondents indicated that they would like the
programme to continue. The evaluation summarised strong evidence of the high level of acceptability,
demonstrated by the fact that parents and communities have allowed their children and female family
members to participate in the GATE Programme’s education. Overall, the respondents all felt that the
GATE Programme should continue and if possible be improved and expanded. The FGDs revealed that the
57
local communities, through the SMS and families, have supported females to train as teachers. The
evaluation concluded that there is enthusiasm and commitment for the programme at community level,
and this creates and contributes to demand for the programme. The sustained efforts to develop
relationships of trust between communities and [education] providers—whether government or
international development organisations—is a key factor in ensuring and protecting important gains made
for women and girls and their participation in learning spaces.
Available information suggests that community members and leaders play a significant role in their
communities to promote awareness of the importance of education and to support girls’ education and
female teacher training. With complex issues including religious and cultural dynamics, communication
and engagement with communities are necessary to ensure that the programme remains relevant and
adaptable. Though the evaluation brought to light a level of awareness and support for the GATE
Programme in communities, the community advocacy and engagement component in the programme is
missing—and where it has been mentioned it appears to be weak and possibly informal, and has not gone
beyond the SMS. The evaluation determined that a link with the religious leaders may complement and
further strengthen community acceptance and involvement, as would a connection with other community
services which are primarily accepted by communities such as health.
3.5.3 Employment opportunities of GATE graduates
The study found that 42% of pre-service scholarship recipients who had graduated are employed, with
69% of them employed by government. The evaluation determined that the GATE Programme does not
explicitly support the recruitment of programme graduates as teachers in any way despite the intent in
the ToC to do so through graduate networks. Both current students and graduates of the programme
indicated that they are willing to serve in their communities including hard-to-reach areas. They also
indicated their willingness to continue their teaching careers if there were increased opportunities for
permanent employment, and if safety and security were addressed. The lack of support in recruitment
was also highlighted by all respondents, and several students indicated that ‘the GATE Programme should
assist the programme’s graduates to get recruited’. Both students and graduates in the FGDs stated that
the lack of formal employment opportunities was a significant issue for them and they highlighted that
support for employment opportunities after graduation was a noteworthy gap in the programme.
The evaluation did not find evidence of any deliberate component or strategy to assist or support the
programme graduates to get employment. This was consistently evident and highlighted among all
respondents in the evaluation. For instance, several of the students and graduates suggested that the
GATE Programme could do more to assist them get employed after graduation.
“The other support is that we should be introduced to the Directorate of Education and provide the
opportunity of being teachers in schools.” Graduate FGD Discussant
Similarly, UNICEF staff suggested that a signed MoU with the MoE would be cardinal to ensure that the
programme graduates are employed and retained on a permanent basis. The evaluation noted that
though only the headteachers in Laghman and Wardak reported that they have teacher vacancies in their
schools, all the headteachers who were interviewed—besides those in Nangahar—reported that they do
58
not have the required number of teachers in their schools. This was not explored by the evaluation, but it
still indicates that there is a need for new teachers to be recruited in the participating districts.
Of particular note is that the current students and graduates (both unemployed and employed) did not
appear to understand the role of the GATE Student Network to assist with recruitment even though they
stated that they are members of the network. The programme documents indicates that support is
provided through these networks but the evaluation did not find any deliberate strategies in place as part
of the programme and did not explore the specific challenges faced by the network. However, the current
structure indicates that there is no link with the government and this may be an issue.
The evaluation highlighted that the MoE is actively committed to increasing the number of female
teachers in coming years. With the active involvement of the MoE in the GATE Programme
implementation through the TED at provincial and district levels, the evaluation determined that there is
a strong underpinning for this component of the programme to be strengthened and sustained.
4.0 CONCLUSIONS: RESPONDING TO EVALUATION PRIORITIES
The report has presented the key findings in relation to each of the evaluation criteria. This chapter
provides a conclusion by summarising the key findings of the evaluation, presenting them in relation to
the adapted OECD-DAC criteria. The chapter therefore provides a summary of the evaluation findings on
relevance, coherence, efficiency, effectiveness, and sustainability of the programme, as well as the
integration of gender, human rights and equity. Each of these criteria is discussed in turn in the following
subsections.
Overall, the evaluation concludes that the GATE Programme was well-designed and well-implemented,
and finds that some features of the programme are particularly strong.
4.1 Relevance
The evaluation determined that the GATE Programme was developed after drawing from existing
information and data, as well as from the processes and experiences in related projects. Evidence on
whether participatory consultations were conducted during programme development is weak. Still,
available information suggests that programme development included important information on the
needs and priorities of girls and communities experiencing the greatest exclusion or inequality. This
information has been highlighted in the education sector review (Ministry of Education, 2019) and the
National Education Strategic Plan (Ministry of Education, 2016), which both appear to guide the
programme strategy.
The evaluation concludes that the programme design is suitable to tackle the main challenges faced by
girls and female students, especially in the targeted provinces. The evidence highlighted access to learning
spaces and the importance of having female teachers as main challenges faced by girls. The GATE
Programme strategically combined two projects to address these challenges, and was implemented in
provinces with the lowest numbers and percentages of female teachers and low enrolment rates for girls
(UNICEF Afghanistan, 2014).
59
It addresses the demand side barriers to girls’ access to education by providing scholarships and support
for females, including a transport allowance which has come out as the most important component of the
programme. The programme addresses the supply side bottleneck in girls’ participation in education by
contributing to the increase in the number of female teachers through providing an opportunity for
females to be trained as teachers. The students are facilitated with targeted training as a distinct cohort
outside the mainstream training, as well as addressing the quality of their training by providing capacity
building in gender responsive pedagogy for the programme lecturers, and providing mentorship support
for the students throughout the training process and even beyond. In order to tackle the challenges faced
by female teachers, the programme also targets in-service female teachers who have not achieved the
Grade 14 qualification and offers them the opportunity to do so.
In summary, the evaluation concludes that the GATE Programme as a strategy is extremely relevant to
the present context of girls’ education in Afghanistan and therefore can be scaled up.
4.2 Coherence
The evaluation established that the GATE Programme ToC reflects the broader national education policy
priorities by addressing both the supply and demand side barriers (described above) of girls’ education
through a focus on increasing the numbers of qualified female teachers in Afghanistan. From available
information, the evaluation determined that the programme is complementary and harmonized with
various key interventions in Afghanistan at national, provincial and district levels. These interventions
include the government’s WEE Programme aimed at increasing the numbers of female teachers, the
World Bank’s collaboration with the GPE in the EQRA Programme which aims to build capacity and
improve recruitment processes for teachers, and the GIZ support to TTCs in collaboration with the TED to
build capacity of lecturers in terms of delivery of learner centred methodology and pedagogy. The
effectiveness of the GATE Programme can be attributed to its coherence with other interventions in the
sector. Further focus on certain areas that need improvement (e.g. enhancing community engagement to
increase acceptance for girls education and developing mechanisms and partnerships to ensure
employment for graduates) can improve the coherence of programme strategies even further.
4.3 Efficiency
The evaluation could not fully assess the efficiency in the use of the available human, operational (in terms
of how well the programme was managed) and financial resources on the GATE Programme. The
evaluation found that UNICEF’s operational aspects of the programme are intertwined with those of the
MoE as the main implementing partner for the programme. This was discussed with UNICEF over the
course of the evaluation, and the limitations regarding the extent of this analysis were acknowledged.
Nonetheless, the evaluation found that UNICEF was, to a large extent, able to implement the programme
and achieve the intended results because it has sufficient financial and human resources, as well as
extensive experience in the education sector. It is evident that the resources which were allocated to the
GATE Programme were calibrated to support the work on a number of levels, and were in line with the
country and sector practice. Budget utilisation was on track, and most notably, the evaluation found that
the financial resource allocation was sufficiently flexible to realign the unit costs for allowances for
lecturers and mentors and with other scholarship programmes in Afghanistan during programme
implementation.
60
The evaluation found that coordination and programme monitoring appeared to be weak. The evidence
suggests that the available human resources in both UNICEF and the TED at provincial and district levels
may not have been well utilized for programme monitoring. The evaluation concluded that the results
may have been noted well if a robust monitoring framework was available for the programme. At
provincial level, the evaluation determined that the programme has underutilised UNICEF’s advantage of
having provincial offices, strong working relationships with the PED and DED, as well as other programme
monitoring structures including the UNICEF Technical Extenders in the target provinces, the Department
of Social Mobilisation and Shuras (DSMS) and the National Institute for Educational Planning (NIEP). At
the national level, the evaluation noted the constraints to efficient programme monitoring due to an
absence of key programme monitoring information. This could be mitigated by the development and use
of a unified programme monitoring database for the programme.
4.4 Effectiveness
The evaluation concluded that though the GATE Programme has been effective in a several ways, it has
not been effective in supporting the graduate students with attaining employment and becoming
tecahers. It has provided females with the opportunity to train as teachers and has afforded female
teachers who had not achieved the Grade 14 qualification to do so. However, it has not supported the
pre-service graduate students to attain employment and work as teachers after graduating. The findings
from this evaluation paint an overall positive picture in terms of the effectiveness of the GATE Programme
in the period 2015 – 2019, and progress towards the achievement of children’s rights, reduction of
inequalities and exclusion, and gender equality in hard-to-reach areas. The evidence suggests that the
programme effectively contributed to the empowerment of females in Afghanistan by contributing to an
increase in the number of qualified female teachers in the hard to reach areas—68% of students had
graduated (with 42% of the pre-service students being employed after graduation) during the period
under review and the drop-out rate was low at 7.4%. Similarly, the evaluation found that programme
beneficiaries and the SMS all indicated that communities have positive perceptions of the programme,
with community members appearing to have an increased awareness of the importance of education for
girls and the importance of the presence of female teachers in schools.
The evaluation concluded that though there are still some challenges, the programme continues to
produce tangible results with high fidelity of programme implementation. The evaluation also determined
that the programme’s components work well but some of them can be improved upon—including the
capacity building and community engagement aspects—to strengthen the programme further.
Implementation of the capacity building element for lecturers appears to have been scanty and weak in
terms of frequency and reach, and it is non-existent for mentors. Though the evaluation concluded that
lecturer and mentor capacity were not an issue in programme implementation, this is an area that can
further enhance the programme because of the important role that both groups play in teaching and
supporting the scholarship recipients. Of particular note was the information from Laghman Province
which appeared to be lagging behind in performance when compared with the other provinces which
participated in the evaluation—including having the lowest % of female mentors at 25%. Laghman appears
to have been a later inclusion to the programme and has 70 students in 2 cohorts—2018 and 2019.
Laghman has 24 lecturers (including 2 females), and qualifications of the lecturers were not available. Only
24% of the scholarship recipients indicated that the lecturers use gender responsive pedagogy and
materials in their classes. The evaluation found that the learning environment was weaker than the other
provinces, with very low classroom interaction reported. Currently, Laghman has 12 mentors (including 3
61
females) and the scholarship recipients indicated that they have positive relationships with their mentors.
Comparatively, the scholarship recipients also reported less favourable community attitudes towards
girls’ education and female teacher training in this province. This further highlights the GATE Programme’s
weak monitoring and learning mechanisms as lessons that may have been learned from earlier
programme provinces could have assisted in tracking and putting in place corrective measures.
The evaluation also concluded that there is a need for more female mentors to be recruited on to the
programme. Available information suggests that the programme had difficulties in recruiting an adequate
number of mentors for the scholarship recipients due to the low numbers of available teachers who are
qualified or meet the requirements, especially female mentors. The evaluation suggests that strategic
engagement with the TED and the EQRA Programme would be highly beneficial to the programme. The
development of an in-service programme in TTCs to build teacher capacity and possibly include gender
responsive pedagogy and mentorship as specific components—with academic credit being provided for
participation —would be highly beneficial to the programme and may potentially increase the pool from
which female mentors can be drawn.
The evaluation also found that the government is well positioned to increase the numbers of qualified
and competent female teachers. Available information indicates that the government has provided an
enabling policy environment and appears to have strategic partnerships with key implementing partners
in gender in education in general, and girls’ education in particular including UNICEF, UNESCO, the World
Bank and GIZ. From the available information, this evaluation concluded that effectiveness of the GATE
Programme is hindered most by the lack of coordination with government strategies—which are also
outlined in the NESP III, the National Girls’ Education Policy, the Teacher Education Policy and the Girls’
Education Strategy— and stakeholders outside of the programme who are implementing related
interventions in the sector. The lack of coordination and shared ownership over the girls’ education and
female teacher training and recruitment agenda has undoubtedly limited the effectiveness of the GATE
Programme. For instance, the programme had planned to link the students with experienced mentors
from hub schools that are connected to the community based schools where the teacher students would
be teaching (UNICEF Afghanistan, 2014, p. 17). This was a strategic intent that could have linked the GATE
Programme directly with the CBE Programme in a way that rounded the training experience for the
students with the view to the certainty of employment on completion of the training. Practically, this has
not been the case. Such coordination, in any future intervention can enhance the programme
effectiveness.
4.5 Sustainability
The evaluation found that sustainability of the programme initiatives does not appear to be secure even
with the strong will and commitment of the MoE. The available information indicates that the MoE is the
key implementing partner in the GATE Programme and is at forefront of actual programme delivery. The
evaluation determined that though ownership of the core activities of the programme is well established
by the strong involvement of the MoE through the TED at the national, provincial and district levels, the
MoE does not have complete ownership of the initiative and this has a bearing on the overall sustainability
of the programme.
The evaluation determined that in their current form, the programme’s capacity building components
may not sustain the initiative. For instance, although the TTCs provide the venue and the lecturers for the
training, the scholarship recipients are trained as a distinct cohort outside the mainstream TTC
62
programme. There are some key advantages of using this approach especially in that the students are
being provided with the space and opportunity to study. However, this also means that the programme
is drawing from a small pool of qualified lecturers to teach additional classes, and these lecturers are being
paid additional allowances by the UNICEF. Similarly, the allowances for students and mentors are paid
directly by UNICEF. This indicates that the recurring costs for the programme are funded from outside the
mainstream MoE budget and are not sustainable without external financial support.
The evaluation also concluded that the programme is not sustainable in terms of employment
opportunities for the programme graduates onto government payroll and private ventures. The
evaluation did not find any deliberate and practical commitment by the GATE Programme to support the
graduates to get employment after their training. Though evidence suggests that the programme
encourages graduate networks to be set up by the students themselves at class level to advocate for
employment opportunities, it is not clear how this is being done or can be done within the GATE
Programme without the provision of practical support by the programme to attain employment. If the
graduates remain unable for quite some time to find employment, they may abandon this career path
altogether, wasting all the programme investment in them.
For any similar future interventions, UNICEF should develop a sustainability plan both for the interventions
and the outcomes, and future evaluations could assess the performance against that.
4.6 Integration of Gender, Human Rights, and Equity
This evaluation has sought to account for gender and equity throughout the analysis. Some key findings
are presented here.
As a gender in education initiative, the GATE Programme intentionally focused on female students as the
scholarship recipients. With the low numbers of qualified female teachers in Afghanistan, the programme
provided an opportunity for females to receive a scholarship and participate in a two-year teacher training
programme. It also strategically included female teachers who did not have the minimum requirement (G
14) for a fully qualified teacher to achieve it. The programme also provided support to the students
through the provision capacity building for their lecturers, incentives for them and their lecturers and
mentors, and it has contributed to perceptions of increased confidence, better finances and economic
opportunities even among the trained female teachers. Being a trained teacher, has increased women’s
chances to get paid employment leading to their economic empowerment.
In terms of equity, in Afghanistan, there are clear concerns on girls’ education, given the variations in
access and participation based on a number of factors (including geography, proximity to urban areas,
gender of the teacher and so on). The GATE Programme was designed to target and impact areas with
low attendance and participation rates for girls and very low numbers of female teachers. Presence of
female teachers have reportedly increased the number of girls in schools, facilitating their access to their
basic human right i.e. right to education. Nevertheless, as such, there is an urgent need to ensure that the
female teacher training and recruitment extends further than the current 17 provinces, so that the rights
of all children to access education and participate in learning spaces are guaranteed.
63
5.0 LESSONS LEARNED
This section highlights the key lessons learned from the findings of the evaluation. The evaluation explored
the key issues arising from the development and implementation of the GATE Programme, and the
findings allow us to provide some formative lessons which feed into our recommendations for the
programme—which are outlined in the next chapter.
Value and demand for the GATE Programme
The demand for the scholarship programme and the need to provide scholarships to females for teacher
training in Afghanistan may be substantially greater than the current known demand. The programme
aimed to train 1,200 female teachers (UNICEF Afghanistan, 2020) and though data on the total number of
applications received is not available, the programme exceeded its target. This indicates that there is
significant demand for the scholarship programme.
Factors still impeding increase of female teacher recruitment and retention
The evaluation determined that the GATE Programme has addressed major bottlenecks for female
teacher presence in hard-to-reach areas through the various components included in its approach and
strategy. However, the evaluation also found that some factors still remain as challenges including:
• Limited programme coverage
• Security and transportation
• Low literacy and lack of facilities
• Cultural norms and values
• Low remuneration and incentives for female teachers to work in rural communities after they are
trained.
Feedback mechanisms needs stregthening
The evaluation found that the TTC’s monitor the scholarship recipients’ progress with standard tests,
assessments and exams, and also by their mentors during their support visits. However, besides the forms
completed by the mentors when they visit graduate teachers, the evaluation did not find any structured
mechanisms for reporting or feedback to be provided by any of the programme’s direct beneficiaries back
to respective duty bearers. The evaluation linked this gap with the absence of a monitoring system for the
programme but could not explore the issue further or conclusively. Nonetheless, it would be strategic for
the programme to address this issue.
The programme does not adequately support programme graduates
The evaluation was unable to determine actual numbers/proportions of graduates employed in each of
the programme provinces due to the gaps in available data and could not conclusively determine the
pattern in student cohorts or provinces. The evaluation noted that the graduate students were very
concerned with the programme’s lack of support for graduates in finding employment. The graduates
have to go through the standard recruitment process, the effectiveness of which is perceived quite
differently by various stakeholders. The evaluation concluded that without a deliberate strategy to
employ the programme graduates, the gains made by the programme remain incomplete.
64
Programme monitoring needs to be strengthened
The evaluation did not come across an M&E strategy for the programme. Despite UNICEF’s exceptional
outreach and presence in the targeted provinces through the zonal offices, the evaluation did not come
across adequate evidence of central, provincial or district level monitoring and evaluation for the GATE
Programme over the period under evaluation. The evaluation noted that though UNICEF staff suggested
that they monitored programme implementation regularly, programme monitoring data or information
for the period under evaluation—where available—were fragmented, out of date or incomplete.
Badghis Province may be an example of good practice for the programme
The evaluation noted that Badghis has done well compared to the other provinces. Therefore, it can be
followed as an example of good practice. The evaluation did not explore the factors contributing to the
perceived success in Badghis, but these can be explored to see what works and how other provinces may
learn from its achievements. However, the evaluation noted a few things that were different from the
other participating provinces;
• It was one of the earlier participants in the programme and has 4 student cohorts—2015, 2016,
2017 and 2020—with a total of 276 scholarship recipients.
• All programme graduates who participated in the survey currently teach in government schools.
• The satellite TTC received computers, projectors and printers as part of the programme’s capacity
building component.
• The scholarship recipients in Badghis appeared to be relatively older than their counterparts in
other provinces (25% of them indicated that they are aged between 26 – 30), with most of them
having more than 5 years teaching experience.
• It has the highest percentage of female lecturers from all provinces in which the GATE Programme
is being implemented i.e., 11%.
• It has the highest proportion (88%) of lecturers with bachelors’ degrees as their highest
qualification and is the only province with 10% of the lecturers stating that they have a masters’
degree as the highest qualification attained.
• All the lecturers who participated in the evaluation reported that they had received training in
gender responsive pedagogy as part of the programme
• About half of the mentors are female (52%).
• The age profile of the mentors appears to be higher than that of the other provinces on the
programme (over 42% reported that they are aged between 46 – 50)
• 73% of the mentors reported having associate degrees as their highest qualification, 22%
bachelor’s degrees and one reported having a master’s degree.
• Interestingly, all of the scholarship recipients reported positive perceptions of their mentors, and
indicated that they meet with their mentors often enough—including 79% of the graduate
teachers.
This information provides evidence of the particularly positive performance of the province, and what is
working well can be explored further to support other participating provinces that may not be doing as
well.
65
6.0 RECOMMENDATIONS
Based on the results of this study and feedback from the ERG, the evaluation is able to provide
stakeholders with several recommendations to strengthen the quality of the intervention. These
recommendations are based on the lessons learned and have been contextualised and presented in a way
that is meaningful and actionable for stakeholders.
Overall, the GATE Programme demonstrates that it is a relevant intervention with the potential for
significant positive outcomes. The over-arching recommendation is that UNICEF and funders should
continue to implement the programme’s core components with some minor adjustments, and if possible
scale-up the programme to provide training for more females. The available data and findings from the
evaluation demonstrate that demand for more opportunities for female teacher training is high, and
indicate that the programme has potential positive impacts on female teacher recruitment. The findings
also indicate that local communities and the MoE at all levels are both interested in and willing to support
female teacher training initiatives.
In the table below, the evaluation provides selected recommendations on some specific areas that can
enhance programme implementation:
Recommendation Priority Recommended Person(s)/Organisation(s)
Level Timeframe for Accountable to
Adoption Recommendation
Programme Outputs
1 Reconceptualize the (draft) Theory of Change to streamline the High Immediate UNICEF
conceptualisation of the programme, and make it more self-
MoE (TED, PED, DED)
explanatory and predictive. The revised ToC should include
applicable assumptions and risks at the various stages to include
applicable considerations for outputs, outcomes and impact or
to monitor, track and/or act upon potential and emerging issues
that may affect the achievement of outputs, outcomes and
impact. The evaluation revised the ToC and the proposed version
is attached as Appendix 8.
2 Revise, outline and clarify the targeting in the recruitment focus High Immediate UNICEF
between pre-service and in-service teacher training scholarship
MoE (TED, PED, DED)
recipients: The GATE Programme aims to recruit more female
teachers and also to upskill female teachers who do not have the
G-14 qualification. The ToC does not clearly spell out the two
intentions— to upskill already trained teachers as well as recruit
more—and does not appear to be deliberate in recruiting
specific numbers of pre-service and in-service teachers. Targets
could be set within the programme based on available figures in
the participating provinces.
3 Put in place a deliberate component or pathway to support the High Immediate UNICEF
programme graduates get employment: Graduate recruitment
should be included as a component in the GATE Programme as
66
the graduate networks do not appear to be supportive enough. MoE (TED, PED, DED)
Possible options are to structure it in a way that links in with the
MoE recruitment departments. Though the ToC mentions the
facilitation of graduate networks for students to advocate for
employment after graduation, the graduates may benefit from a
more robust and operationalised pathway to support them to
get employed after graduation. A possibility is a link with the
MoE WEE Programme or the use of incentive packages as
outlined in the NESP III.
4 Purposefully aim to recruit more female mentors: The evaluation High Immediate UNICEF
found that the scholarship recipients have positive perceptions of
MoE (TED, PED, DED)
their mentors and that the mentors can provide the necessary
support for the scholarship recipients. The evaluation noted that
several key stakeholders highlighted the importance of having
female mentors for the female students and graduates especially
given the cultural norms in Afghanistan. In its current form, the
GATE Programme does not intentionally recruit female mentors
and the evaluation determined that this was possibly due to
available capacity in the target provinces. However, the
programme would benefit from recruiting more female mentors
for the students, with a strong case being made in Badghis
province where more female mentors are available and
scholarship recipients reported having the most positive mentor
engagements in the programme.
Programme Strategy
5 Engage and collaborate with other stakeholders and Medium Long-Term UNICEF
programmes either formally or informally eg. CBE, World Bank
(EQRA Programme) and MoE (WEE Programme): The evaluation
found that linkages with other organisations and stakeholders in
female teacher education are low. It may be beneficial to link
more with other development partners/funders to protect the
gains that are being made and also to enhance the programme
and potentially bring it to scale quickly, especially because it is
essentially an exit strategy. Key issues highlighted in this
evaluation on access include distances to TTCs and/or learning
spaces and also the low recruitment rates for the programme
graduates as teachers or difficulties in recruitment. A missed
opportunity to address these issues could be strategic leveraging
with the MoE on current priorities. For instance, the NESP III has
prioritised initiatives aimed at the deployment of female
teachers to rural areas and the establishment of training and
dormitory facilities to allow girls and female teachers to continue
their education. The GATE Programme could mitigate some of
the issues around inadequate transport allowances through
collaboration with this initiative. It may also increase impact by
collaborating more with initiatives and development partners
working on teacher recruitment such as the EQRA and the WEE
67
to support the MoE. This can result in female teacher
recruitment to strategically improve and contribute to the
sustainability of the programme for long term gains of the
deployment of female teachers to rural areas.
6 Strengthen capacity building component of the programme for High Immediate UNICEF
lecturers and mentors or advocate to incorporate an extended
MoE (TED, PED, DED)
or regular training component in the regular in-service teacher
training provided by TTCs: The evaluation found that though Implementing partners
there were no apparent issues with the capacity of the mentors
and lecturers on the programme, the implementation of this
critical component was particularly weak and inconsistent. Given
the positive effects of the GATE Programme, and the high level of
fidelity of implementation, the evaluation determined that the
lecturers and mentors delivering the GATE Programme are
motivated and performing well in what they are doing overall.
However, it was noted that training for the lecturers had only
occurred once in the form of a three-day workshop, and not all
the lecturers had been trained. Of particular note is that the
evaluation found that none of the mentors had received any
training as part of the programme. Because of the critical role that
the mentors and lecturers play on the programme, the evaluation
recommends that a more extended or regular training for
lecturers and mentors becomes part of the programme. The
evaluation also recommends that additional advocacy for the
inclusion of gender, gender responsive pedagogy, to be included
in the main teacher training curriculum in all TTCs may benefit the
programme in the long run.
7 Strengthen and include a component for active community Medium Mid-Term UNICEF
engagement: Though the programme appears to have positively
engaged community members. The evaluation recommends that
the programme includes a deliberate community engagement
component to the programme and possibly link with or borrow
from sectors that have successfully engaged with communities.
For instance, because health is broadly accepted by religious
leaders and within religious influences, it could be strategic for the
programme to link with health services in some form.eg. borrow
from VHT approach to immunisation campaigns. Another option
could be engaging religious leaders through the SMS to
disseminate messages on girls’ education. World Vision
Afghanistan has done this and lessons may be borrowed from the
experience.
8 Develop mechanisms for beneficiaries to provide feedback: The Medium Mid-Term UNICEF
evaluation concluded that the participation of rights holders in
MoE (TED, PED, DED)
accountability and provision of feedback to service providers and
duty bearers is weak. The inclusion of this element can provide
the programme with timely and relevant feedback to assist with
even more efficient programme implementation. For instance,
68
feedback from beneficiaries could potentially strengthen the
support supervision element of the programme as well as
enhance the accountability of duty bearers.
Programme Performance
9 Develop an M&E strategy and a database to collect and organise High Immediate UNICEF
programme monitoring information for the GATE Programme:
MoE (TED, PED, DED)
The programme demonstrated positive, significant impacts for
female teacher training and, overall, the programme appears to
be efficient and effective. However, the evaluation found that the
programme lacked a database to monitor, collect and track
programme implementation activities. The evaluation
recommends that at a basic level, an activity output tracking
system should be implemented for the GATE Programme at
provincial level and district levels, which could be consolidated at
national level. This could be used for operational assessment—to
monitor progress made, targets reached, identify gaps (e.g. which
district or province), or where to focus efforts for improvement or
to enhance coordination. Additionally, the evaluation
recommends that the database also collects detailed data on
programme graduates’ employment to track progress over time
and possibly measure the programme’s impact on the education
sector.
This evaluation also recommends that, if possible, the database
should be aligned with the EMIS in terms of required information
to support integration of data into the MoE. This would assist with
programme planning, and communication and reporting to
donors. This will also help various stakeholders to align their
efforts and avoid duplication.
10 Conduct an investment case or cost - benefit analysis: The GATE High Immediate UNICEF
Programme, if it is to be scaled up or replicated, needs accurate
data to enable value for money to be assessed with confidence.
Though it was not possible to conduct a costing exercise during
this evaluation, the absence of the GATE Programme initiatives
in the MoE mainstream budget suggests that it is worth
exploring given its high implied long run returns for Afghanistan.
An investment case or cost - benefit analysis would capture the
resources needed to implement the GATE Programme so that
policy makers in Afghanistan and other stakeholders have a
complete understanding of the intervention. It could also be the
first step for advocacy for the inclusion of GATE Programme
components in the mainstream MoE budget and an important
point for leveraging in advocacy for fundraising for scaling up
the programme, given that UNICEF is well positioned to leverage
advocacy for budget line inclusion and fundraising due to its
global experience and reputation.
Table 9: Recommendation Priority, Timeframe and Accountability
69
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Afghanistan National WASH Cluster, 2018. Afghanistan National Guidelines for WASH in
Emergency (ANGWE), Kabul: Ministry of Rural Rehabilitation and Development.
ATR Consulting, 2020. COVID Preventive Guidelines. Kabul: ATR Consulting.
ATR Consulting, 2020. Guidelines for Interviewing Children. Kabul: ATR Consulting.
Central Statistics Organisation, 2018. Afghanistan Living Conditions Survey 2016-17, Kabul: CSO.
Dunbrack, A., 2018. Violence and Education in Afghanistan: A study on the Impact of Conflict
and Violence on the Education System and Children, Especially Girls, in Afghanistan, Kabul:
UNICEF ACO.
James, S., 2020. Girls' Education in Afghanistan: Examining key issues and context surrounding
the state of education and gender equality in the central Asian nation. s.l.:Aga Khan Foundation.
King, N., 2004. Using Templates in the Thematic Analysis of Text. In: C. Cassel & G. Symon, eds.
Essential Guide to Qualitative Methods in Organisational Research. London: SAGE Publications,
pp. 256 - 270.
Mays, N. B. & Pope, C., 1995. Rigour and Qualitative Research. BMJ Clinical Research,
311(6997), pp. 109-112.
Ministry of Education, 2016. National Education Strategic Plan III 2017-2021, Kabul: Ministry of
Education of Islamic Republic of Afghanistan.
Ministry of Education, 2016. National Education Strategic Plan III 2017-2021, Kabul: Ministry of
Education of Islamic Republic of Afghanistan.
Ministry of Education, 2017. NESP 2017-2021, Kabul: Islamic Republic of Afghanistan, Minstry of
Education.
Ministry of Education, 2019. 2020-2021 Girls' Education Strategy, Kabul: Ministry of Education
Islamic Rebublic of Afghanistan.
Ministry of Education, 2019. Dimensions of Teacher Policy – Quality, Management &
Recruitment Factors, Kabul: Islamic Republic of Afghanistan Ministry of Education.
Ministry of Education, 2019. Education Joint Sector Review 2018, Kabul: Islamic Republic of
Afghanistan, Ministry of Education.
Ministry of Education, 2019. National Policy on Girls Education, Kabul: Ministry of Education.
70
Ministry of Education, 2020. Out of School Children Policy, Kabul: Islamic Republic of
Afghanistan, Ministry of Education, IDeputy Minisrty of General Education, General Education
Directorate.
Patton, M. Q., 2011. Developmental Evaluation: Applying Complexity Concepts to Enhance
Innovation and Use. New York: The Guilford Press.
Patton, M. Q., 2015. Qualitative Research and Evaluation Methods: Integrating Theory and
Practice. Fourth Edition ed. California: SAGE Publications.
Schulze, C., 2020. Afghanistan Quality Standards Framework: Standards Zero Draft, s.l.: UNICEF.
Shayan, Z., 2015. Gender Inequality in Education in Afghnaistan: Access and Barriers. Open
Journal of Philosophy, Volume 5, pp. 277 - 284.
The Konterra Group, 2019. Mid-Term Evaluation of the Increasing Access to Basic Education and
Gender Equality Programme, s.l.: The Konterra Group.
UNGEI, 2019. Afghanistan Education Equity Profile for Adolescent Girls, Kathmandu: United
Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF).
UNGEI, 2019. Afghanistan Education Equity Profile for Adolescent Girls, Kathmandu: UNGEI.
UNICEF Afghanistan, 2014. Afghanistan: Country Programme Document 2015-19, s.l.: UNICEF .
UNICEF Afghanistan, 2019. Gender Strategy for the Afghanistan Country Office, Kabul: United
Nations Children's Fund.
UNICEF Afghanistan, 2014. Country Programme Action Plan: 2015-19, Kabul: UNICEF .
UNICEF Afghanistan, 2014. Girls Access through female Teacher Education (GATE): funding
proposal to the Government of Korea, s.l.: UNICEF.
UNICEF Afghanistan, 2014. National Education Strategic Plan (2015-2020) (Draft), Islamic
Republic of Afghanistan, Ministry of Education. [Online]
Available at:
https://planipolis.iiep.unesco.org/sites/planipolis/files/ressources/afghanistan_nesp_iii_2015-
2020_draft.pdf
UNICEF Afghanistan, 2017. Together in Partnership to Improve Access to Quality Education for
Girls in Afghanistan: proposal submitted to: The Government of the Republic of Korea , Kabul:
UNICEF Aghanistan.
UNICEF Afghanistan, 2018. Annual Progress Report: The Government of the Republic of Korea:
Improve Access to Quality Education for Gilrs in Afghanistan; Grant: SC170729, Kabul: UNICEF
Afghanistan.
71
UNICEF Afghanistan, 2018. Basic Education and Gender Equality Thematic Report: January -
December 2017, Kabul: UNICEF Afghanistan.
UNICEF Afghanistan, 2019. Education Thematic Report 2019, Kabul: UNICEF Afghanistan.
UNICEF Afghanistan, 2019. Gender Strategy for the Afghanistan Country Office 2019 - 2021,
Kabul: UNICEF.
UNICEF Afghanistan, 2020. Draft Theory of Change, Kabul: s.n.
UNICEF Afghanistan, 2020. Final report: Government of the Republic of Korea: Improve Access
to Quality Education for Girls in Afghanistan: Grant: SC170729, Kabul: UNICEF Afghanistan.
UNICEF Afghanistan, 2020. Formative Evaluation of Girls' Access to Teacher Education (GATE)
Scholarship Programme. Kabul: UNICEF Afghanistan.
UNICEF Afghanistan, 2020. Terms of Reference: Formative Evaluation of Girls' Access to Teacher
Education (GATE) Scholarship Programme. Kabul: UNICEF Afghanistan.
UNICEF UNGEI, 2019. Afghanistan Education Equity Profile for Adolescent Girls, Nepal: UNICEF .
UNICEF/Aghanistan/Bouvet, 2019. Preserving hope in Afghanistan. [Online]
Available at: https://www.unicef.org/reports/preserving-hope-afghanistan-2019
[Accessed 16 February 2021].
UNICEF, 2014. Early Childhood Development: The key to a full and productive life, s.l.: s.n.
United Nations Evaluation Group, 2008. UNEG Ethical Guidelines for Evaluation, s.l.: UNEG.
Women and Children Legal Research Foundation, 2019. Field Study on Girls' Access to
Education: Challenges, Opportunities and Situation Analysis, Kabul: WCLRF.
72
APPENDICES
Appendix 1: GATE Programme Draft Theory of Change (UNICEF Afghanistan, 2020)
73
Appendix 2: Terms of Reference: (Request for Proposal), 9th April 2020
UNICEF AFGHANISTAN
TERMS OF REFERENCE FOR GATE EVALUTION
SHORT TITLE OF ASSIGNMENT
Formative evaluation of the Girls Access to Teacher Education (GATE) scholarship programme
DUTY STATION: Kabul, Afghanistan
REQUESTING SECTION Social Policy, Evaluation, & Research (SPEAR)
Evaluation Specialist, UNICEF Afghanistan Country Office
SUPERVISOR
OTHER CONTACT Chief, SPEAR Section
POINTS IN OFFICE:
Chief, Education Section
Education Specialist - Quality
Proposed Duration
90 days Notes/Comments
90 working days excluding weekends and
Contract Period 01/05/ 2020 -30/09-2020
public holidays stretched over the contract
TYPE OF PROCUREMENT RFP duration
EOI, RFP, RFQ, ITB
Estimated Cost of USD
Services
PROPOSED END DATE: Five months after signing
contract
WBS 0060/AO/07/884/010/003
Bamyan, Ghazni, Khost,
Paktya, Paktika, Wardak,
LOCATION OF REQUIRED Badghis, Ghor, Kandahar,
SERVICES Helmand, Urozgan, Zabul,
Nangarhar, Laghman and
Kunar
GRANT RR
74
ESTIMATED VALUE MAY
EXCEED CRC THRESHOLD No
(Yes/No)
INCLUDED IN SUPPLY
YES / NO (circle appropriate
answer)
PLAN
Need for procurement of institutional services is reflected in the Annual Work Plan Yes
(AWP) or is in response to a specific programming decision
Yes
The tasks cannot be completed by UNICEF staff or counterparts
ToR is clearly defined with tangible, measurable, and time-bound deliverables or an Yes
end-product and with payments (contract fee) clearly linked to these deliverables
ToR includes a description of the specific activities and timeframes for completion of Yes
the activities
ToR includes performance indicators for evaluation of results (e.g. timeliness or Yes
quantitative measures)
SIGNED FOR AGREEMENT
Recommended by Education Reviewed by Supply Chief Approved by Deputy
Chief Moses Sichawo Representative
Erinna Dia Operations
Ian Fuller
UNICEF AFGHANISTAN
Date/Time…….
Date/Time…….
TERMS OF REFERENCE – FOR GATE EVALUTION
Date/Time…….
SHORT TITLE OF ASSIGNMENT
Formative evaluation of Girls’ Access to Teacher Education (GATE) scholarship programme
BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE
Overall Education Situation in Afghanistan.
Afghanistan is a war-torn country that has suffered from ongoing conflict for almost four decades, with
recurrent natural disasters and large population movements. These conditions have adversely affected
the country’s education system which lacks human and financial resources to provide quality basic
75
education services. The UNICEF-Ministry of Education (MoE) Out of School Survey 2018 report estimates
that 3.7 million children are out of school, 60 percent or over two million are girls. The reasons for this
trend are multiple such as poverty, insufficient relevant learning / teaching resources, capacity limitations
in formal schools to take on additional children, social norms affecting girl’s education, shortage of
competent teachers, especially qualified female teachers (only 38% of teachers in Afghanistan meet the
minimum grade 14 requirement and only 34% are female with very few in rural schools thus affecting the
participation of girls in learning opportunities as well as reluctance of parents/communities to send girls
to schools dominated by male teachers).
Furthermore, the Monitoring of Trends in Education Growth (MTEG) assessment in 2013 has revealed
that only 12% of primary school students reached the minimum proficiency level (MPL) level of reading.
Proficiency in language and mathematics for grade 6 students in Afghanistan is equal to that of grade 4
students in neighboring countries like Iran, Azerbaijan and Kazakhstan.
Despite the above challenges, considerable progress has been made over the past couple of years in
terms of access to education. Enrolment has increased from 1 million in 2002 to 9 million by 2018 (EMIS
2018).
The priority of the MoE and partners is therefore to improve education quality and relevance ensuring
that learning is focused on the results and competencies outlined in the National Education Strategic Plan
2017-2021 (NESP-III). UNICEF through the 2015-2021 Country Program of Cooperation with the
government of Afghanistan has committed to help the MoE increase quality of education and girl’s
participation and retention in learning programs, so far limited by a shortage of qualified female
teachers, especially in insecure, marginalized, and socially conservative rural communities. To address
this barrier, UNICEF, in partnership with the MoE and the Government of Korea, has initiated the Girls’
Access to Teacher Education (GATE) programme, a two year scholarship aimed at providing opportunities
to female students, especially those from rural and hard to reach areas, to train as teachers and attain
the grade 14 minimum requirement as set by the MoE. The GATE programme is implemented as part of
the Girls’ Education initiative, multi-sectorial in approach, with interventions in WASH, Nutrition and
Education seeking to ensure the overall development of the girl child and adolescent.
Detailed program description.
The education sector in Afghanistan grapples with a shortage of qualified and competent female
teachers, especially in rural areas, which is one of the major causes for low enrolment and retention
amongst girls. The situation is worse in rural provinces such as Ghor, Paktika, Paktia, Khost and Uruzgan
with less than 5% proportion of female teachers, where parents/communities are reluctant to send girls
76
to schools dominated by male teachers due to social and cultural reasons. To address the above
inequalities, UNICEF partnered with the Government of Korea and MoE to increase the number of
qualified female teachers in rural areas and consequently, girl child enrolment and retention rates in
school through the Girls Access to Teacher Education (GATE) scholarship Programme, initiated in 2015 for
an initial cohort of 1,000 female students. The two-year scholarship programme was piloted in the 5
provinces of Uruzgan, Ghor, Paktia, Paktika and Badghis before being scaled up to 8 others by 2018,
targeting 887 additional students. Key programme components included.
• Scholarships and incentives to 1,847 female students at grade 12 level
• Incentives in form of transport allowances and trainings for 1,000 mentors at satellite teacher training
colleges to provide support and mentor the female students
• Salaries for 120 tutors to teach and coach female teachers and mentors
• School improvement grants for 5 provincial teacher training colleges to improve learning environment
• Textbooks and monitoring support by MoE at national and subnational levels to provincial teacher training
colleges and satellite teacher training colleges.
To date over 1,847 students have directly benefited from the GATE program with an approximate budget
of 3 million dollars.
Evaluation purpose.
UNICEF and the MoE intend to conduct a formative evaluation of the GATE scholarship programme to
assess the extent to which it is progressing in relation to the intended objectives of increasing female
teacher presence in hard to reach areas, increasing girls’ participation in learning spaces. The evaluation
findings and recommendations will inform the Local Education Group (LEG), composed of in-country
education stakeholders such as the ministries of education and finance, donors, development partners,
UN agencies, and civil society organizations, on the current achievements of the programme based on
the aforementioned criteria. Information generated will be used to further shape, scale up, and
strengthen the GATE programme while producing valuable insights to inform and guide future
interventions in the education sector in Afghanistan and beyond.
Evaluation objectives.
The evaluation will take a formative approach with the following objectives.
• Assess the progress of the programme in relation to increasing female teacher presence in hard to reach
areas, girls ‘participation in learning spaces and retention.
• Evaluate programme performance based on coherence, relevance, effectiveness, efficiency and
sustainability.
• Identify gaps along the results chain and recommend remedies to inform the scale up of the programme.
• Review existing theory of change of GATE programme and reconstruct where needed.
• Assess the extent to which cross-cutting issues of gender, equity and human rights are integrated into
various programme interventions.
77
Evaluation Scope:
Within the overall objectives of the programme, the evaluation will focus on the implementation
strategies in a purposively selected sample of provinces covering the target groups who benefitted from
GATE between 2015 to 2019.
• 1,847 direct beneficiaries
• 5 provincial teacher training colleges in relation to the utilization of the institution’s improvement grant, 120
lecturers and 1,000 mentors who were supported as part of the programme to teach, mentor and monitor
the GATE students.
• School Management Shuras and community members involved in GATE programme candidate’s
identification process.
• Students taught by GATE graduates in hard to reach areas.
• PED/DED, MoE officials working with academic supervision and teacher education departments as well as
UNICEF staff involved in programme implementation of at national and sub-national level.
The evaluation will cover up to 7 of the 13 target programme provinces (Paktya, Paktika, Khost, Wardak,
Bamyan, Ghazni, Helmand, Zabul, Badghis, Ghor, Nangarhar, Laghman and, Kunar). The provinces
selected will have students who graduated from the programme and those currently in session.
Evaluation Questions.
The evaluation will seek to answer the following questions, which will further be refined and/or
elaborated at the inception stage:
Coherence.
• Does the programme theory of change reflect the broader national education policy priorities i.e. girl’s
education policy, teacher policy and NESPIII, etc.
• Are the various programme interventions complementary and harmonized with those of other relevant
stakeholders including donor agencies, other UN agencies, NGOs, government education departments at
central, provincial and district levels, etc.
Relevance.
• Is the current programme design suitable to tackle the key challenges faced by girls and female students
(including students with disability) in the country, especially in the targeted provinces?
• Did UNICEF, in its programme development, identify the needs and priorities of the girls/communities
experiencing the greatest exclusion or inequality, through needs assessments and participatory
consultations? To what extent is the programme guided by relevant theories and appropriate strategies?
• Is there any evidence that has been produced to inform GATE programming and approach?
78
• How can the GATE programme objectives, approaches be most relevant and adapted to the country context
for scale up?
Efficiency.
• To what extent are the resources (financial and human) allocated to the GATE programme appropriate to
support the implementation of strategies and the achievement of the expected results? Could the same or
better results could have been achieved using different strategies?
Effectiveness.
• How does the available evidence highlight what works and what does not in the GATE programme in
Afghanistan? How effective is it?
• Did the GATE programme contribute to progress towards the achievement of children’s rights, especially
girls, their empowerment and grater gender equality? How? Did the intervention contribute to the reduction
of inequalities and exclusion especially for marginalized in hard to reach areas?
• Have communities and community leaders increased their awareness on the importance of education
especially for the girl child and the presence of female teachers in their communities?
• How has the Government positioned itself to increase the numbers of qualified and competent female
teachers in the education sector?
Sustainability.
• How sustainable is the GATE programme in terms of cost, acceptance by communities and employment
opportunities of the GATE graduates into government payroll and other private ventures?
• What mechanisms and policies exist that will sustain the programme initiatives?
Evaluability.
The GATE programme was initially implemented as a standalone initiative and subsequently subsumed as
part of an integrated programme combining education, Nutrition and WASH interventions. The
availability of relevant data and information on the implementation of the program will determine the
extent to which the various evaluation criteria and questions therein will be explored.
79
Limitations.
Afghanistan faces several challenges in terms of security and limited access to target groups that might
affect timely implementation of data collection activities. This, combined with the current Covid-19
global health crisis, will require adaptation and flexibility during the course of the evaluation. In addition,
limited reliable secondary data and absence of proper documentation at the provincial and district levels
is another concern for this assignment. There are also limitations to data collection to consider, such as,
sensitive religious, cultural and tribal norms of target population especially towards interactions with
females who are the main focus of the GATE scholarship programme.
Evaluation methodology and design.
Each institution interested in the assignment is expected to propose a methodology and analytical
approach in their proposal that will be refined and finalized in the inception report. The evaluation must
go beyond the act of simply describing and summarizing the main features of the programme. It should
enable investigation into the merits of the GATE programme. The minimum expectations for data
collection will include:
• Primary data through qualitative and quantitative methods such as surveys, key informant
interviews and Focus Group Discussions (FGDs). Data will be collected from the following categories
of respondents listed above on page 4.
• Secondary data through GATE programme documents and available education sector policies,
education information management system (EMIS) that can be obtained from UNICEF, including
donor proposals and progress reports.
The evaluation team will ensure the use of photographic evidence and appropriate technology, for
example in situations where remote data collection is an option.
Sampling Frame.
The successful vendor will develop and present the sampling approach in the technical proposal. The
sample size for each target group should be sufficient to allow generalization of findings to the larger
population targeted by the GATE programme. Sample selection of participants for both qualitative and
quantitative data collection will be based on the following sampling frame:
GATE programme participant/stakeholder Total number of programme
category participants/stakeholders
GATE female students in current cohort (cohort 2) 887
80
GATE female students who graduated (cohorts 1) 960
Teacher training college tutors (TTCT) 60
Mentors from hub schools and satellite teacher 960
colleges
Female students that have not joined the 100
programme but meet requirements, this will help
understand the barriers
School management Shura SMS where female 100
teachers operate
Key stakeholders involved in project, MoE 20
national level (2) PEDs (5), DEOs (5) UNICEF (7)
including field offices and NGO (1) partners
Data collection tools.
Data collection tools should capture valid and accurate information on main programme indicators
required to answer key evaluation questions. Information and data collected from surveys, interviews
and focus group discussions should be confidential and documented with the consent of people
interviewed. The successful firm should be able to develop, translate and pilot the tools before actual
data collection. Real time data collection technologies will be used, and all instruments must be
appropriate to the cultural and security context of Afghanistan.
Data analysis and findings.
To a large extent, data should be disaggregated by gender, location and age of respondents, and data
analysis cover GATE programme performance against set objectives and indicators.
Management of the evaluation process.
The evaluation will be directly managed by UNICEF Afghanistan Country Office Evaluation Specialist and
the Chief of Social Policy and Research (SPEAR) Section, with the assistance of Education Specialist
Quality and overall technical guidance of the Chief Education and MoE teacher education taskforce.
The selected institution will be responsible for:
• At inception stage, developing a report based on detailed desk research and key informant interviews, that
includes a process clearly defining the timeline, methodology, sampling strategies, data collection tools, key
81
data sources, and analytical approach. A draft inception report will be shared with UNICEF and teacher
education task force and feedback incorporated before deliverables are finalized.
• Ensuring that the methodology, sampling strategy, and analytical approach meets highest standards of
technical competency, ethical consideration, and that conclusions/recommendations are firmly based on
the evidence generated.
• Presenting preliminary findings and recommendations at the end of the fieldwork and data analysis stage.
• Compiling a draft report incorporating feedback from UNICEF, teacher education task force, and external
reviewers before finalizing the deliverable.
• Presenting findings and recommendations to UNICEF and key actors in a dissemination workshop.
Deliverables.
• An inception report with annexes, operational plan, field-tested and translated data collection tools
presented and endorsed by MoE and UNICEF.
• Fieldwork conducted, weekly data collection updates shared, and final fieldwork report compiled. Draft
report of findings/ recommendations presented to MoE, UNICEF and relevant stakeholders (bridged
version).
• Final report incorporating feedback from MoE, UNICEF, and other stakeholders submitted including annexes
in UNICEF evaluation report format. This will include a 2-4-page report summary/brief of the evaluation
process, findings, and recommendations. Further the consultant is expected to deliver a power point
presentation to key programme stakeholders to share evaluation findings.
Quality assurance.
An Evaluation Reference Group (ERG) will be constituted that will include technical officers/specialists
from UNICEF Afghanistan Country Office, representatives from MoE teacher education. The team will be
accountable to the ERG in respect to how feedback from ERG is incorporated in evaluation outputs. The
taskforce will also prepare an audit plan prior to commencing fieldwork specifying the steps in place to
verify accuracy/reliability of data/information gathered.
Ethical procedures.
All evaluations of programmes falling under the MoE in Afghanistan are subject to approval by an
Institutional Review Board (IRB). Therefore, the evaluation team will be required to submit the final
version of the inception report and data collection tools to IRB for approval before commencing the
fieldwork. The evaluation team should take into account the process of preparing and submitting
documents, plus the timeframe for acquiring IRB approval in their workplan. The process of attaining IRB
approval will be facilitated by UNICEF.
Evaluators are required to identify any potential ethical issues and must disclose in writing any past
82
experiences and relationships, including of their families and friends to the object of the evaluation.
Evaluators must exercise independent judgment and not be influenced by statements or view of any
party It is vital that the firm;
• Be impartial and produce a comprehensive presentation of strengths and weaknesses of the programme
and take due account of the view of stakeholders based on unbiased findings.
• Illustrate evidence on verified findings and lessons learned.
• Exercise honesty, integrity, respect for dignity and diversity.
• Produce evaluation reports based on fair representation of knowledge, vulnerable groups, gender and ethnic
groups.
Evaluators are required to receive informed consent from participants before involving them in the data
collection process and respect their right to provide information in confidence. The data collection team
must inform participants about the scope and limits of confidentiality and ensure that their
data/information cannot be accessed by non-authorized persons or traced back to them. It is essential to
prepare risk management plans to reduce potential harm to participants and the data collection team
before commencing fieldwork.
Confidentiality.
Evaluators must obtain permission from UNICEF to disclose any evaluation materials and keep raw data
and protocols in concealment. Data must be securely retained or disposed according to UNICEF’s policy
on the disposal of records. All materials collected and evaluation products remain the property of
UNICEF and the contractor must not use or share this information without explicit written permission of
UNICEF.
Budget and Remuneration.
The budget for this consultancy will be covered by UNICEF funds. The contract fee rate will be based on
current market value. The payment modality is described below. This consultancy will be organized in
three stages as outlined below:
1. Inception phase.
This phase will focus on the development of the evaluation design, operational plan and instruments in
coordination with UNICEF and the MoE. This phase will also include desk review of all relevant program
related literature such as project proposals, programme reports, case studies and related program data.
2. Data collection and analysis phase.
83
The second level includes the actual data collection process from target provinces as per inception report
and operational plan developed. This will include the analysis and presentation of a draft report to MoE
and UNICEF.
3. Reporting phase.
The final phase of the consultancy will be the finalization of the report, presentation of findings and
recommendations to the MoE, donors and UNICEF.
Payment and timeframe:
# Tasks Duration Payment
1 Inception phase Deliverable
1.1 Review GATE programme interventions and
literature, policy documents and guidelines
1.2 Interview with UNICEF and MoE /partners
30 days Submission of
1.3 Develop evaluation methods, design & pre-test
inception report
data collection tools 20 %
& data collection
1.4 Submit inception report and executive tools.
summary.
1.5 Make presentation to members of evaluation
taskforce
2 Data collection and analysis phase
2.1 Conduct field visits in target locations to collect Submission of
30 days
data weekly fieldwork
reports & final
40 %
2.2 Submit a summary of the field visits.
report of the field
2.3. Analyze data / findings and draft report visits/initial
findings, data
files and analysis.
3 Final evaluation repots writing and
presentation
3.1 Submit final evaluation report and present 40 Days Submission of
findings final evaluation
40 %
report and
presentation.
84
Qualifications, specialized experience and competencies:
The successful firm/ institution should have strong substantive background in research, evaluations,
studies and similar undertakings. The team leader and individual member that will undertake the
consultancy will have the following competencies, experience and qualifications:
Team lead with:
• a university degree at master’s or Doctorate level in Social Sciences, education, education research methods,
statistics or related fields from a reputable institution.
• at least 15 years of professional experience in evaluation or research related to education, gender, child
rights or related fields; experience in evaluation of education related development/humanitarian
programmes and projects, particularly with UNICEF/UN in Afghanistan is a distinct advantage.
Evaluation team with:
• Excellent analytical and research skills, including a sound knowledge of qualitative and quantitative research
methods with strong technical experience in study design.
• Demonstrated experience conducting participatory research and evaluations on education related projects
on potentially sensitive topics.
• Successful track record conducting evaluations and studies of a similar nature. Review of prior work products
will be requested during the selection process.
• Experience working with governments and UN agencies providing support on education programmes.
• Excellent written and oral communication skills in English.
• Ability to work independently and respond to feedback in a timely and professional manner.
• Experience in a complex and high threat environment.
• Ability to travel to remote areas of Afghanistan to oversee fieldwork.
• Strong interpersonal, communication and organizational skills.
• Previous experience working with or completing similar assignments with UNICEF desirable.
• At least some team members with fluency in Dari/ Pashto to manage field data collection.
• Strong national research/evaluation partner institution to implement the fieldwork component of the
assignment.
Note: The evaluation team proposed is expected to be available for the duration of the assignment and
the team leader is expected to undertake 2 in-country missions during the course of the evaluation,
during the inception phase and fieldwork/analysis phase.
85
86
Appendix 3: Evaluation Matrix
Theme Category Evaluation Questions Indicators Data Source FGD Interview Survey Respondents
1.Programme 1.1 Increased female 1.1.1 How do the Existing data from TTC data or x x x Female
Outputs teacher presence in female TTCs records students and
hard to reach areas students/graduates graduates
Perceptions of lecturer
perform in their
and students
training?
1.1.2 What are the Perceptions of x x x Female
most important scholarship recipients, students and
aspects of the GATE graduates, and other graduates,
Programme? stakeholders DED, PED, and
UNICEF staff
working on
GATE
Programme
1.1.3 Will the female Perceptions of x x Female
scholarship recipients scholarship recipients students and
continue to pursue graduates
Career aspirations of
their career goals
scholarship recipients
after the training?
1.1.4 Will the female Perceptions of x x Female
scholarship recipients scholarship recipients students and
teach in schools in graduates
Numbers of graduates
rural areas/hard to
teaching in rural/hard
reach places after
to reach areas
graduation?
1.1.5 What factors Existing Government x x x Female
successfully allow for governmentpolicy, Documents, students and
the recruitment and documented Programme graduates,
retention of female information. Documents headteachers,
teachers? teachers, PED
and DED staff
87
Perceptions of working on
scholarship recipients, GATE
headteachers, Programme
teachers, PED and DED
1.1.6 What is the Perceptions of x x x Female
quality of the scholarship recipients, students and
relationship of the lecturers and mentors graduates,
female students and mentors,
Information from
their lecturers
direct observation
mentors/lecturers?
Level and type of
support provided to
scholarship recipients
by lecturers/mentors
1.1.7 What is the Perceptions of x x x Female
quality of scholarship recipients, students and
relationships between headteachers and graduates,
the female teacher teachers headteachers
graduates and other and teachers
teachers and
headteachers in the
learning spaces where
they work?
1.1.8 Have Existing data from DED Government x x Female
programme graduates and PED. Documents graduates,
been retained on PED and DED
Survey data on how
government payroll? staff working
many graduates are on
on GATE
government payroll
Programme
1.2 Girls' 1.2.1 To what extent Existing information Programme x x x
participation and and how can the and data on an Reports, Headteachers,
programme enabling environment EMIS or female
contribute to an
88
retention in learning increase in girls’ for girls education in School level graduates,
spaces access and retention Afghanistan. data pupils
to learning spaces?
Perceptions of
scholarship recipients,
headteachers,
teachers, mentors
DED, PED, UNICEF
1.2.2 Does female Existing information Programme x x x Students and
teacher presence on an enabling Documents, graduates,
contribute to environment for girls EMIS pupils,
increased access and education in teachers and
retention of girls in Afghanistan. headteachers
learning spaces?
Perceptions of
scholarship recipients,
headteachers,
teachers, mentors
DED, PED, UNICEF
1.2.3 What factors Perceptions of x x x Students and
remain to support scholarship recipients, graduates,
girls to be retained in headteachers, pupils,
learning spaces teachers, mentors teachers and
and/or continued DED, PED, UNICEF headteachers,
their studies? DED, PED, and
UNICEF Staff
working on
GATE
Programme
2. 2.1 Community 2.1.1 How has the Perceptions of x x x Students,
Programme Awareness/Attitude GATE programme students, graduates, graduates,
Strategies influenced pupils, headteachers, pupils,
communities’ and teachers, mentors, headteachers,
community leaders’ teachers,
89
(Shuras) awareness of PED, DED, UNICEF, mentors, PED,
the importance of SMS DED and
education and their UNICEF Staff
Type of support and
responsibilities in working on
involvement of SMS in
regard to female GATE
teachers and girls in
GATE programme
Programme,
education? SMS
2.1.2 How have Perceptions of x x x Students,
community Shuras students, graduates, graduates,
influenced pupils, headteachers, pupils,
community attitudes teachers, mentors, headteachers,
to education since PED, DED, UNICEF, teachers,
they began SMS mentors, PED,
participating in the DED, and
programme? UNICEF Staff
working on
GATE
Programme,
SMS
2.1.3 How has the Perceptions of x x x Students,
programme students, graduates, graduates,
influenced pupils, headteachers, pupils,
community opinions teachers, mentors, headteachers,
and norms regarding PED, DED, UNICEF, teachers,
female teachers and SMS mentors, PED,
girls’ education? DED, and
UNICEF Staff
working on
GATE
Programme,
SMS
90
2.2 Community 2.2.1 How are the Existing information Programme x x x Students,
Actions/Mobilisation community leaders on community Documents graduates,
helping their mobilisation and pupils,
communities promote community action. headteachers,
awareness of the teachers,
SMS level of activity
importance of mentors, PED,
and involvement in
education among DED and
education within
families? UNICEF Staff
respective
working on
communities
GATE
Active involvement of Programme,
community leaders in SMS
SMS
Perceptions of
students, graduates,
pupils, headteachers,
teachers, mentors,
PED, DED, UNICEF,
SMS
2.2.2 How have Perceptions of x x x Students,
communities students, graduates, graduates,
contributed to pupils, headteachers, pupils,
encouraging girls to teachers, mentors, headteachers,
participate in learning PED, DED, UNICEF, teachers,
spaces? SMS mentors, PED,
DED and
UNICEF Staff
working on
GATE
Programme,
SMS
2.3 Mentorship 2.3.1 How are Existing information Programme x x x Students,
Support programme mentors on capacity building of Documents graduates,
91
supporting the mentors and other mentors,
students/graduates? incentives. headteachers
Perceptions of
students, graduates,
mentors, PED, DED,
UNICEF
Level and type of
interactions between
mentors and
scholarship recipients
2.4 Lecturer Support 2.4.1 How are Existing information Programme x x x Students,
lecturers supporting on capacity building of Documents, graduates,
the students? lecturers and other Direct mentors,
incentives. Observation lecturers
Levels and type of
interaction between
scholarship recipients
and lecturers during
lectures.
Perceptions of
students, graduates,
lecturers, PED, DED,
UNICEF
2.5 Scholarship 2.5.1 Does the GATE Existing information Programme x x x Students,
Support programme and data on Documents graduates,
scholarship package scholarship package. PED, DED, and
cover all that is UNICEF Staff
Perceptions of
needed by the working on
scholarship recipient,
recipients? GATE
mentors, lecturers,
Programme
PED, DED and UNICEF
92
2.6 TTC Grants 2.6.1 Have the TTCs Existing information Programme x x PED, DED and
received adequate and data on support Documents UNICEF Staff
support as part of the provided to TTCs by working on
GATE Programme? the programme. GATE
Programme
Perceptions of PED,
DED and UNICEF
2.7 Capacity Building 2.7.1 Has relevant Available information Programme x x Mentors,
capacity been built on capacity building Documents, lecturers, PED
sufficiently for the provided as part of the Government and DED Staff
programme? programme. Documents working on
GATE
Perceptions of
Programme,
mentors, lecturers,
Headteachers,
PED, DED,
Teachers
Headteachers,
Teachers
Changes implemented
in teaching style or
practice by lecturers as
a result of training
received.
Levels of programme
involvement and
monitoring by PED and
DED
3. 3.1 Coherence 3.1.1 Does ToC reflect Available information ToC, x PED, DED and
Programme broader national in reports, policies and Government UNICEF Staff
Performance education policy programme Documents working on
priorities ie. Girls documents on broader including GATE
education, teacher education sector. policies and Programme
policy and NESP111 strategic
Evidence of active
plans,
involvement of
93
relevant departments Programme
within MoE Documents
3.1.2 Are various Available information Programme x PED, DED, and
programme in reports, policies and Documents UNICEF Staff
3.2 Relevance
interventions programme working on
complementary and documents on broader GATE
harmonised with education sector. Programme,
those of stakeholders Development
Perceptions of PED,
e.g. UN agencies, Partners/LEG
DED, UNICEF and
NGOs, government Members
education
development partners.
departments at Evidence of
central, provincial and partnership with key
district levels stakeholders in key
elements of the
programme
3.1.3 Did the Existing information Programme x x Scholarship
programme support on capacity building in Documents recipients,
individual and programme PED and DED
community capacity documents Staff working
development e.g. on GATE
Capacity building
C4D? Programme,
elements included in
Mentors,
programme
Lecturers,
implementation.
Headteachers,
Perceptions of Teachers
scholarship recipients,
PED, DED, Mentors,
Lecturers,
Headteachers,
Teachers
94
3.1.4 Did the Perceptions of UNICEF, Programme x x x UNICEF, PED
programme allow for PED, DED, students Documents and DED Staff
rights-holders to and graduates, working on
participate in mentors, lecturers. GATE
accountability Programme,
mechanisms that
Participation of rights
students and
holders in
provide feedback to graduates,
accountability or
service providers and mentors,
feedback to
duty-bearers? lecturers
programme
implementors.
Availability of robust
programme
monitoring system
3.1.5 Was the Availability and Programme x x Pupils,
programme framed inclusion of key Documents UNICEF GATE
within human rights aspects of the Human Programme
norms and standards Rights Based Approach Staff
as its primary frame to Programming or
of reference e.g. reference to the
universality, non- approach in
discrimination, the programme
best interests of the documents
child, the right to
Perceptions of
survival and
children taught by
development, the
scholarship recipients
indivisibility and
interdependence of
human rights,
accountability and
respect for the voice
of the child?
95
3.1.6 To what extent Existing data from Programme x x UNICEF, PED
is the programme previous needs Documents and DED
covering the needs of assessments GATE
the communities, incorporated into Programme
government partners programme and Staff,
and planning documents. development
teachers/educators in partners/LEG
Inclusion of
terms of developing members,
communities and
their capacity and headteachers,
other stakeholders in
increasing teachers
programme planning
awareness? (needs of
and implementation
adults – communities,
PED/DED, Teachers,
MOE)
3.1.7 Were the Programme strategies Programme x UNICEF, PED
programme goals and and outcomes linked Documents, and DED
objectives aligned with UNICEF Global Government GATE
with the UNICEF Strategic Plan 2014- Documents Programme
Global Strategic Plan 2017, CPAP, CPD, Staff,
2014-2017? CPAP? UNGEI and national development
CPD? UNGEI? NESP education strategies partners/LEG
III? Other national and policies of members
strategies and policies Afghanistan.
of Afghanistan?
3.2.1 Does the Logical and clear ToC Programme x x UNICEF, PED
programme available, and Documents, and DED
design/ToC activities/inputs based ToC GATE
sufficiently capture on evidence from Programme
and support the needs assessments, Staff,
identified key etc. students and
challenges faced by graduates,
Perceptions of UNICEF,
girls in learning
students and
spaces and females
graduates, PED, DED
training to be
96
teachers (including on programme
those with components
disabilities/special
needs) in the targeted
provinces?
3.2.2 Did UNICEF’s Inclusion of needs Programme x UNICEF GATE
programme assessment in Documents Programme
development identify programme Staff
the needs and development.
priorities of the
Level and type of
girls/communities
stakeholder
experiencing the
involvement in
greatest exclusion or
programme
inequality through
development and
needs assessments
implementation
and participatory
consultations?
3.2.3 To what extent ToC components clear Programme x UNICEF GATE
is the programme and logical Documents, Programme
guided by relevant ToC Staff
theories and
appropriate
strategies?
3.2.4 Is there any Inclusion and/or Programme x UNICEF GATE
evidence that has reference to strong Documents, Programme
been produced to supporting evidence in ToC Staff
inform GATE programme planning
programming and documents and
approach? implementation
strategies
97
3.2.5 How can the Perceptions of UNICEF, Programme x x x UNICEF, PED
GATE programme PED, DED, students Documents and DED
objectives and and graduates on how GATE
approaches be more the programme fits Programme
relevant and adapted with the broader Staff,
to the country challenges to girls students and
context for scale up? education and female graduates,
teacher presence. headteachers,
teachers,
Evidence of strong
pupils
links and partnership
with MoE and
development partners
3.2.6 Is the Evidence of strong Programme x UNICEF, PED
programme aligned links and partnership Documents, and DED
with the needs of the with PED and DED. Government GATE
target populations as Documents programme
well as the priorities Staff
of the government
(national, provincial
and local levels) e.g.
NESP III.
3.2.7 Did the Perceptions of Programme x PED and DED
programme have an respondents on Documents, GATE
impact on girls’ access numbers of girls in Government Programme
to quality education schools. Documents Staff
in the provinces with
Available EMIS/school
lowest attendance
level data in
rates and highest
participating provinces
numbers of out of
school children based
on the last out-of-
school children report
98
3.2.8 To what extent Perceptions of UNICEF, Programme x UNICEF, PED
is there a good PED and DED Documents and DED
awareness and GATE
Awareness of national
understanding of the Programme
priorities at PED and
relevant policies and Staff
DED
priorities
underpinning the
GATE programme at
the provincial and
local levels?
3.3 Efficiency 3.3.1 To what extent Perceptions of Programme x x Students,
are the allocated scholarship recipients, Documents graduates,
human and financial UNICEF, PED, DED, UNICEF, PED
resources appropriate mentors, lecturers. and DED
to support the GATE
strategy
Identification of
Programme
implementation
implementation and Staff,
bottlenecks
achieve expected mentors,
results? lecturers
3.3.2 Could the Perceptions of Programme x x Students,
same/better results scholarship recipients, Documents graduates,
have been achieved mentors, lecturers, mentors,
using different PED, DED, UNICEF, lecturers,
strategies? Development PED, DED and
Partners. UNICEF GATE
Programme
Comparison of
Staff,
planned programme
Development
targets and actual
Partners/LEG
implementation.
members
Comparison of
programme with
99
identified best
practices
3.3.3 Did the Perceptions of Programme x x Students,
programme scholarship recipients, Documents graduates,
consolidate available mentors, lecturers, mentors,
resources? PED, DED, UNICEF, lecturers,
Development Partners PED, DED and
on the use of UNICEF GATE
resources. Programme
Staff,
Existing information
Development
on structure of
Partners/LEG
programme
members
management
3.3.4 Were applicable Existing information Programme x PED, DED,
processes on programme Documents and UNICEF
streamlined? processes. GATE
Programme
Perceptions of PED,
Staff
DED and UNICEF
3.3.5 Were the Existing information Programme x PED, DED,
approaches to on structure of Documents and UNICEF
allocation of human, programme processes GATE
operational and and management. Programme
financial resources Staff
Perceptions of PED,
appropriate/adequate
DED and UNICEF
to deliver intended
results in the socio-
economic and
political context of
Afghanistan? (Staff,
administration and
finance enough to
100
deliver the
programming?)
3.3.6 How do the Perceptions of PED, Programme x PED, DED,
coordination DED and UNICEF. Documents and UNICEF
processes and GATE
Existing information
structures facilitate or Programme
on structure and
impede Staff
coordination of
implementation of
programme processes
the GATE scholarship
and management.
programme?
3.3.7 Did the school- Evidence of Programme x x x Students,
community members involvement of schools Documents graduates,
participate in in programme aspects. UNICEF, PED
mechanisms to and DED
Interaction between
enable girls to access GATE
graduates, teachers,
and participate in Programme
and headteachers in
learning spaces? Staff
schools where
graduates are
teaching.
Perceptions of
scholarship recipients,
pupils being taught by
graduates,
headteachers and
teachers in schools
where graduates are
teaching
101
3.4 Effectiveness 3.4.1 How does Evidence of Programme x x x Students,
available evidence incorporation of key Documents graduates,
highlight what aspects of best mentors,
works/not in the practices in lecturers,
GATE programme? programme planning headteachers,
and implementation. teachers,
pupils, PED,
Perceptions of
DED and
scholarship recipients,
UNICEF GATE
mentors, lecturers,
Programme
headteachers,
Staff
teachers, pupils, PED,
DED, UNICEF
3.4.2 How effective is Perceptions of Programme x x Students,
the programme? scholarship recipients, Documents, graduates,
mentors, lecturers, EMIS/MoE mentors,
headteachers, lecturers,
teachers, pupils, PED, headteachers,
DED, UNICEF. teachers,
pupils, PED,
Available data on
DED, and
female teacher
UNICEF GATE
presence in
Programme
participating provinces
Staff
between 2015 – 2019
Available data on girls
attendance and
participation in
schooling in
participating provinces
between 2015 - 2019
102
3.4.3 Did the Perceptions of Programme x x x Students,
programme scholarship recipients, Documents graduates,
contribute to mentors, lecturers, mentors,
progress towards headteachers, lecturers,
achievement of teachers, pupils, PED, headteachers,
children’s rights, DED, UNICEF. teachers,
empowerment and pupils, PED,
Available data on girls
gender equality, DED, and
access to education
especially girls? UNICEF GATE
and participation in
Programme
schooling between
Staff
2015 - 2019
3.4.5 Did the Programme x x x Students,
Available data on
intervention Documents graduates,
female teacher
contribute to including mentors,
presence in
reduction of programme lecturers,
participating provinces
inequalities and monitoring headteachers,
between 2015 – 2019
exclusion of data teachers,
girls/females Available data on girls pupils, PED,
especially those attendance and DED, and
marginalised in hard participation in UNICEF GATE
to reach areas? schooling in Programme
participating provinces Staff
between 2015 - 2019
3.4.6 Have Evidence of increased x x x Students,
communities and awareness of the graduates,
community leaders importance of mentors,
increased their education and girls lecturers,
awareness of the education. headteachers,
importance of teachers,
Perceptions of
education and girls’ pupils, PED,
scholarship recipients,
education in DED, and
mentors, lecturers,
particular? UNICEF GATE
headteachers,
103
teachers, pupils, SMS, Programme
PED, DED, UNICEF. staff, SMS
3.4.7 Have Evidence of increased x x x Students,
communities and awareness of the graduates,
community leaders importance of the mentors,
increased their presence of female lecturers,
awareness of the teachers in headteachers,
importance of the communities teachers,
presence of female pupils, PED,
Perceptions of
teachers in DED, and
scholarship recipients,
communities? UNICEF GATE
mentors, lecturers,
Programme
headteachers,
Staff
teachers, pupils, SMS,
PED, DED, UNICEF.
3.4.8 How has the Availability of relevant Government x PED, DED, and
Government policy documents. Documents UNICEF GATE
positioned itself to Programme
Evidence of
increase numbers of Staff,
partnerships and
qualified and Development
collaboration between
competent female Partners/LEG
UNICEF, development
teachers in the Members
partners and the
education sector?
government of
Afghanistan.
Evidence of both pre-
service and in-service
graduates’ inclusion
on government
payroll.
104
Evidence of
employment of
graduates into
mainstream schools
3.4.9 Was UNICEF Perceptions of PED, Programme x PED, DED, and
strategically DED, UNICEF. Documents UNICEF GATE
advantaged to Programme
Evidence of UNICEF
implement this Staff
having strong position
programme?
and influence in
education sector in
Afghanistan.
Evidence of UNICEF
having institutional
capacity to implement
the programme
3.4.10 How are Availability of Programme x PED, DED, and
monitoring and strong/robust Documents UNICEF GATE
reporting systems of programme Programme
the programme set monitoring documents Staff
up? and systems.
Perceptions of PED,
DED and UNICEF staff
3.4.11 How are the Availability of Programme x PED, DED, and
monitoring and strong/robust Documents UNICEF GATE
reporting systems programme Programme
being used to gather monitoring documents Staff
credible evidence on and system.
the programme
Perceptions of PED,
DED and UNICEF staff
105
performance and
results?
3.4.12 To what extent Strategic changes Programme x UNICEF GATE
has the gathered documented and Documents Programme
evidence been used implemented at some Staff
to inform UNICEF on stage(s) during
the programme programme
performance, detect implementation.
and resolve
Evidence or availability
bottlenecks on time?
of regular programme
monitoring reports for
all provinces including
activity output
tracking documents
Perceptions of UNICEF
programme staff
3.4.13 Are the Evidence or availability Programme x PED, DED, and
programme activities of detailed work plans Documents UNICEF GATE
being implemented that include all Programme
according to its activities Staff
timeline?
Perceptions of UNICEF,
PED and DED
3.4.14 How have the Programme x PED, DED, and
Evidence or availability
programme Documents UNICEF GATE
of regular programme
implementation Programme
monitoring reports for
strategies been used Staff
all provinces including
to efficiently
activity output
overcome delays and
tracking documents
deliver results?
106
Perceptions of UNICEF,
PED and DED
3.4.15 To what extent Perceptions of UNICEF, Programme x PED, DED and
do UNICEF development partners, Documents UNICEF GATE
partnership strategies PED and DED Programme
and collaboration Staff,
with stakeholders at Development
different levels Partners/LEG
support the delivery Members
of the programme
results? (Partnerships
improving efficiency)
3.5 Sustainability 3.5.1 How sustainable Perceptions of Programme x x x Students,
is the GATE scholarship recipients, Documents graduates,
programme in terms mentors, lecturers, mentors,
of acceptance by headteachers, pupils,
communities? teachers, pupils, SMS, teachers,
PED, DED, UNICEF. headteachers,
lecturers
3.5.2 How sustainable Perceptions of Programme x x x Students,
is the GATE scholarship recipients, Documents, graduates,
programme in terms PED, DED, UNICEF. Government PED, DED and
of employment Documents UNICEF GATE
Evidence of an
opportunities of the Programme
enabling environment
GATE graduates into Staff
for graduates to be
government payroll
included on
or other private
government payroll
ventures?
Graduates included on
government payroll
107
Graduates employed
in mainstream schools
3.5.3 What Programme x UNICEF GATE
Evidence of an
mechanisms and Documents Programme
enabling environment
policies exist to Staff
for programme
sustain programme
initiatives/components
initiatives?
to be implemented
3.5.4 Did the Evidence of changes in Programme x UNICEF, PED
programme build practice implemented Documents and DED
national and local at PED and DED as a GATE
government result of built capacity Programme
institutional capacity? Staff
Perceptions of UNICEF,
PED and DED
3.5.5 Did the Evidence of Programme x UNICEF, PED
programme support partnership and Documents, and DED
government-led collaboration between Government GATE
reforms? UNICEF and PED/DED Documents Programme
Staff
Strong link between
programme
components and
government priorities.
Perceptions of UNICEF,
PED and DED
3.5.6 Did the Evidence of inclusion Programme x UNICEF, PED
programme integrate and awareness of Documents, and DED
security risk security risk Government GATE
management into management in Documents Programme
planning, Staff
108
implementation and planning and
monitoring for implementation
partners to better
understand and
reduce security risks?
3.5.7 Was the Evidence of Programme x UNICEF GATE
programme consideration of Documents Programme
environmentally environmental Staff
sustainable in terms awareness and related
of reducing UNICEF’s best practices in
environmental programme planning
footprint through and implementation
greenhouse gas
emissions reductions
from its air travel,
vehicle fleet and
facilities, and
achieving a net-zero
climate footprint by
2020?
3.5.8 What Evidence of strong exit Programme x UNICEF, PED
partnerships, strategy for the Documents and DED
mechanisms, and programme GATE
policies exist that will Programme
Perceptions of UNICEF,
sustain the Staff
PED and DED
programme
initiatives?
109
3.5.9 To what extent Evidence of strong or Programme x UNICEF, PED
will the programme strengthened relevant Documents and DED
interventions institutional and GATE
contribute to individual capacity of Programme
increasing the stakeholders Staff,
stakeholder capacity headteachers,
Perceptions of
e.g. the Government teachers,
headteachers,
partners, mentors,
teachers, mentors,
communities and lecturers
lecturers, UNICEF, PED
teachers/educators to
and DED
ensure the
sustainability of the
programme
initiatives?
3.5.10 What exit Evidence of strong or Programme x UNICEF GATE
strategy does UNICEF strengthened relevant Documents Programme
have and how institutional and Staff
appropriate is it for individual capacity of
ensuring the stakeholders
sustainability of this
Perceptions of UNICEF
and similar
programmes and
adequate transition of
the programme
ownership to the
Government
partners?
3.5.11 What other Perceptions of x x Students,
types of inputs are scholarship recipients, graduates,
needed to facilitate mentors, lecturers, mentors,
an increase in headteachers, lecturers,
numbers of female teachers, pupils, PED, headteachers,
teachers and DED, UNICEF teachers,
subsequently pupils, PED,
110
numbers of girls Comparison of DED and
accessing and programme UNICEF GATE
participating in components with best Programme
learning spaces? practices Staff
3.5.12 Is the GATE Perceptions of x PED, DED and
scholarship scholarship recipients, UNICEF GATE
programme a mentors, lecturers, Programme
temporary stopgap headteachers, PED, Staff,
measure or should it DED, UNICEF students,
be a formal graduates,
component in the mentors,
Education system? lecturers,
headteachers
111
Appendix 4: Data Collection Instruments
Survey Protocol for GATE Students and Graduates
TRACKING INFORMATION
1. Surveyor Name:
2. Surveyor ID:
3. Surveyor Gender:
4. Province:
5. District:
6. Village:
BACKGROUND INFORMATION (All Respondents)
Name of institution ________________________________________________________
1. Status of respondent on GATE Scholarship Programme
 Student  Graduate of Programme
2. How old are you?
 Below 20
 21 - 25
 26 - 30
 31 - 35
 36 - 40
 41 - 45
 Over 46
 Do not want to answer
112
3. Which province do you live in?
 Paktya
 Khost
 Wardak
 Helmand
 Badghis
 Nangarhar
 Laghman
 Other
 Do not want to answer
4. 6 months before you got the scholarship, what did you do?
 Teaching
 Studying in G12 (>>>Skip to Q6 if respondent was not a teacher before getting a scholarship)
 Studying in G10 (>>>Skip to Q6 if respondent was not a teacher before getting a scholarship)
 Actively looking for a job (>>>Skip to Q6 if respondent was not a teacher before getting a
scholarship)
 Staying at home and not looking for a job (>>>Skip to Q6 if respondent was not a teacher
before getting a scholarship)
 Other (>>>Skip to Q6 if respondent was not a teacher before getting a scholarship)
 Do not want to answer (>>>Skip to Q6 if respondent was not a teacher before getting a
scholarship)
5. If you were a teacher before the scholarship programme, how many years had you been a
teacher?
 Less than two years
 3 to 5 years
 6 to 10 years
 11 to 15 years
113
 More than 15 years
 Do not want to answer
6. How did you hear about the scholarship programme?
 Advertisement
 School
 Community
 Other (Explain)
 Do not want to answer
7. What kind of grades do you/did you usually get while on the GATE scholarship programme?
 Mostly Excellent
 Mostly Good
 Mostly Fair
 Mostly Poor/Failing
 Do not want to answer
PROGRAMME OUTPUTS (For Students Only)
8. If respondent is a student, what stage are you on the GATE Scholarship Programme?
 First Year
 Second Year
 Do not want to answer
9. Do you expect to continue your education in the future e.g. After the GATE scholarship?
 Yes
 No
 Don’t know
 Do not want to answer
114
10. Do you expect to teach in rural/hard to reach areas in the future e.g. After the GATE
scholarship?
 Yes
 No
 Don’t know
 Do not want to answer
11. During the past 3 months, how many days did you miss college without permission from your
college?
 Never
 One day or less in a month
 More than two days in a month or more
 Don’t know
 Do not want to answer
12. During the past 3 months, how many days did you have to miss college in order to work or to
help out at home?
 Never
 15 days or less
 16 to 30 days
 More than 30 days
 Don’t know
 Do not want to answer
13. How often do you meet with your mentor?
 More than once a week
 Once a week
 Once every 2 weeks
 Once every 4 weeks
 Other
115
¨ Don’t know
 Do not want to answer
PROGRAMME OUTPUTS (For Graduates Only)
14. Are you a permanent teacher or are you a contract teacher?
 Permanent
 Contract
 Not Teaching
 Do not want to answer
15. If currently teaching, what type of school are you teaching at?
 Government School
 Community Based School
 Private School
 Don’t know
 Do not want to answer
16. Have you been retained on the government payroll? (>> If no, Skip to Q.18)
 Yes
 No
 Don’t know
 Do not want to answer
17. If yes, how long have you been on government payroll?
 Between 1 – 3 months
 Between 4 – 6 months
 Between 7 – 9 months
 Between 10 – 12 months
116
 More than 12 months
 Don’t know
 Do not want to answer
18. If yes, how soon after graduating were you put on the payroll?
 Between 1 – 3 months after graduating
 Between 4 – 6 months after graduating
 Between 7 – 9 months after graduating
 Between 10 – 12 months after graduating
 Between 1 – 2 years after graduating
 Between 2 – 3 years after graduating
 Don’t know
 Do not want to answer
19. How is your professional relationship with the headteacher at the school where you teach?
 Very Good
 Good
 Neutral/Average
 Not so bad
 Bad
 Don’t know
 Do not want to answer
20. How is your professional relationship with the male teachers in the school where you teach?
 Very Good
 Good
 Neutral/Average
 Not so bad
 Bad
 Not Applicable (if no male teachers at the school)
117
 Don’t know
 Do not want to answer
21. How is the professional relationship with the other female teachers in the school where you
teach?
 Very Good
 Good
 Neutral/Average
 Not so bad
 Bad
 Not Applicable (No other female teachers at the school)
 Don’t know
 Do not want to answer
22. Has your mentor visited you since you graduated?
 Yes
 No
 Do not want to answer
23. Has your mentor ever been in your classroom when you are teaching?
 Yes
 No
 Do not want to answer
118
PROGRAMME STRATEGY (All Respondents)
24. What type of support did/have you received as part of the GATE scholarship programme?
(select all that apply)
 Transport allowance
 Lecturers
 Female Mentors
 GATES student network
 Support from community
 Other (Explain)
25. Of all the components of support provided to you within the scholarship programme, what
is/was most useful for you in particular? Please rank using numbers 1 – 6 from most useful to
least useful (with 1 being the most useful and 6 being the least useful)
 Transport allowance
 Lecturers
 Female Mentors
 GATE student network
 Support from community
 Other (Explain)
119
Note for Surveyor: The following section is to be administered to all respondents. Tell the respondent
that the next set of questions will have options and that she should select the option that most applies
to the question, based on her own opinion
Surveyor has the option to hand the tablet to the participant so they can read and answer these by
themselves.
SS A N D S
t r o t r o g r e e u is a t r o
n g ly n g ly e t r a l g r e e n g ly
A D D
g
r e
is
a
is
a
eg g
r
e
r
e
e e
PROGRAMME OUTPUTS
1 Females are encouraged to participate in college/schoolactivities
outside the classroom e.g. Clubs, sports, etc
2 Females are encouraged to participate actively in academic classes.
3 This school/college has an active School Management Shura
4 Students with disabilities participate equally in college/school
activities.
5 Females can access similar resources as males to succeed at this
school/college
6 Females are allowed to participate in college/school activities outside
the classroom e.g. Clubs, sports, etc
7 Tutors/teachers at this school help female students/pupils with issues
concerning them both outside and in school/college
8 The principal/headteacher at this school/college is supportive of
females/girls
9 There are now more females/girls in this school/college because of the
GATE programme
10 There are now more female teachers in this school/college because of
the GATE programme
11 I was planning to be a teacher before I got the GATE scholarship
120
SS A N D S
t r o t r o g r e e u is a t r o
n g ly n g ly e t r a l g r e e n g ly
A D D
g
r e
is
a
is
a
eg g
r
e
r
e
e e
12 I would still have trained to be a teacher if I didn’t get the GATE
scholarship
13 I will continue my education in the future
14 I enjoy training as a teacher or being a teacher
PROGRAMME STRATEGY
Relationship of School/College with Community
15 Staff from this college/school go out into the community to encourage
the enrolment of both male and female children
16 Staff from this college/school go out into the community to encourage
the enrolment of minority students, students living in poverty, children
with disabilities/special needs, or others at risk for poor educational
outcomes.
17 Staff from this college/school make direct contact with families whose
children drop out of school/college or are at risk of dropping out to
encourage the child’s continued enrolment.
18 When students are absent from college/school for more than a few
days, staff makes direct contact with their families to find out what the
problem is and to facilitate the return to school as soon as possible.
19 Adults in the community encourage me to take school seriously
20 My community’s attitude towards girls’ education has changed since
the GATE programme started
21 The School Management Shura actively supports female students eg.
They encourage female students to attend school/college regularly
School/College Environment
22 Teaching/learning materials in this school/college are gender
responsive i.e. they have materials that show both males and females,
they have examples that have both males and females
23 Tutors/teachers are very supportive of female students
121
SS A N D S
t r o t r o g r e e u is a t r o
n g ly n g ly e t r a l g r e e n g ly
A D D
g
r e
is
a
is
a
eg g
r
e
r
e
e e
24 I have received all the support I need from my mentor
25 I have/had a very good relationship with my mentor
26 I meet/met with my mentor often enough
PED/DED Engagement
27 The PED/DED regularly visit this school/college
28 The PED/DED regularly conduct classroom visits to observe lessons
122
Interview Schedule for GATE Students and Graduates (Currently Teaching)
BACKGROUND INFORMATION
1. Name of College and Province:
2. Status of respondent on GATE Scholarship Programme
 Student  Graduate
3. How old are you?
 Below 20
 21 - 25
 26 - 30
 31 - 35
 36 - 40
 41 - 45
 Over 46
 Do not want to answer
4. What are your career goals? Would you like to teach in a rural area/hard to reach area? Please
provide details of why?
5. How has the GATE programme helped you so far?
PROGRAMME OUTPUTS
6. What do you think is the most valuable aspect of the GATE programme? And why?
7. What are some of the improvements you would suggest for the GATE Programme?
8. What other barriers do you think still exist for female teachers in schools in your community?
123
PROGRAMME STRATEGIES
9. What type of support do you/did you receive from your mentors?
10. Is there any other support that you think your mentor can give you?
11. Thinking back over the last few years, do you think community attitudes towards girls’ education
have changed in your community? Please explain
12. How else do you think the GATE programme can help increase the numbers of female teachers
in schools?
13. How else do you think the GATE programme can help increase the numbers of girls in learning
spaces?
14. Overall, are there specific aspects of the GATE scholarship programme that you think should
continue? Can you elaborate?
124
Interview Schedule for GATE Graduates (Not Currently Teaching)
BACKGROUND INFORMATION
1. Name of College and Province:
2. How old are you?
 Below 20
 21 - 25
 26 - 30
 31 - 35
 36 - 40
 41 - 45
 Over 46
 Do not want to answer
3. When did you graduate from the TTC?
4. What are your career goals? Would you like to teach in a rural area/hard to reach area? Please
provide details of why?
5. Are you a member of the GATE Student Network? (Please probe for details eg. How long have
you been a member, how active is the network in your community, what exactly does the
network do?)
PROGRAMME OUTPUTS
6. What do you think is the most valuable aspect of the GATE programme? And why?
7. What are some of the improvements you would suggest for the GATE Programme?
8. What other barriers do you think still exist for female teachers in schools in your community?
9. What are the reasons why you are not currently teaching?
125
PROGRAMME STRATEGIES
10. Thinking back over the last few years, do you think community attitudes towards girls’ education
have changed in your community? Please explain
11. How else do you think the GATE programme can help increase the numbers of female teachers
in schools?
12. How else do you think the GATE programme can help increase the numbers of girls in learning
spaces?
13. What is your view on the continuation of the GATE Programme?
14. Overall, are there specific aspects of the GATE scholarship programme that you think should
continue? Could you please elaborate?
126
Interview Schedule for College Lecturers of GATE Scholarship Students
BACKGROUND INFORMATION
1. Name of College and Province:
2. Gender
 Male  Female
3. Do you live in this community?
 Yes
 No
 Do not want to answer
4. How old are you?
 Less than 25
 26 - 30
 31 to 35
 36 to 40
 41 - 45
 45 - 50
 Do not want to answer
5. What is the highest level of education that you have completed?
6. How many years have you worked as a lecturer since you qualified?
7. How many years have you worked as a lecturer in this college?
8. How long have you been a lecturer for GATE scholarship students?
PROGRAMME OUTPUTS
9. How would you describe your relationship with the students/graduates you lecture?
127
10. On average, what kind of grades do the scholarship recipients usually get programme?
11. Based on your response to the above question, what do you think is the reason for this?
PROGRAMME STRATEGIES
12. As a lecturer working with beneficiaries of the GATE scholarship programme, have you received
any training or support as part of the GATE programme?
 Yes  No
13. If yes, what type of training/support did you receive?
14. After your training or support, what did you implement or change as a result of the
training/support that you received?
15. What do you think are the main challenges that female students have at your college?
16. What type of support do you think female students need in your college?
17. What are the main challenges you have faced as a lecturer for GATE students?
PROGRAMME PERFORMANCE
18. Besides teaching the GATE students, what other type of support do you give them?
19. What other type of support do you think you need as a GATE student lecturer?
20. What other type of support do you think the GATE students need? Please explain
21. Do you think the GATE programme should continue? And why?
128
Interview Schedule for Mentors of GATE Scholarship Graduates
BACKGROUND INFORMATION
1. Name of College and Province:
2. Gender
 Male  Female
3. Do you live in the community where the graduates you mentor are teaching?
 Yes
 No
 Do not want to answer
4. How old are you?
 Less 25 years old
 21 - 25
 26 – 30
 31 - 35
 36 - 40
 41 – 45
 46 - 50
 Do not want to answer
5. What is the highest level of education that you have completed?
 Secondary School
 Two-Year University Degree
 Four-Year University Degree
 University Degree with Advanced Certification (e.g. An additional qualification to a degree like
higher diploma, postgraduate diploma, etc.)
 Masters or Doctorate
129
 Do not want to answer
6. How many years have you worked as a teacher since you qualified?
 Less than two years
 3 to 5 years
 6 to 10 years
 11 to 15 years
 More than 15 years
 Don’t know
 Do not want to answer
PROGRAMME OUTPUTS
7. How long have you been a mentor for GATE scholarship students?
 1 Year
 2 Years
 More than 2 years
 Don’t know
 Do not want to answer
8. How did you become a mentor for students on the scholarship programme?
9. What’s the reason you became a mentor?
10. How would you describe your role as a mentor?
• What type of support do you give the students you mentor?
• How often do you interact?
• How long do you mentor your students for?
11. How many students do you mentor at the moment?
130
12. How would you describe your relationship with the students/graduates you mentor?
PROGRAMME STRATEGIES
13. What do you think are the main challenges that GATE graduates face when they are studying in TTCs
or when they are teaching in schools?
14. As a mentor working with beneficiaries of the GATE scholarship programme, what type of training
or support have you received?
15. After your training or support, what did you implement or change as a result of the training/support
that you received?
16. What are the main challenges you have faced as a mentor for GATE students/graduates? Please
explain or provide examples.
17. As a mentor, how else do you think you can be supported better in the GATE Programme?
18. How long do you think the mentorship support should last for students and graduates who start
teaching in schools?
19. Do you think the GATE student(s) or graduate(s) that you mentor need(s) more support?
• Why do you think that?
• And what other type of support do you think they need?
PROGRAMME PERFORMANCE
20. What do you think are the main challenges that female students still have in TTCs and when they
start teaching in schools?
21. What type of support do you think female teachers need in the school where you teach?
131
22. The GATE Programme aims to increase the numbers of female teachers with the view that this
would in turn increase the numbers of girls in schools in this community. What else do you think
the programme can do to increase the number of girls in schools?
Interview Schedule for Teachers in Schools where GATE Scholarship Graduates are Teaching
BACKGROUND INFORMATION
*Provide a brief introduction of the GATE Programme
1. Name of School and Province:
2. Gender
 Male  Female
3. Do you live in this community?
 Yes
 No
 Do not want to answer
4. How old are you?
 Less than 20
 21 - 25
 26 - 30
 31 - 35
 36 - 40
 41 - 45
 46 - 50
 Do not want to answer
5. What is the highest level of education that you have completed?
 Secondary School
 Two-Year University Degree
 Four-Year University Degree
132
 University Degree with Advanced Certification (Additional qualifications e.g. Higher diploma,
postgraduate diploma, etc.)
 Masters or Doctorate
 Don’t know
 Do not want to answer
6. How many years have you worked as a teacher since you qualified?
 Less than two years
 3 to 5 years
 6 to 10 years
 11 to 15 years
 More than 15 years
 Don’t know
 Do not want to answer
7. How many years have you worked as a teacher in this school?
 Less than two years
 3 to 5 years
 6 to 10 years
 11 to 15 years
 More than 15 years
 Don’t know
 Do not want to answer
PROGRAMME OUTPUTS
8. What do you think are the key barriers to having more female teachers in your school?
133
9. Do you think having more female teachers in your school would increase the numbers of girls
in your school? Please explain
10. The GATE Programme aims to increase the numbers of female teachers with the view that this
would in turn increase the numbers of girls in schools in this community. What else do you think
the programme can do to increase the number of girls in schools?
134
Interview Schedule for Teachers in Schools where GATE Scholarship Graduates are Teaching
BACKGROUND INFORMATION
*Provide a brief introduction of the GATE Programme
1. Name of School and Province:
2. Gender
 Male  Female
3. Do you live in this community?
 Yes
 No
 Do not want to answer
4. How old are you?
 Less than 20 years old
 21 to 25 years old
 26 to 30 years old
 31 to 35 years old
 36 - 40 years old
 41 - 45 years old
 45 - 50 years old
 Do not want to answer
5. What is the highest level of education that you have completed?
 Secondary School
 Two-Year University Degree
 Four-Year University Degree
135
 University Degree with Advanced Certification (Additional qualifications e.g. Higher diploma,
postgraduate diploma, etc.)
 Masters or Doctorate
 Don’t know
 Do not want to answer
6. How many years have you worked as a teacher since you qualified?
 Less than two years
 3 to 5 years
 6 to 10 years
 11 to 15 years
 More than 15 years
 Don’t know
 Do not want to answer
7. How many years have you worked as a teacher in this school?
 Less than two years
 3 to 5 years
 6 to 10 years
 11 to 15 years
 More than 15 years
 Don’t know
 Do not want to answer
PROGRAMME OUTPUTS
8. What do you think are the key barriers to having more female teachers in your school?
9. Do you think having more female teachers in your school would increase the numbers of girls
in your school? Please explain
136
10. The GATE Programme aims to increase the numbers of female teachers with the view that this
would in turn increase the numbers of girls in schools in this community. What else do you think
the programme can do to increase the number of girls in schools?
137
Interview Schedule for Headteachers in Schools where GATE Scholarship Graduates are Teaching
BACKGROUND INFORMATION
1. Gender
 Male  Female
2. How many years have you worked, in any position, in this school?
 Less than two years
 3 to 5 years
 6 to 10 years
 11 to 15 years
 More than 15 years
 Don’t know
 Do not want to answer
3. How many years have you worked, as the Head Teacher of this school?
 Less than two years
 3 to 5 years
 6 to 10 years
 11 to 15 years
 More than 15 years
 Don’t know
 Do not want to answer
4. How many teachers do you have at this school?
Male __________
Female __________
 Don’t know
 Do not want to answer
138
5. How many of your teachers had been beneficiaries of the GATE Scholarship Programme?
 Less than 5
 6 to 10
 11 to 15
 16 to 20
 21 or more
 Don’t know
 Do not want to answer
6. How many children do you have at this school?
Male ___________
Female __________
 Don’t know
 Do not want to answer
7. What is the average age of teachers in this school?
 Less than 20
 21 - 25
 26 - 30
 31 - 35
 36 - 40
 41 - 50
 46 - 50
 Don’t know
 Do not want to answer
8. Do most teachers in your school live near this school or in this community?
 Yes
139
 No
 Don’t know
 Do not want to answer
9. Do you live near the school or in this community?
 Yes
 No
 Do not want to answer
10. Does your school have the required number of teachers?
 Yes
 No
 I do not know
 I do not want to answer this question
11. Is there any vacancies in your school?
 Yes
 No
 I do not know
 I do not want to answer this question
PROGRAMME OUTPUTS
12. In what year did you first receive teachers who are graduates (had been scholarship
recipients/students) of the GATE programme?
 2015
 2016
 2017
 2018
140
 2019
 2020
 Don’t know
 Do not want to answer
13. How did you feel about your school having teachers who are graduates from the GATE
scholarship programme?
14. Have you seen any changes in the school due to the presence of the GATE programme? Can you
please elaborate?
15. The GATE Programme aims to increase the numbers of female teachers with the view that this
would in turn increase the numbers of girls in schools in this community. What else do you think
the programme can do to increase the number of girls in schools?
PROGRAMME STRATEGY
16. How do you think having teachers who were recipients of the GATE programme affects the
school?
17. What do you think are the barriers for female teachers in your school?
18. How else do you think the GATE Programme can contribute to increasing the number of female
teachers in your school?
19. Did you have any challenges in recruiting female teachers before you got teachers who are
graduates from the GATE scholarship programme?
o What type of challenges?
o Any examples?
o Has the GATE programme addressed some of these challenges?
20. Have any teachers from your school who had been recipients of the GATE scholarship moved to
other schools? If yes, what was/were their main reasons for moving?
141
21. Do provincial inspectors visit the GATE Graduates who are teachers in your school?
 Yes
 No
 I do not know
 I do not want to answer
22. If yes, how often do they visit the school? (>>>Skip to Q23 if did not answer yes to Q21)
 At least once a month
 Once every 2 months
 Once every 3 months
 Once every 4 months
 Once every 6 months
 Once every 12 months
 Don’t know
 Do not want to answer
23. Do GATES programme mentors visit the graduates teaching in your school?
 Yes
 No
 I do not know
 I do not want to answer
24. If yes, how often do they visit the school? (>>>Skip to Q26 if didn’t answer Yes to Q23)
 At least once a month
 Once every 2 months
142
 Once every 3 months
 Once every 4 months
 Once every 6 months
 Once every 12 months
 Don’t know
 Do not want to answer
25. If they do, what do the GATE programme mentors do when they visit the school?
26. What do you think is the most valuable aspect of the GATE programme? (On a scale of 1 – 6
with 1 being the most important and 6 being the least important)
 Transport allowance for students
 Female mentors provided for the students
 Training lecturers on gender responsive pedagogy and orientation
 Grants provided to TTCs
 Allowances for lecturers
 Other (Please provide details
143
Key Informant Interview Schedule for UNICEF Staff Members
BACKGROUND INFORMATION
1. Type of Respondent
 UNICEF Field Office Staff Member
 UNICEF Kabul Office Staff Member
2. Gender
 Male
 Female
3. What is your role specifically in the GATE programme?
4. How many years have you worked in this position?
 Less than two years
 3 to 5 years
 Don’t know
 Do not want to answer
5. How often do you monitor GATE programme components that are relevant to your role?
 At least once a month
 Once every 2 months
 Once every 3 months
 Once every 4 months
 Once every 6 months
 Never
 Don’t know
 Do not want to answer
144
PROGRAMME STRATEGIES
6. Overall, what do you think of the GATE programme?
7. Based on the programme components, which strategies do you think are the most
important? (On a scale of 1 – 6 with 1 being the most important and 6 being the least
important)
 Transport allowances for scholarship recipients
 Female mentors provided for the students
 Training lecturers and mentors on gender responsive pedagogy and orientation
 Grant provided to TTCs
 Allowances for Lecturers
 Other (Please provide details)
8. Based on the programme components, are there any significant needs that you feel
have not been covered so far?
PROGRAMME COORDINATION
9. What is UNICEF’s advantage in implementing/coordinating this programme vis a vis other
organizations
10. What do you think about the programme’s overall co-ordination process/approach?
11. What do you think about the programme’s engagement with the communities in which the
programme is being implemented? Do you think the current strategies are working? Please
explain your answer
PROGRAMME ALIGNMENT WITH OTHER UNICEF FOCUS AREAS
12. How do you think the programme aligns with the overall United Nations Girls Education
Initiative (UNGEI)?
145
13. How do you think the programme aligns with the UNICEF Basic Education and Gender Equality
(BEGE) Programme?
14. How do you think the programme aligns with the overall government education policy and
plans? Eg. NESP III, Women Economic Empowerment Plan, or any other
PROGRAMME IMPLEMENTATION
15. Do you think programme support (eg. Scholarships, training, funding for programme
monitoring, etc.) provided by UNICEF has been adequate? Please explain or provide details if
possible
16. Can you please elaborate on your view of programme performance since it was implemented
in 2015?
17. What do you think UNICEF has done best in the GATE programme?
18. What are some of the lessons learned from the implementation of the GATE programme?
19. Since the start of the programme, do you know of any delays in programme implementation
(eg. Disbursement on funds, training schedules for mentors/lecturers, etc.)? Please explain or
provide examples if possible
20. How active/responsive is your section in supporting implementation of the GATE programme
components?
 Very active
 Active
 Fairly active
 Not active
 Do not know
 Do not want to respondPlease explain or provide examples/details if possible
21. Do you think UNICEF has adequate staff members and resources to keep the programme going
for another 4 years?
 Yes
 No
146
 Don’t Know
 Do not want to respond
22. If possible, please provide details based on your response to the above question
23. Which aspects of the GATE programme do you think should continue for the next 4 years?
 Transport allowance for scholarship recipients
 Female mentors provided for the students
 Training lecturers and mentors on gender responsive pedagogy and orientation
 Grant provided to TTCs
 Other (Please provide details)
24. Give reasons for your answer
147
Key Informant Interview Schedule for Key Personnel including representatives from the respective
Provincial Education Directorates, MoE (Teacher Education Directorate) and other relevant District
Education Directorates in the Provinces/Districts where GATE Scholarship Programme was
implemented
BACKGROUND INFORMATION
1. Type of Respondent
 Directorate of Teacher Education
 Provincial Education Directorate
 District Education Officer
 Other (Please provide details)
2. Gender
 Male  Female
3. How active is your department as a whole in supporting implementation of the GATE programme
components?
 Very active
 Active
 Fairly active
 Not active
 Does not support the programme
 Do not know
 Do not want to respond
4. What is your role specifically in the GATE programme?
5. How many years have you worked in this position?
 Less than two years
 3 to 5 years
 6 to 10 years
 11 to 15 years
148
 More than 15 years
 Don’t know
 Do not want to answer
6. How often do you monitor GATE programme components?
 At least once a month
 Once every 2 months
 Once every 3 months
 Once every 4 months
 Once every 6 months
 Never
 Do not want to respond
PROGRAMME OUTPUTS
7. Have you as an individual received any training or support as part of your work/involvement on
the GATE programme? Please explain or provide details (Skip to Q9, if the answer is No)
8. If you did, what did you implement or change as a result of the training/support that you
received?
9. Has your department received any other support as part of the GATE Programme? Please explain
or provide details
10. Do you think the TTCs have received adequate support for the GATE programme?
• Why do you think so?
• Why yes/no?
11. What other support do you think the TTCs need?
12. Overall, do you think the GATE programme addresses all the key barriers to increase the number
of female teachers? Please explain
PROGRAMME STRATEGIES
149
13. How do you think the programme aligns with the overall Government Education Policies and Plans
such as the NESP III, etc.?
14. Based on the GATE programme components, which strategies do you think are the most important?
(On a scale from 1 – 6 with 1 being the most important and 6 being the least important)
 Transport allowance for scholarship recipients
 Female mentors provided for the students
 Training lecturers and mentors on gender responsive pedagogy and orientation
 Grant provided to TTCs
 Allowances for lecturers and mentors
 Other (Please provide details)
15. What do you think has not been covered by the GATE programme so far?
16. What do you think about the recruitment process of students for the GATE scholarship programme?
• Can it be improved?
• What important aspects have been included in the recruitment process?
• What other aspects can be included?
17. What do you think about the programme’s engagement with the broader communities in which it
is being implemented? Do you think there have been any changes in community attitudes towards
education because of the GATE Programme?
18. What do you think about the programme’s overall co-ordination process/approach?
• How do you think the programme can improve?
• Are there any areas where you think the programme can do things differently?
PROGRAMME PERFORMANCE
19. The GATE Programme aims to increase the numbers of female teachers with the view that this
would in turn increase the numbers of girls in schools in this community. What else can the
150
programme do to increase the number of teachers in your district/province/overall? (Request data
if available)
20. What else do you think the programme can do to increase the number of girls in schools in your
district/province/overall? (Request data if available)
21. Since the GATE programme started implementation in 2015, do you think there have been any
changes in community attitudes towards education? Why do you think so? Why yes or no?
22. Since the start of the programme, have there been any delays in programme implementation?
• Do you think programme support is received by you/your department in a timely manner?
Please explain or provide examples if possible.
23. Which aspects of the GATE programme do you think should continue in the next 4 years?
 Scholarships for female teacher training
 Female mentors provided for the students
 Training tutors on gender responsive pedagogy and orientation
 Grant provided to TTCs
 Other (Please provide details)
Give reasons for your answer
151
Focus Group Discussion Guide for Scholarship Recipients Still in College
PROGRAMME OUTPUTS
1. What motivated you to train as a teacher?
2. What are the barriers to females training as teachers in your community? Do you think the GATE
programme can address these barriers? Explain
3. Can you tell us, how is the GATE programme contributing to education in your community? Why
do you think GATE is or is not contributing?
4. Do you think the GATE programme is actually contributing to an increase in the numbers of
female teachers in your community? Why do you think so?
5. Do you think the GATE programme is actually contributing to an increase in the numbers of girls
participating in learning spaces? Why do you think so?
6. Can you provide us some examples from your experience how GATE has impacted you or
someone in your community?
PROGRAMME STRATEGIES
7. Can you tell us about the various components of the GATE scholarship programme? What do
you think about them (Probe for their thoughts on the transport allowance, is it adequate, how
are the classes conducted, what do they like or what do they not like about the classes and
lecturers? What do they like or what do they not like about the mentorship, etc.)?
8. Do you think there are other things that the programme can do for you?
9. What has worked well for you on the programme? And in what ways? Can you provide an
example?
10. What has not worked well for you in the programme? Can you share your experience about it?
PROGRAMME PERFORMANCE
11. Will you teach in your home community when you complete your training? If response is yes,
probe for reasons and motivation. If response is no, probe for reasons.
12. How supportive has your family and community been to you training as a teacher? Why do you
think this is so?
13. Do you think there has been enough community support/involvement in the programme?
(Probe for explanations of responses)
152
a. What support did the community provide?
b. How else would you recommend community involvement/ support for the programme?
14. What, if any, do you think are the negative consequences of participating in the GATE
Programme?
15. If you were managing the scholarship programme, what would you do differently? Is there
anything that you would change? And why?
153
Focus Group Discussion Guide for Scholarship Graduates
PROGRAMME OUTPUTS
1. What motivates you to teach in this community?
2. What else do you think the GATE programme can do to increase the numbers of female teachers
in schools in your community? Why do you think so? What else can the programme do to
contribute to increasing the numbers of female teachers?
3. How has the GATE Programme helped you to get employed as a teacher? Do you think the
programme could have done anything differently? What else can the programme do for you?
4. Do you think the GATE programme is actually contributing to an increase in the numbers of girls
participating in learning spaces? Why do you think so?
5. Can you provide us some examples from your experience how GATE has impacted you or
someone in your community?
PROGRAMME STRATEGIES
6. Can you tell us about the various components of the GATE scholarship programme? What do
you think about them (Probe for their thoughts on the classes, mentorship, transport
allowances, lecturers, etc.)? Have you been involved in the GATE student/graduate network?
Has the GATE student/graduate network helped you in any way? Please explain or provide
examples if possible
7. Do you think there are other things that the programme can do for you?
8. What has worked well for you on the programme? And in what ways? Can you provide an
example?
9. What has not worked well for you in the programme? Can you share your experience about it?
154
PROGRAMME PERFORMANCE
10. Do you think there has been enough community support/involvement in the programme?
(Probe for explanations of responses)
a. What support did the community provide?
b. How else would you recommend community involvement/ support for the programme?
11. How supportive has your family and community been to you working as a teacher? Why do you
think this is so?
12. How do you think the GATE programme can support GATE Graduates better?
13. What do you think are the negative consequences of participation in the GATE Programme?
155
Focus Group Discussion Guide for School Management Shuras
Please note number of participants in FGD by gender (Male: _____ Female: ____)
PROGRAMME OUTPUTS
1. What do you know about the GATE scholarship programme for female teachers in your
community? When were you first aware of it? And how did you come to know about it?
2. What are the barriers for females to train as teachers or to work as teachers in your community?
3. Do you think the GATE programme can address these barriers? Please explain or provide
examples if possible
4. What do you think is the ideal gender composition of teachers in a school? Please explain
PROGRAMME STRATEGIES
5. As a school management shura, how have you been involved in the GATE scholarship
programme? Can you give some examples?
6. How satisfied are you with how much your community has been involved in the GATE
programme? Please explain
7. What else do you think your School Management Shura can do to make the programme better?
8. Do you think your community can do more to encourage more females to train as teachers? If you
were in charge of the programme, what would you do?
PROGRAMME PERFORMANCE
9. Do you think having more female teachers would increase the number of girls going to school in your
community? Why do you think so?
10. As a School Management Shura, do you think you can do more to encourage more girls to attend
school in your community? Please give examples of what you think can be done.
11. As a School Management Shura do you think you can do more to increase the number of female
teachers in your community? Please give examples of what you think can be done
12. Do you know of other scholarship programmes for female teachers in your community? If you do,
can you compare the GATE scholarship programme with the other ones? (Probe for explanations to
responses)
156
13. Do you know of any other programmes that support female teachers in your community? If you do,
please provide details or examples
157
Focus Group Discussion Guide for Children being taught by GATE Graduates (organised by gender and
age group)
PERCEPTIONS OF GATE PROGRAMME COMPONENTS
1. Are you familiar with the GATE programme? (If not familiar the research assistant can explain
broadly)
2. What do you think of the GATE programme? Is it good or bad? Why do you think so?
3. Is it important for you to have female teachers in your school? Why?
PROGRAMME STRATEGIES
4. Do most of the children in your community attend school? Why or why not?
5. Do most of the girls in your community attend school? Why or why not?
6. Overall, do you think your community is supportive of girls to participate in learning spaces? Do
adults in your community encourage girls and boys to attend school? Can you provide an
example of how?
7. Overall, do you think your community is supportive of encouraging more female teachers to
work in your community? Can you provide an example of how?
8. From what you have just learnt about the GATE Programme, do you think it can help to increase
the number of female teachers in your school? Do you think it can help to increase the number
of girls who attend your school?
158
Observation Guide for Interaction of College Lecturers and GATE Scholarship Students and consent form
Note to data collectors:
The field observation may involve audio recording and taking pictures of the activities being monitored. Always seek explicit written or verbal
consent from someone who is responsible for the site before recording/taking pictures. Mention the following points when seeking their consent:
• All photos taken will not focus on faces of participants unless specific consent is obtained. For instance, in classrooms the pictures will be
taken from the end of the class and the faces of participants will be blurred.
• If informed consent is not given, pictures will not be taken and audio recordings will not take place.
YES NO
CONSENT FOR TAKING AUDIO RECORDINGS AND PICTURES OBTAINED
NAME AND ROLE OF THE PERSON WHO PROVIDED CONSENT (IF APPLICABLE): _____________________________________
MALE FEMALE
GENDER OF TUTOR/LECTURER
TOTAL NUMBER OF STUDENTS IN COLLEGE
TOTAL NUMBER OF SANITATION FACILITIES FOR STUDENTS IN COLLEGE
GENDER OF TUTOR/LECTURER IN CLASS OBSERVED
TOTAL NUMBER OF STUDENTS ENROLLED IN CLASS OBSERVED
TOTAL NUMBER OF STUDENTS PRESENT IN CLASS OBSERVED
NUMBER OF STUDENTS WITH DISABILITIES/SPECIAL NEEDS
159
Not At All True = 0 Somewhat True = 1 Very True = 2 Score
PHYSICAL ENVIRONMENT
1 There are adequate male and female sanitation facilities available
2 Both male and female students each sit comfortable during lessons
3 Both male and female students each have sufficient space to work.
4 Teaching materials available in class room e.g. Text books
Comments About Physical Environment:
PEDAGOGY
5 The lecturer/tutor presents lessons in a well-prepared and organized manner.
6 The lecturer/tutor maintains an engaging class, without pressuring the students.
7 The lecturer/tutor communicates both verbally and nonverbally with female students in a positive and friendly
manner.
8 The lecturer/tutor interacts with the female students in a respectful manner.
9 The lecturer adapts lessons for students with special learning needs. [Ask teacher for examples if not observed.]
10 The female students participate in class activities. [Note any observable patterns of non-participation in
comments].
160
Not At All True = 0 Somewhat True = 1 Very True = 2 Score
Comments About Pedagogy
INCLUSIVENESS/PARTICIPATION
12 In general, male and female students receive equal time and attention from the tutor/lecturer.
13 The lecturer/tutor has similar expectations for both males and females (e.g., asks questions of similar difficulty).
14 Female students appeared relaxed and comfortable
15 Both male and female students behave respectfully towards each other
16 Female students are actively engaged in the classroom
Comments About Inclusiveness/participation:
161
Appendix 5: Evaluation Team
The Evaluation Team comprised colleagues from of Education and Development Solutions (EADS) in Ireland, and ATR-Consulting in Afghanistan.
The core team included Dr Rosaria Kunda Marron (Team Leader) who provided overall management of the evaluation team including evaluation
planning, design, data analysis and report writing. Dr Pauline Lyseight-jones supported the project lead together with the EADS Quality Assurance
team, and Mr Fayaz Amiri (ATR Project Manager and Education Specialist) who managed the data collection, field work, data transcription and
translation for analysis, and field level quality assurance aspects of the evaluation. Specific responsibilities of EADS as the lead organisation and
ATR-Consulting as the local organisation are outlined below .
PROJECT LEAD
Peer Reviewer
DATA COLLECTION DATA ANALYSIS QUALITY
AND ANALYSIS AND REPORT ASSURANCE
WRITING
Project Manager/Education Quality Assurance
Specialist Manager
QualityAssurance
Senior Analyst Quality Translation
Assurance
Assistants
Database
Field Team Recruitment
Leaders Translators Specialist
162
Education and Development Solutions (EADS)
For the effective execution of this assignment, the following were the responsibilities of EADS:
• Apply the set-out methodology so as to ensure the outputs are in line with the Evaluation Task Force expectations;
• Use the work plan to execute and control the assignment;
• Provide a team and resources to execute the assignment;
• Deliver the expected reports on time;
• Produce quality deliverables;
• Coordinate the execution of the assignment and manage the team; and
• Provide backstopping staff and replace staff where necessary so as not to delay the execution of the assignment.
ATR-Consulting
For the effective execution of this assignment, the following were the responsibilities of ATR-Consulting:
• Apply the set-out methodology so as to ensure the outputs are in line with the Evaluation Task Force expectations;
• Use the work plan to execute and control the assignment;
• Provide a team and resources to execute the assignment;
• Manage field work including the deployment of a data collection team
• Management and quality assurance of data in line with set out methodology
163
Appendix 6: Evaluation Mission Schedule
Province District Dates Survey Dates KII Dates FGD
Khost Nadir Shah 24 - 27 March 20 current 27 - 29 March 11 (5 female students in college, 2 1 April 1 female students in colleges
Kot students mentors, 4 lecturers)
Matoon 24 - 25 March 15 graduate 27 - 30 March 14 (5 female graduates currently 3 - 5 April 3 (1 female graduates currently
students teaching, 2 head teachers, 2 teaching, 1 pupils of female
teachers, 1 mentor, 1 DED, 1 UNICEF, graduates teaching in schools, 1
1 PED) SMS)
Zazi Maidan 27 - 28 March 15 graduate 31 March - 1 7 (5 female students not currently N/A N/A
students April teaching, 2 mentors)
Badghis Qalae Naw 24 - 25 March 21 (8 current 30 - 31 March 14 (2 female students in college, 4 1 - 3 April 2 (1 female students in colleges, 1
students, 13 female graduates currently teaching, female graduates currently
graduate 1 PED, 1 DED, 2 lecturers, 3 mentors) teaching)
students)
Qadis 27 - 29 March 29 (17 current 30 - 31 March 20 (3 female students in college, 3 3 - 4 April 2 (1 pupils of female graduates
students, 12 female graduates currently teaching, teaching in schools, 1 SMS)
graduate 3 female graduates currently not
students) teaching, 4 teachers, 2 head teacher,
3 lecturers, 2 mentors)
Wardak Jalrez 24 - 25 March 15 (current 31 March - 1 14 (5 female students in college, 2 2 April 1 female students in colleges
students) April mentors, 2 teachers, 4 lecturers, 1
headteacher)
Hese Awal 24 - 28 March 17 graduate 30 March - 1 9 (3 female graduates currently 3 - 4 April 2 (1 female graduates currently
students April teaching, 2 female graduates teaching, 1 pupils of female
currently not teaching, 1 teacher, 1 graduates teaching in schools)
head teacher, 1 lecturer, 1 mentor)
Markaz 29 - 30 March 18 graduate 30 March - 1 12 (2 female graduates currently 3 April 1 SMS
Behsud students April teaching, 3 female graduates not
currently teaching, 1 teacher, 1
headteacher, 1 PED, 1 DED, 1
UNICEF, 2 mentors)
164
Laghman Alingar 24 March 13 current 30 March 8 (2 female students in college, 2 6 April 1 female students in colleges
students mentors, 4 lecturers)
Qarghae 25 - 28 March 24 current 3 - 4 April 13 (3 female students in college, 4 N/A N/A
students female graduates currently teaching,
2 teachers, 1 headteacher, 2
mentors, 1 lecturer)
Mehtharlam 29 March 12 graduate 5 April 10 (3 female graduates currently 7 April 3 (1 female graduates currently
students teaching, 3 female graduates teaching, 1 pupils of female
currently not teaching, 1 mentor, 1 graduates teaching in schools, 1
UNICEF, 1 PED, 1 DED) SMS)
Helmand Grishk 24 - 27 March 18 current 28 - 29 March 14 (5 female students in college, 5 5 April 1 female students in colleges
students female graduates currently teaching,
2 mentors, 2 lecturers)
Nade Ali 24 March 8 current N/A N/A N/A N/A
students
Nawa 27 March 9 current N/A N/A N/A N/A
students
Bost 25 - 27 March 15 graduate 30 March - 1 8 (3 female graduates currently 6 - 7 April 2 (1 female students in colleges, 1
students April teaching, 2 female graduates female graduates currently
currently not teaching, 1 head teaching)
teacher, 2 teachers)
LashKargah N/A 2 - 4 April 9 (3 lecturers, 3 mentors, 1 DED, 1 8 April 1 SMS
PED, 1 UNICEF
Paktia Zazi Aryoub 24 - 25 March 13 current 28 March 9 (3 female students in college, 2 31 March 1 female students in colleges
students mentors, 2 lecturers, 1 headteacher,
1 teacher)
Ahmad Aba 24 - 25 March 12 current 28 March 8 (2 female students in college, 2 N/A N/A
students mentors, 3 lecturers, 1 teacher)
Gardez 25 - 27 March 25 graduate 29 - 30 March 14 (5 female graduates currently 1 - 4 April 3 (1 female graduates currently
students teaching, 5 female graduates not teaching, 1 pupils of female
currently teaching, 1 UNICEF, 1 PED, graduates teaching in schools, 1
1 DED, 1 mentor) SMS)
165
Nangarhar Ghani Khil 24 - 25 March 13 current 28 March 10 (3 female students in college, 2 5 April 1 female students in colleges
students mentors, 3 lecturers, 1 teacher, 1
headteacher)
Chaparhar 24 - 25 March 12 current 29 March 7 (2 female students in college, 1 N/A N/A
students mentor, 2 lecturers, 1 teacher, 1
headteacher)
Haska Mina 25 - 27 March 13 graduate 30 March - 4 7 (5 female graduates currently 6 - 7 April 2 (1 female students in colleges, 1
students April teaching, 2 mentors) female graduates currently
teaching)
Khogyani 25 - 27 March 13 graduate 30 - 31 March 5 female graduates not currently N/A N/A
students teaching
Jalalabad N/A 4 April 3 (1 PED, 1 DED, 1 UNICEF) 8 April 1 SMS
166
Appendix 7: UNICEF Research Ethics Approval Certificate
167
Appendix 8: Proposed Reconstructed Components for the GATE Programme ToC
Assumptions Inputs Outputs Outcomes Impact
Attendance and Provide scholarships to 1,887 females 1,887 females receive Increased number and Improved access and
participation in teacher with grade 12 certificates (and female scholarships and proportion of qualified retention for girls in 14
training are consistent teachers who have not achieved grade successfully complete female teachers in target provinces
14 qualifications) to attend teacher TTC training target provinces
training programmes in outreach TTCs programme
Adequate advocacy Engagement with various community
undertaken to gain leaders to support females on
community support scholarship programme
Sufficient number of Provide support to scholarship 120 mentors receive
lecturers and mentors recipients through trained lecturers allowance and training
recruited and mentors on formative
assessment, coaching
and mentorship
Lecturers and mentors 224 lecturers receive
training is appropriate and training on gender
sufficient responsive pedagogy,
formative assessment
and language
enhancement
TTCs ability to provide Provide capacity building support to 5 Lump sum grants
training for GATE students provincial TTCs provided to TTCs for
168
outside main TTC infrastructure and
programmes teaching materials
MoE teacher recruitment Strengthen advocacy and engagement Advocacy, support and Scholarship graduates
strategically target graduates with MoE to support graduates with engagement with MoE recruited by MoE
employment opportunities to recruit GATE
scholarship graduates
169
Appendix 9: Key Informants - Meetings via Zoom
DATE NAME ORGANISATION/DESIGNATION
24 September, 2020 Mr Simon Peter Aturia UNICEF Education Specialist
24 September, 2020 Ms Khadijah Bahrman UNICEF Education Programme
24 September, 2020 Mr Ahmad Fawad Jamshid UNICEF Education Programme
29 September, 2020 Ms Veronica Kamanga Njikho UNICEF Gender Specialist
7 October, 2020 Mr Niaz Mohammad Puya GIZ Programme Manager
7 October, 2020 Mr Samad Aasi GIZ Girls Education
7 October, 2020 Ms Halima Azadmanish GIZ Gender Specialist
7 October, 2020 Mr Tsuyoshi Fukao World Bank Education Specialist
8 October, 2020 Dr Erinna Dia UNICEF Chief of Education
170
Appendix 10: Documents Reviewed
Girls’ Education Strategy (2020 – 2021), Ministry of Education, 2020
Afghanistan: Basic Education and Gender Equality Thematic Report, January – December 2017, UNICEF
Afghanistan, March 2018, UNICEF
Afghanistan Country Programme Action Plan, 2015-2019, November 2014, UNICEF
Afghanistan Country Programme Document 2015-2019, September 2014, UNICEF
Afghanistan Quality Standards Framework, Standards Zero Draft, Schulze, 2020, UNICEF
Annual Progress Report, The Government of the Republic of Korea Improve Access to Quality Education
for Girls in Afghanistan. Grant: SC170729, UNICEF Afghanistan, November 2018, UNICEF
Curriculum Framework for General Education, Islamic Republic of Afghanistan, Ministry of Education,
2018
Dimensions of Teacher Policy – quality, management and recruitment factors, Islamic Republic of
Afghanistan, Ministry of Education, 2019
Draft Theory of Change, undated
Education Joint Sector Review 2018, Republic of Afghanistan, Ministry of Education, General Directorate
of Planning and Evaluation, Strategic Monitoring and Evaluation Directorate, Research and Evaluation
Unit, 2018
Education Thematic Report 2019, UNICEF Afghanistan, 2019, UNICEF
Field Study on Girls Access to Education: challenges, opportunities and Situation Analysis, 2019, Women
and legal research foundation, Malala Fund
Final Report, Government of the Republic of Korea, Improve Access to Quality Education for Girls in
Afghanistan. Grant: SC170729, UNICEF Afghanistan, February 2020, UNICEF
Girls Access through female Teacher Education (GATE), Funding Proposal to the Government of Korea,
UNICEF Afghanistan, March 2014, UNICEF
Mid-Term Evaluation of the Increasing Access to Basic Education and Gender Equality Programme
(Afghanistan) (2015-2019), The Konterra Group, 2019, The United States Agency for International
Development (USAID)
National Education Strategic Plan 2017-2021, Islamic Republic of Afghanistan, 2016, Ministry of Education
Operational Assessment of Social Mobilisation and Behaviour Change Training, Magenta, 2020, UNICEF
OOSS Targets 2020 indicative, UNICEF, 2020
Out of School Children Policy, Final 2nd draft of OOSC policy for review, Islamic Republic of Afghanistan,
Ministry of Education, Deputy Ministry of General Education, General Education Directorate, 2020
171
Together in partnership to improve access to quality education for girls in Afghanistan, Proposal submitted
to: The Government of the Republic of Korea, UNICEF Afghanistan, November 2017, UNICEF
172
Appendix 11: Consent/Assent Forms
FGD Consent Form: Students and School Management Shuras
Data Collector
Date of the FGD
Start Time
End Time
Respondent’s Information
Name
Gender
Position
Contact Info
Hello, my name is ________ from ATR. We are conducting focus group discussions with people in your
district who have participated in a programme called the GATE Scholarship Programme. We are
conducting focus group discussions (FGD) as part of an evaluation of this programme. We would like to
ask you some questions about your experiences with this programme and any changes you have
observed in your community as a result of the programme. Although there are no direct benefits to you
for participating in this research study, your knowledge and experience will contribute to information
that may improve and enhance the programme
There are no right or wrong answers to our questions. We are just interested in understanding your
perspectives and experiences so that we can learn how the project is progressing and provide
recommendations to UNICEF about any changes or improvements that can be made. Please note that
the FGD will take around one hour and a half.
• Your participation is voluntary and you are free to stop your participation at any time.
• Feel free to skip a question or topic if you feel uncomfortable or don’t wish to answer.
• Anything you say during the FGD is confidential. We will not record any names of any
participants during the discussion so your identity will not be connected with anything you say.
• We will not use names of individuals from the focus group discussion when we write up the
results of the study
Given that the discussion will take place with a group of people, we would like to ask you to respect the
privacy of others in the group and not discuss what we speak about outside of the focus group.We
would like to audio record the discussion so that we capture everything you say, but if you would prefer
that we didn’t then I can take notes while we speak. The audio recordings will be shared only within the
research team and will not be played in front of anyone. After we analyse the data, the recordings and
the transcripts will be destroyed.Is it okay for us to record the FGD? Is it okay for us to take some
photos? Do you have any questions?
For additional information please contact Mr Fayaz Amiri (fayaz.amiri@atr-consulting.com or +93 78 005
6520)
173
KII Consent Form: Headteachers, Teachers, PED, DED and UNICEF
Data Collector
Date of the interview
Start Time
End Time
Respondent’s Information
Name
Gender
Position
Contact Info
Hello, my name is ________ from ATR. We are conducting interviews with people in your district who
have participated in a programme called the “GATE Scholarship Programme”. We are conducting these
interviews as part of an evaluation of this programme. We would like to ask you some questions about
your experiences with this programme and any changes you have observed in your community as a
result of the programme. Although there are no direct benefits to you for participating in this research
study, your knowledge and experience will contribute to information that may improve and enhance the
programme
There are no right or wrong answers to our questions. We are just interested in understanding your
perspectives and experiences so that we can learn how the project is progressing and provide
recommendations to UNICEF about any changes or improvements that can be made. Please note that
the interview will take around one hour.
• Your participation is voluntary and you are free to stop your participation at any time.
• Feel free to skip a question or topic if you feel uncomfortable or don’t wish to answer.
• Anything you say during the interview is confidential. We will not record your name during the
interview so your identity will not be connected with anything you say.
• We will not use names of individuals when we write up the results of the study
I would like to audio record the interview so that I capture everything you say, but if you would prefer
that I didn’t then I can take notes while we speak. The audio recordings will be shared only within the
research team and will not be played in front of anyone. After we analyse the data, the recordings and
the transcripts will be destroyed. Is it okay for us to record the KII? Is it okay for us to take some photos?
Do you have any questions?
For additional information please contact Mr Fayaz Amiri (fayaz.amiri@atr-consulting.com or +93 78 005
6520)
174
Survey/KII Consent Form: Scholarship Recipients
Data Collector
Date of the interview
Start Time
End Time
Respondent’s Information
Name
Gender
Position
Contact Info
Hello, my name is ________ from ATR. As part of an evaluation of the GATE Scholarship Programme, we
are conducting a survey/interviews with scholarship recipients to get an understanding of their
experience of being on the programme. We would like to ask you some questions about your
experiences and any changes you have observed as a result of the programme. Although there are no
direct benefits to you for participating in this research study, your knowledge and experience will
contribute to information that may improve and enhance the programme.
I will be asking some questions but this is basically a discussion and I would like to hear your opinions
and ideas. Your identity will remain anonymous and we will not publish your name and position without
your consent. We would also like to record this discussion so that we do not miss any information. This
recording will remain with ATR and will only and solely be used for the purpose of this research.
There are no right or wrong answers to our questions. We are just interested in understanding your
perspectives and experiences so that we can learn how the project is progressing and provide
recommendations to UNICEF about any changes or improvements that can be made. Please note that
the interview will take around one hour.
• Your participation is voluntary and you are free to stop your participation at any time.
• Feel free to skip a question or topic if you feel uncomfortable or don’t wish to answer.
• Anything you say during the interview is confidential. We will not record your name during the
interview so your identity will not be connected with anything you say.
• We will not use names of individuals when we write up the results of the study
I would like to audio record the interview so that I capture everything you say, but if you would prefer
that I didn’t then I can take notes while we speak. The audio recordings will be shared only within the
research team and will not be played in front of anyone. After we analyse the data, the recordings and
the transcripts will be destroyed.Is it okay for us to record the interview? Is it okay for us to take some
photos? Do you have any questions?
For additional information please contact Mr Fayaz Amiri (fayaz.amiri@atr-consulting.com or +93 78 005
6520)
175
FGD Consent Form: Pupils of GATE Graduates (addressed to their
parents/guardian/school)
Data Collector
Date of the FGD
Start Time
End Time
Schools/Parents/Guardian/Respondent’s Information
Name
Gender
Position
Contact Info
Hello, my name is ________ from a survey firm called ATR. We are having discussions with students
taught by female teachers who have received training as part of the GATE programme. We want to
know how well the programme is working, and so, we would like to ask your child/pupils some
questions about their experiences in your school and community, and any changes they may have
observed as a result of the programme. Although there are no direct benefits to you or your child/pupils
for participating in this research study, their insights and experience will contribute to information that
may improve and enhance the programme.
There are no right or wrong answers to our questions. Please note that the discussions with the
child/pupils will take place in groups and take around one hour.
• Participation is voluntary and children are free to stop their participation at any time.
• Children are free to skip a question or topic if they feel uncomfortable or don’t wish to answer.
• Anything they say during the FGD is confidential. We will not record any names of any
participants during the discussion so their identity will not be connected with anything they say.
• We will not use yours or any children’s names when we write up the results of the study that
come from this discussion.
The information that your child/pupils share in this group will not be shared with others outside of the
discussion room – this is a safe space for all. Children will be instructed to respect the privacy of others
in the group and not discuss what we speak about. All these points will also be clearly explained to
children by a trained facilitator before starting the discussions.
We would also like to audio record the discussions so that we capture everything that is said, but if you
would prefer that we didn’t then the facilitator can simply take notes as the discussions take place. The
audio recordings will be shared only within the research team and will not be played in front of anyone.
After we finish our work, we will destroy the recordings.
Do you consent that your child/pupils participate in the group discussions for the study? Is it okay for us
to record the FGD? Is it okay for us to take some photos during the FGD? Do you have any questions?
For additional information please contact Mr Fayaz Amiri (fayaz.amiri@atr-consulting.com or +93 78 005
6520)
176
FGD Assent Form: Pupils of GATE Graduates
Data Collector
Date of the FGD
Start Time
End Time
Respondent’s Information
Name
Gender
Position
Contact Info
Hello, my name is ________ from a survey company called ATR. We are discussing with students like you
who are taught by female teachers who have been part of the GATE programme. We want to know how
well the programme is working, and so, we would like to ask you some questions about your
experiences in your school and community, and any changes you may have observed as a result of the
programme. There are no direct benefits to you for participating in this research study, but your
opinions are very important to us because it can help improving the programme.
There are no right or wrong answers to our questions, and we would like to hear from all of you. Please
note that the group discussions will take around one hour.
• Your participation is voluntary and you are free to stop your participation at any time.
• Feel free to skip a question or topic if you feel uncomfortable or don’t wish to answer.
• Anything you say during the group discussions is confidential. This means we will not record any
names of any participants during the discussion so your identity will not be connected with
anything you say.
• We will not use your names when we write up the results of the study that come from this
discussion.
The information that you share in this group will not be shared with others outside of this room – this is
a safe space for all of us. We would like to ask you to respect the privacy of others in the group and not
discuss what we talk about today with others.
We would also like to audio record the discussion so that we capture everything you say, but if you
would prefer that we didn’t then I can take notes while we speak. The audio recordings will be shared
only within the research team and will not be played in front of anyone. After we finish our work, we will
destroy the recordings.
[Ask participants to repeat what they understand the exercise is for and clarify any potential doubts]
Is it okay for us to record the FGD? Is it okay for us to take some photos during the FGD? Do you have any
questions?
For additional information please contact Mr Fayaz Amiri (fayaz.amiri@atr-consulting.com or +93 78 005
6520)
177
Stories of Transformation Consent Form: Students
Data Collector
Date of the interview
Start Time
End Time
Respondent’s Information
Name
Gender
Position
Contact Info
Hello, my name is ________ from ATR. We are conducting further interviews with scholarship
beneficiaries who appear to have experienced significant changes as a result of the their participation in
the GATE Programme. We would like to ask you some questions about your individual experiences with
this programme and any changes you have experienced as an individual. Although there are no direct
benefits to you for participating in this research study, your knowledge and experience will contribute to
information that may improve and enhance the programme
There are no right or wrong answers to our questions. We are just interested in understanding your
individual experiences a bit more so that we can learn how the project has directly affected some of the
direct programme beneficiaries. Please note that this interview/discussion will take around one hour.
• Your participation is voluntary and you are free to stop your participation at any time.
• Feel free to skip a question or topic if you feel uncomfortable or don’t wish to answer.
• Anything you say during this interview/discussion is confidential and we will not record it
anywhere during the interview/discussion. Your identity will not be connected with anything
you say.
• We will not use your name when we write up the results of the study
We would like to audio record the interview/discussion so that we capture everything you say, but if you
would prefer that we didn’t then I can take notes while we speak. The audio recording will be shared
only within the research team and will not be played in front of anyone. After we analyse the data, the
recordings and the transcripts will be destroyed.Is it okay for us to record this interview/discussion? Is it
okay for us to take some photos? Do you have any questions?
For additional information please contact Mr Fayaz Amiri (fayaz.amiri@atr-consulting.com or +93 78 005
6
178
Appendix 12: Snap Survey Data
Between 2015 to 2019—the period under evaluation—the GATE Programme reached 1,272
direct beneficiaries in the seven participating provinces. The breakdown is given below:
Provinces Direct Beneficiaries
Students Lecturers Mentors Total
1 Badghis 276 35 23 334
2 Helmand 110 24 12 146
3 Khost 105 21 10 136
4 Laghman 70 24 12 106
5 Nangarhar 100 20 10 130
6 Paktia 294 21 13 328
7 Wardak 73 12 7 92
Total 1028 157 87 1272
Table 10: Direct beneficiaries of the GATE Programme in seven provinces
Scholarship Recipients
As the main target group of the GATE Programme, this evaluation looked at the characteristics
of the scholarship recipients as a distinct group by collecting contextual data through a snap
survey of the scholarship recipients—including current students and graduate students—to get
a broad understanding of who they are as the primary target of the GATE Programme.
Age distribution
In the participating provinces, 88% of the survey respondents were aged below 25 years, with
45% below the age of 20 years. This suggests that most of the GATE scholarship recipients are
either early career teachers or just starting their careers in teaching.
179
s 45%
t 43%
n
e
ip
ic
e
r
p
ih
s
r
a
lo
h
c
s
f
o
e
g
a 7%
t
n
e 2%
c 1% 1% 1%
r
e
P
20 or 21 - 25 26 - 30 31 - 35 36 - 40 41 - 45 46+
below
Age range of scholarship recipients
Graph 15: Percentage of scholarship recipients in different age ranges
This pattern is further mirrored in a cross tabulation of the age distribution between current
students and graduate students. A breakdown of the age distribution by province indicates that
the age distribution is similar in all the provinces except in Badghis and and Wardak.
85%
s
t
n
e
ip
ic e r
p
60% 63% 62% 58%
ih54%
s
r
a
lo
h
c
s 40%
f o 38% 3… 38%
e
g a 30%
t
n
e 24% 24%
c
r
e
P
9% 13%
1…
6% 8%
2%2 4% 2… 2% 2 2% 0 4% 44%6% 0 2 0 % 3% 0
Badghis Helmand Khost Laghman Nangarhar Paktya Wardak
Age range of scholarship recipients
20 or below 21 - 25 26 - 30 31 - 35 36 - 40 41 - 45 46+
Graph 16: Percentage of age distribution of scholarship recipients in seven provinces
180
Teaching experience before GATE Programme
Similarly, a high percentage of scholarship recipients indicated that they had less than 2 years
teaching experience before they were awarded the scholarship. This further confirms the finding
that scholarship recipients were in an early phase of their respective teaching careers. A
breakdown of the data on teaching experience by province indicates that the majority of
scholarship recipients in Helmand, Nangahar, Paktia and Wardak had less than 2 years teaching
experience, with all recipients in Helmand and Nangahar having less than two years’ experience
before being awarded the scholarship. Badghis had the highest proportion of students with
more than 5 years teaching experience at 35%—a correlation with the age profile of scholarship
recipients in Badghis.
56%
p
ih
s
r
a
lo
hs 30%
c s
f o
t n e
ip
eic
ge
ar
t
n
e c 4% 4% 4%
r
e
P
2 or less years 3 to 5 years 6 to 10 years 11 to 15 years 16+ years
Teaching experience prior to receipt of scholarship
Graph 17: Teaching experience of scholarship recipients prior to being awarded the GATE
scholarship
GATE Programme Components, Processes and Activities
The GATE Programme components broadly included capacity building of TTCs and lecturers who
would teach the scholarship recipients, the provision of mentors for the scholarship recipients,
allowances for the lecturers and mentors on the programme, transport allowances for the
scholarship recipients and a graduate network. UNICEF provided the funds for allowances for
the scholarship recipients, lecturers and mentors, and the money was paid directly to the
recipients on a monthly basis. UNICEF also provided the funds to the TED and PED to facilitate
and supported programme monitoring.
In exploring the programme components, this evaluation included community support as it has
been implicitly included as an important component in the documents reviewed as part of this
evaluation. Most of the scholarship recipients ranked the transport allowance and the lecturer
support as the most important or useful components for them (Refer to Graph 19 below).
UNICEF staff ranked the provision of female mentors as the most important component of the
programme, while respondents from the PED and DED ranked the transport allowance as the
most important programme component.
181
100%
s t 90%
n
e
ip 80%
ic
e 70%
r
p
ih 60%
s
r
a 50%
lo
h
c 40%
s
e
g 30%
a
t
n 20%
e
c
r e 10%
P
0%
Mentors Student Lecturer Community Transport Other
Networks Support Support Allowance
First choice (most useful) Second choice Third choice
Fourth choice Fifth choice Sixth choice (least useful)
Graph 18: Scholarship recipients ranking of six scholarship support components
Transport Allowance as an important component of the GATE programme
The financial support provided to scholarship recipients has been highlighted by almost all
respondent groups and appears to be a very important component of the GATE Programme
because of the distances that students need to travel to access the TTCs. In their FGDs, pupils
being taught by programme graduates identified the transport allowance and salaries as very
important in the GATE Programme. UNICEF staff and GATE Scholarship Recipients (both
graduates and current students) in the KIIs and FGDs also identified the transport allowance as
the most important aspect of the programme components.
In some cases, students and graduates in the FGDs indicated that the transport allowance was
inadequate, with scholarship recipients in Helmand suggesting that the programme could
include accommodation for students closer to the TTCs because of the transport issue. The need
for the amount to be increased was further echoed by UNICEF staff who suggested it did not
meet the needs and requirements of the students.
Lecturers recruited in the GATE programme
Because the programme is designed to have the scholarship recipients taught as a distinct cohort
outside the regular TTC timetables, the programme had aimed to recruit 120 lecturers in 5
provinces (UNICEF Afghanistan, 2014) to teach the students. As the programme was rolled out
to another 9 provinces, this figure was revised to 224 lecturers (UNICEF Afghanistan, 2020).
These lecturers were to undergo training in gender responsive pedagogy and then teach the
scholarship recipients in their respective communities.
For the period under evaluation, a total of 232 lecturers had been recruited with 157 (8 female
and 149 male) in the 7 participating provinces. Data for when the lecturers had been recruited
onto the programme was not available for all 7 provinces, but the available data suggested that
Badghis was among the provinces that recruited lecturers at the start of the programme (Graph
20).
182
d
e
t
iu
r 15
c
e
r
s
r
e
r
u
t
c
e
l
f 15
o
r e
22
18
b
m
u
N 5
Badghis Helmand Khost Laghman Nangahar Paktia Wardak
2015 2016 2017 2018
Graph 19: Number of recruited lecturers each year from 2015 – 2019
Among the 7 provinces, Badghis had the highest percentage of female lecturers—about 11%—
while Khost, Nangahar and Wardak had no female lecturers at all (Graph 21).
e
m
m
a
r
g
o
r
P
E
T
A
G
31
n
o
s
r
e r 23 22
u t c 21 20 20
e
l
f o 12
r
e
b 4
m 1 2 1
u
N Badghis Helmand Khost Laghman Nangarhar Paktia Wardak
Female Male
Graph 20: Number of male and female lecturers in seven provinces
Where data was available, the analysis showed that almost 86% of the lecturers had Bachelors
Degrees as their highest level of qualification, with Badghis having the highest proportion—
including 4 females (Graph 22).
183
4
s
r
e
r
u
t
c
e l
f
35 9 1 2
o
r
e
b 20 19
m 15
u 12
N
Badghis Helmand Khost Laghman Nangahar Paktia Wardak
18/Masters Degree/Professional
Certificate
16/Bachelors Degree
14/Associate Degree
Graph 21: Highest qualifications of lecturers (in numbers) in seven provinces
77% of the lecturers who were interviewed were aged between 26 – 35 years old. A breakdown
by province showed that in Helmand and Laghman 20% of the lecturers reported that they were
aged between 41 – 45 years old and in Badghis 20% reported being 46 – 50.
The support provided by lecturers was ranked as being very important by scholarship recipients,
with positive perceptions of their relationships with them and the teaching materials used in the
classes (Graph 23).
100%
s t 90%
n
e ip 80%
ic 70%
e
r
p 60%
ih
s 50%
r
a lo 40%
h c 30%
s
e 20%
g
a t 10%
n
e 0%
c
r
e Strongly Agree Neutral Disagree Strongly
P
Agree Disagree
Lecturers are very supportive of female students.
Teaching/learning materials class are gender responsive
Graph 22: Scholarship recipients perceptions of lecturer support
They also pointed out that they valued their lecturers support. They expressed that they felt
empowered with the knowledge and skills gained during the training, and that their lecturers
helped female students with issues concerning them both in and out of school as represented
in Figure 7.
184
Lecturers at our TTC help female students with issues
concerning them both in and outside the classroom
Strongly Agree Agree Neutral Disaggree Strongly Disagree
Figure 7: Scholarship recipients' perceptions (in numbers) of lecturer support
A scoping exercise on classroom interactions between lecturers and students and delivery of
lessons was carried through the perceptions of scholarship recipients in a snap survey and an
observation of lessons underway. The classroom observation assessed the teaching and learning
materials and methods used by the lecturers and included an observation of how the lesson was
presented, how the lecturers related with the students during the lesson, communication and
interaction between the lecturer and the students, and student participation. From the snap
survey, 70% of the scholarship recipients felt that the teaching/learning materials adopted by
their lecturers in their respective classes were gender responsive. A breakdown of this data by
province found that most of the positive perceptions were from the recipients from Badghis,
Helmand, Paktia, and Wardak provinces (Graph 24).
185
100
90
s
t n 80
e
ip
ic 70
e Strongly
r
p 60 disagree
ih
s Disagree
r
a 50
lo
h
c s 40 Neutral
e
g
a t 30 Agree
n
e
c r 20
e Strongly
P
10 agree
0
Graph 8: Perceptions of gender responsiveness (in numbers) of teaching and learning materials
by province
Similarly, the classroom observations rated the classroom interactions and lesson delivery well
overall, with the exception of the class in Laghman which had slightly lower scores (Graph 25).
Students participated actively during the lessons that were observed, and their lecturers
encouraged them to take part in the lectures and share their opinions.
2.5
2
e
r
o 1.5
c
S
1
0.5
0
Khost Laghman HelmandNangarhar Badghis Paktya
Lesson Presentation Student Engagement Communication
Interaction Participation
Graph 24: Satisfaction with five aspects of pedagogy
(2 = Very True, 1 = Somewhat True, 0 = Not at all True)
The inclusiveness aspect for students was rated well in all 6 TTCs observed (Graph 26), with
Laghman being rated the lowest overall with minimal student engagement observed during the
186
lesson. The observations noted mutual respect among students and lecturers, and active
enagement of students .
2.5
2
e 1.5
r
o
c
S
1
0.5
0
Khost Laghman Helmand Nangarhar Badghis Paktya
Attention from lecturer Lecturer expectations
Students relaxed Students respectful
Active engagement of students
Graph 25: Satisfaction with five aspects of inclusiveness/participation
(2 = Very True, 1 = Somewhat True, 0 = Not at all True)
When analysed together, the data in Graphs 24, 25 and 26 suggests that the classroom
interactions and lesson delivery in Laghman is lagging when compared with the TTCs in the other
5 provinces which were observed.
Recruitment of mentors
The programme also makes use of experienced and qualified mentors to support the students
for the duration of their training. During the period under evaluation, a total of 167 mentors had
been recruited on to the programme, with 87 (50 male and 37 female) in the seven provinces
covered by the evaluation. The evaluation found that most of the mentors are male—almost
57% overall —and from the documents reviewed and interviews with key informants this can
be attributed to a lack of qualified females who meet the requirements of being recruited as
mentors for the programme in the participating provinces.
187
100
90
80
Number of Female Mentors Number of Male mentors
70
60 50
50
40
30
20
11 37
10 12 9 8 2 9 6 9 4
0 3 3 4 4 3
Badghis Helmand Khost Laghman Nangarhar Paktia Wardak Total
Graph 26: Number of male and female mentors in each of the seven provinces
Khost Province had the highest percentage of female mentors (80%) and Laghman Province had
the lowest percentage of female mentors (25%). The available information in the programme
documents does not specify any preference regarding the gender of the mentors recruited on
to the programme, but the evaluation noted that UNICEF staff, PED and DED personnel, and
scholarship recipients indicated that having female mentors was an important aspect of the
programme. For example, one of the PED Respondent said:
‘It is vital to have female mentors for women empowerment purposes’. PED Respondent, Paktia
However, there does not appear to be any deliberate strategies in place to recruit female
mentors, who would be significant drivers of change for the programme.
Where available, information on how long the mentors in the seven provinces participating in
the evaluation had been on the programme indicated that Badghis had mentors from early on
in the programme.
The programme had initially planned to recruit 1,000 experienced teachers as mentors in the 5
participating provinces, with each mentor supporting 4 – 5 students (UNICEF, 2014). This figure
was revised to 120 and the programme was rolled out to cover 14 provinces (UNICEF
Afghanistan, 2020). Available information suggests that it was not feasible to have the required
numbers and planned mentor student ratios because of the low numbers of qualified teachers
available in rural areas—only 32% of teachers in the education system in Afghanistan meet the
minimum requirement (Grade 14) for a fully qualified teacher with the situation worse in rural
provinces with some of them having less than 5% female teachers and 50% of the districts having
no female teachers at all (UNICEF, 2014, p. 8).15 The programme later revised figures and aimed
to have each mentor assigned to 10 students (UNICEF Afghanistan, 2020). The evaluation found
15 A report from the GATE Programme Review Workshop, 23 – 25 December 2018 (Kabul Teacher
House) stated that only 52 % of the teachers in the education system in Afghanistan meet the minimum
requirement (G 14) for a fully qualified teacher.
188
that the average student mentor ratio in the seven provinces was approximately 12:1, with
Laghman having the lowest ratio of around 6:1, and Badghis and Paktia having the highest ratios
of almost 23:1 (Graph 28).
s r 294
o 276
t
n
e
m
d
n
a
s
t
n
e
d
u
t s 110 105 100
f
o
r
70 73
e
b
m
23
u N 12 10 12 10 13 7
Badghis Helmand Khost Laghman Nangarhar Paktia Wardak
Students Mentors
Graph 97: Number of students and mentors in each of the seven provinces
The mentors who were interviewed reported that they lived in the communities where the
students and graduates they were mentoring studied and taught. They also stated that they
were aged between 45 – 50 years old, with Badghis and Paktia having the highest percentage of
mentors aged between 45 – 50 years old, and all the mentors in Wardak aged 35 years and
below (Figure 5).
20%
60%
20%
26 to 30 years old 31 to 35 years old 36 to 40 years old
45 - 50 years old Less 25 years old
Figure 8: Age range of mentors
189
Though data on the highest levels of qualification for mentors in Helmand, Laghman and
Nangahar was not available, 70% of the mentors had associate degrees (Grade 14). Similarly,
most of the mentors interviewed reported their highest qualification as a two-year associate
degrees and four-year university degrees.
1
s r 5
o
t
n
e
m
f
o
r 5
e
b 17 3
m
u 2
N 7 8
5
Badghis Helmand Khost Laghman Nangahar Paktia Wardak
18/Masters Degree/Professional Certificate
16/Bachelors Degree
14/Associate Degree
Graph 28: Highest qualifications of mentors by province
A gender analysis of available data of the mentors by qualification indicated that Badghis had
the highest number of females than males with Grade 14 qualifications, and all female mentors
in Khost had Grade 14 as their highest qualification.
The mentors appeared to understand the importance of their role in the career paths of their
students, with some also indicating that they had previously alerted students to employment
opportunities. They also stated that their sessions with the students included counselling,
providing encouragement and assistance in areas where they were lagging behind in their
lessons. The scholarship recipients indicated that the mentorship support was useful and
provided motivation and support to them during their training.
“For example, one of our friends wasn’t allowed to attend the teacher training centre, then the
mentor teacher talked with her family to let her attend the teacher training centre.” Student KII,
Badghis Province
Key words used in the FGDs and KIIs to describe the relationships between the students and
mentors were ‘friendly, beneficial and mutual respect’. Although scholarship recipients ranked
mentorship support as the third most important among the different programme components,
88% of them indicated that they had positive relationships with their mentors. The evaluation
looked at 3 aspects of mentor student interaction and findings are reported in Graph 30 below.
190
s
t n 199 194 187
e
ip
ic
e
r
p
ih 115 111
s r 95
a
lo
h
c
s
f 31 31
o r e 15 11 6 20 17 4 5
b
m
u
N Received all the support I Had very good Met with my mentor
needed from my mentor relationship with my often enough
mentor
Strongly Agree Agree Neutral Disaggree Strongly Disagree
Graph 10: Perceptions of mentorship support on three aspects
The evaluation noted that 91% of the scholarship recipients indicated that they had received all
the support they needed from their mentors, and 81% felt that they met with their mentors
often enough. However, the students also stated that they would like to receive additional
support from the mentors including guidance on personal and academic challenges.
Almost half of the students and graduates reported that they met with their mentors frequently.
49%
p
35%
ih
s
r
a
los
ht n 9%
c s
e
e ip 2% 5%
gic
t a n e r Once every 4 Once every 2 Once a week More than once a Other
e
c
r weeks weeks week
e
P
Frequency of meeting with mentors
Graph 30: Percentage of scholarship recipients and frequency of meeting with their mentors
A breakdown of this data by province indicated that all respondents in Badghis reported meeting
their mentors often enough.
60% of the graduate students indicated that they had been visited by their mentors after
graduation and 40% reported that they had not been visited. A further analysis by province
indicated that most of the students in Khost were not visited by their mentors after graduation.
191
p 79% 67% 30% 68% 56% 53% 77%
ih
s
r
a
los
ht
n
70%
c s
e
e ip
g
a t n
ic
e r 44% 47%
e c 33% 32%
r e 21% 23%
P
Badghis Helmand Khost Laghman Nangarhar Paktya Wardak
No Yes
Graph 31: Percentage of scholarship recipients visited by mentors after graduation
Most of the headteachers who were interviewed felt that mentorship support was the most
important component of the GATE Programme. More than half of the headteachers who were
interviewed indicated that the programme mentors did not visit the graduate teachers in their
schools. Those headteachers who indicated that the mentors did visit the graduates said they
mostly visited the graduate teachers once a month, with only one headteacher saying the
mentor came once in 3 months. Where the mentors visited the graduate teachers, the
headteachers stated that the mentors conducted classroom observations and completed
assessment and performance reports, and they mostly provided assistance with teaching
methods.
Graduate Network
As discussed in section 1.2.2, the GATE Programme also aimed to set up networks for graduates
at class level to support the students and advocate for employment opportunities after
graduation. This is mentioned in programme documents, and both the current students and
graduates (both those employed and unemployed) stated that they are or had been members
of the network. According to the scholarship recipients, the networks are active in all the seven
provinces. However, in Nangahar, none of the unemployed graduates appeared to know about
the network.
The evaluation found that most of the scholarship recipients did not appear to fully understand
the purpose of the network. For instance, data from the KIIs and FGDs with scholarship
recipients in 6 of the provinces suggested that the network was perceived to be the same as
being on the scholarship programme. For instance, most graduates interviewed stated that the
network ‘provided money (for stationery and transport), provided a mentor, motivated the
community to send their daughters to the schools and TTCs, talked about women’s rights with
the families, held workshops and met with students in homes, schools and universities.’ However,
in Helmand, the network appeared to be relatively strong. Graduate students in Helmand
(unemployed) understood the role of the network as assisting ‘to provide job opportunities to
teach in schools’ or ‘to pave the way for girls to get educated and find jobs, and earn money.’
192
Capacity Building of TTCs, Mentors and Lecturers
The evaluation noted that though the capacity building component of programme is important,
its potential has not been fully exploited. The lecturers were trained in gender responsive
pedagogy as part of the programme’s capacity development aspect. Available information
indicated that two training workshops were conducted in 2016 and were facilitated by UNICEF.
From the available data, the evaluation could not explore how many of the lecturers who are on
the programme were actually trained. However, the findings in this evaluation indicate that
(besides Laghman where scholarship recipients indicated negative perceptions of gender
responsive pedagogy being used in their classes) the lecturer capacity in the participating
provinces appears to be adequate.
Most of the lecturers who were interviewed stated that they had received training as part of the
GATE Programme.
100% 100% 100%
s
r
e 80% 80% 80%
r
u
t
c
e
l
f
60%
o
e
g
a 40%
t
n
e
c
r 20% 20% 20%
e
P
Badghis Helmand Khost Laghman Nangarhar Paktya Wardak
No Yes
Graph 32: Percentage of lecturers who reported that they have/have not received training as
part of the GATE Programme
The scholarship recipients reported that the lecturers used gender responsive approaches and
materials in their classes, and they ranked the support provided by them as being very
important, and reported positive perceptions of their professional relationships with them
(Refer to Graph 22).
The evaluation did not find any records or information for training of any of the mentors despite
the intent being made in the proposal documents and the ToC (UNICEF Afghanistan, 2014, p. 17;
UNICEF Afghanistan, 2020), and UNICEF staff who were interviewed confirmed that none of the
mentors had received any training as part of the programme.
From the programme documents, the focal points from the participating TTCs and their
respective PED appear to have taken part in the training to enhance their capacity to conduct
support supervision and monitoring visits to the GATE Programme though the details on actual
training content were not available. Also, none of the PED and DED respondents who were
interviewed during this evaluation stated that they have received any individual training or
support as part of their role and involvement in the GATE Programme, though one PED
respondent in Helmand stated that he had participated in a seminar and an implementation
planning activity for the GATE Programme, and one PED respondent highlighted that he had
193
attended a GATE Programme review workshop which covered ‘the establishment of a class to
understand the role and responsibilities of all stakeholders, including teachers, students,
managers, and MoE’.
As part of the capacity building support at institutional level, 5 Satellite TTCs—Paktia, Paktika,
Badghis, Ghor and Urozgan—received computers, projectors and printers from UNICEF to assist
with producing and securing teaching materials and for communication. However, less than half
of the PED and DED respondents who were interviewed stated that their departments had
received some form of support—such as stationery and educational materials—as part of the
GATE Programme. They emphasised the need for additional support for the TTCs such as the
provision of ICT materials and laboratories. They also highlighted the need for adequate
classroom equipment, educational material, and further assistance in expanding TTCs to other
inaccessible remote areas. The evaluation noted that at PED level, less than half of the
respondents mentioned the need for capacity building in the form of teacher methodology
training and seminars, and this issue did not emerge at DED level.
Learning Environment
As discussed in section 1.2, the scholarship recipients were taught as a distinct cohort of
students in classes which were based in TTCs or schools. A scoping exercise was carried out to
gain insight into the learning environment of the GATE Programme students. This exercise was
undertaken through the direct observation of lessons in 6 classes in 6 of the provinces—focusing
on 3 broad areas including the physical environment, pedagogy and
inclusiveness/participation—and through perceptions of the scholarship recipients in a snap
survey.
Within the physical environment, the evaluation team looked at availability of sanitation
facilities, classroom seating, classroom workspace and availability of teaching materials. On
average, each of the classes observed had 22 students. Actual figures are shown in the Graph
34.
31
25
24
s
t
n 21
e
d 19
u
t
s
f
o
r
e b 12
m
u
N
Khost Laghman Helmand Nangarhar Badghis Paktya
Graph 33: Number of students in GATE Programme classes observed
194
Overall, each of the TTC physical environments were rated well, with seating and availability of
teaching materials found to be adequate in all the classrooms observed.
2.5
2
1.5
e
r
o
c
S
1
0.5
0
Khost Laghman Helmand Nangarhar Badghis Paktya
Sanitation Seating Work Space Teaching Materials
Graph 34: Adequate physical environment in classes observed
(2 = Very True, 1 = Somewhat True, 0 = Not at all True)
A key observation was the disparity in the student to toilet ratio among the 6 TTCs visited in
each of 6 provinces, with Laghman and Helmand having the highest ratios of 21:1 and 24:1
respectively. However, the evaluation noted that this is a positive finding as the ratio is still
below the recommendation in the WASH Cluster Guidelines’ (Afghanistan National WASH
Cluster, 2018, p. 17) Standard 10: WASH in Schools, which recommends a ratio of 25:1 for
females.
E 31
T A s s e
Gs
d
s
a 25
nlc 24
a
s t e lio
C
T T d
e
21 19 21
t
e
v
r
la e
s
mb 12
eo
f
f o
n
i s 7
r e t n 5
be
md
u u t 1 1 1
Ns
Khost Laghman Helmand Nangarhar Badghis Paktya
Female Toilets GATE Students
Graph 35: Female students and number of female toilets in each TTC observed
195
The evaluation noted that some scholarship recipients stated that the distances to the learning
centres and the associated safety concerns are not fully addressed by the programme. Of
particular note was that in Laghman, Nangahar and Wardak Provinces, the students stated that
moving the GATE Programme classes to the city would make the access to classes easier because
of security concerns, classroom infrastructure and the transportation challenges in hard-to-
reach areas.
The evaluation also noted that in some FGDs with scholarship recipients, the discussants
expressed the need for internet facilities and laboratory facilities to be made available if possible
for their science practical lessons to improve. This sentiment was shared by the PED and DED
respondents in the KIIs as well.
The existence of an enabling environment for GATE graduate teachers
The evaluation explored the environment in which female teachers are working by getting
feedback and experiences of the programme graduates who are employed as teachers, the
teachers working with GATE Programme graduates and the headteachers in schools where
programme graduates are teaching. The headteachers interviewed in the 7 provinces were all
male and most reported that they live in the communities in which their schools are based—
with few exceptions in Khost and Wardak where not all headteachers live in the same
communities where their schools are based. They all expressed satisfaction with the high levels
of enthusiasm, professionalism, self-reliance and effective teaching methodologies of the
programme graduates teaching in their schools. Most of the headteachers indicated that the
GATE graduates have a positive impact on their classes and that they had noticed improvement
in education standards in their schools. They reported that they had seen improvements and
changes to the students’ performance which showed them that the education standards and
levels in their schools have changed. Some reported that the graduates used improved teaching
methodologies, and had a better knowledge and understanding of pure science subjects and
Pashto in particular, which had been challenging for the teachers with Grade 12 qualifications.
Generally, the headteachers were satisfied with and supportive of female GATE programme
graduate teachers working in their schools.
Similarly, the evaluation noted that most of the GATE Programme graduates who are teaching
(38% strongly agreed and 58% agreed) had positive perceptions of their headteachers.
196
The principal/headteacher at this school is supportive of
female teachers.
Strongly Agree Agree Neutral Disaggree Strongly Disagree
Figure 9: Graduate teacher perceptions of how supportive the headteachers are in their
schools
The scholarship recipients also pointed out that in some cases, the headteachers were very
supportive and had recommended that some of the students be recruited onto the GATE
Programme. Such support can increase the chances for the applicant to get a scholarship. For
example, one of the respondents explained:
“When information comes from a trusted source like the headteacher the people would answer
quickly and give the scholarship.” Graduate FGD Discussant, Wardak
In addition, the GATE Programme graduates appear to have good working relationships with the
other teachers in the schools where they taught. As can be seen in Figure 9, over 95% of graduate
teachers reported having good or very good professional relationships with both male and
female teachers in their schools. The quality of their relationship was registered to be slightly
better with female teachers—65% percent reported having a very good relationship with female
teachers and 56% reported the same about their relationships with male teachers.
197
With female teachers With male teachers
65
56
s
e
t
a
u
d 38
a
r g 32
e
g
a
t
n
e
c
r
e 6
P 3
0 0 0 1
Very bad Bad Neutral Good Very good
Quality of relationships with other teachers
Graph 3611: Graduate teacher perceptions about the quality of their relationships with other
teachers in their schools
The evaluation concluded that the graduates who are teaching are working in enabling and
supportive environments, and have no significant bottlenecks affecting their work as teachers.
Both the headteachers and teachers with whom they are working appear to work well with
them.
198
Appendix 13: Stories of Transformation
NB: All names have been changed to protect identity of the individuals
Nangahar Student: The transport allowance is a game changer
Before Najia was enrolled on to the GATE Scholarship Programme, she lived with her family in a
village in Nangahar Province. She had always wanted to be a teacher and when she graduated
from the 12th grade, she enrolled at the nearest TTC to her village which is quite a distance away.
There is a river between her village and the village where the TTC is based, and there is no bridge
to cross to the other side. Whenever it rains or when the river is full, it is impossible to cross the
river and so she is unable to attend her classes.
“People cannot cross it because of lots of water in some of the seasons and there is no bridge on
it either. I didn’t go to the class for few days because of too much water in the river and I thought
till what time we would not go to the class. It was also possible that water flow will increase
further,” she said.
After a few months, she was informed by her lecturer that there was a scholarship programme
available for females and she immediately applied and was selected. Soon after, the GATE
Programme conducted a seminar in the provincial office to introduce the GATE employees to
the students. People from 3 districts were invited there and afterwards, everyone was given
money for transport and expenses. The monthly allowances for the students had also been
approved on the same day and all students were told to collect them from Azizi Bank.
“When the meeting finished, they paid all the expenses of transportation, I didn’t count the
money and put them in the bag when I got it….it was around 7 pm that we arrived home. I saw
12000 AFs in my bag when I checked it, I couldn’t believe it, I can’t tell in words that how happy
I was”.
After getting the money, Najia and a group of friends have been able to rent a car to get to the
TTC. She is very happy and comfortable because she does not have to worry about whether or
not she will be able to attend her classes regularly any more.
Paktia Student: Motivation to teach against the odds
Nahita had always wanted to be a teacher. When she completed her education in a girls’ school
in Helmand Province, she graduated with a first rank. Not long after her graduation, she got
married and moved to Paktia Province with her husband.
Nahita was worried that she would never be able to achieve her aim of becoming a teacher,
especially because there was no school in or near the village where she now lived with her
husband. Because of her ambition for education and teaching, she set up the first school in
Belawot District in Paktia Province with support from her aunt and her husband, who also
became the school principal.
“Then in 1370, when I was 19 or probably 20 years old, I married. Since the situation was so dire,
no school could be found. I had no idea how to live my life here because the women were
illiterate. Finally, after 8 or 9 years, I began teaching first-grade students.”
Initially it was just one class of first grade, then the school slowly expanded to include more
classes until eventually it was a secondary school.
199
“Under the tent and the trees, we learnt. I began with the first grade, then the second, and then
the third…. We made it all the way to ninth grade. Then we took the 9th-grade girls and turned
them into teachers. After a few years, the 10th grade emerged”.
Her husband heard about the GATE Programme and knowing that she was very passionate about
teaching, he informed her about it. He encouraged and supported her to apply and she was
selected. She is now in 13th grade and will graduate next year. After her training, she will not
only be qualified but she will bring good teaching skills to her school to make it even better.
Badghis Graduate: A story of resilience and family support
When Sakina graduated from school, she got married and she went to live with her husband and
his family in another village. Her husband’s family was very poor. He was a soldier and then
became addicted to drugs. Life became even harder for her and her 2 children. Her husband’s
aunt told her about the GATE Programme and she enrolled and started training to become a
teacher. However, the centre was quite far from her village. Her transport allowance was spent
on household needs. She could not afford to buy her babies the milk that they needed in order
for her to continue her education. After trying for more than a year, Sakina dropped out of the
training programme.
‘I studied for 1.5 years but I did not have money to buy my chapters. I was living away from the
teacher training centre so I could not afford to pay the transportation fare. I had two babies. I
could not afford to buy them a can of milk and continue my education. I studied for 1.5 years but
I could not take care of the household works.
When Sakina’s father heard about her poor living condition, he took her back to live with him
and her family. There were pre-school training programmes that had been set up by UNICEF and
Sakina worked as a teacher there for 6 or 7 months. After about an year, her financial status
improved and her father enrolled her in the teacher training centre under the GATE programme.
The TTC was only 15 – 20 minutes away from her home so she could attend classes easily and
regularly. The GATE programme included financial assistance that met her requirements, and
her mother took care of her babies at home while she attended her lessons. She used the money
that she was receiving from the GATE Programme to support her family and complete her
education.
‘My personal goal was to complete my studies because I was a school graduate and I could not
find a job with school certification. I neither had money to pay a bribe and get a job nor know
anyone to get a job by power. My goal was to study and graduate from 14 grade and get a job
to help my family financially. I am grateful for the GATE programme that helped me to complete
my studies. I graduated from the teacher training program in 1396. I worked as a contractor
teacher for one year in 1398... Now, I am working as a teacher in the accelerated training
programme’.
Laghman Graduate: Improving teaching skills for pre-service students
When Mariam graduated from school, her ambition was to continue her education up to a
bachelor's degree, or at least an associate degree. But due to the poor economic conditions her
200
father was not able to support her financially to continue her higher education. However, she
was determined to be a teacher and got a job in a nearby school.
“At the time, I was very upset and disappointed. Suddenly I found a chance to be a teacher in the
school. So, I became a teacher and I started teaching. I improved my economic situation a little
bit. But still, I was facing some problems in the teaching process because I obtained only a
baccalaureate degree, and I was not familiar with the teaching either. So, I was very upset and
disappointed.”
Mariam was then informed about the GATE Programme, and that it was setting up a TTC class
at her school. She enrolled onto the programme and her economic situation improved because
of the allowance she was getting. As an in-service GATE student, she learned improved skills to
assist her in the classes she was teaching. She believes the GATE Programme gave her the
opportunity to improve her skills and make her an even better teacher.
Khost Lecturer (Male): Unexpected skills gained from teaching on the GATE Programme
Khalid has been working at the TTC for 12 years. He has a Bachelor’s Degree in Literature, and a
Master’s Degree in Education from the American University of Afghanistan. He was the head of
the TTC for 2 years, and now he is the teaching deputy at a school. He does not teach students
on the GATE Programme at the moment, but had taught a cohort of students who have now
graduated. At the moment, he supports the programme by monitoring implementation and
supporting the local teachers.
When he became a lecturer on the GATE Programme, he had a class full of girls and no boys for
the first time. He believes that the GATE Programme has been very important because it
provides opportunities for females who may not be able to train as teachers otherwise. Looking
back at the GATE students that he taught, he recalls having really good students who got good
marks and had good attendance percentages. He points out that the financial support to the
girls opened up opportunities for them. He has very fond memories of his time on the
programme, and he built his skills too.
“We learned that if we provide girls financial opportunities, it will have positive results…it
affected me positively and brought positive changes in me. One of my apparent experiences was
that we had a mentor teacher, who was our partner. We used him as a teacher, and from that, I
learned how to use a partner teacher and cooperate with each other”.
Khalid feels like a small hero in his community.
“Parents ask for my phone number and used to call me and visit me in school, and they would
drink tea with me; so maybe it had affected them, and I seemed like a small hero to them. It was
my job as the head of the TTC”.
201