0
table of Contents
Table of content 1
List of tables, pictures and figures 2
RELATIONSHIP OF ACRONMOS 3
Executive summary 4
1. Background and context of the evaluation. 8
2. Evaluation object 9
3. EVALUATION 12 PURPOSE
4. EVALUATION OBJECTIVES 14
5. EVALUATION SCOPE: EVALUABILITY AND EVALUATION LIMITANTS
14
6. Evaluation frame 15
7. EVALUATION METHODOLOGY 16
7.1 METHODOLOGICAL DESIGN 17
7.2 Ethical considerations 18
8. Evaluation findings 19
8.1. Findings for evaluation criteria 19
1. Relevance criteria 19
2. Effectiveness Criteria 24
3. Sustainability criteria 44
8.2. Presentation of the case study: the museum classrooms as an exemplary case
Of the project. 48
9. Change theory 52
10. Conclusions 55
11. Lessons learned 58
12. Recommendations 59
13 ANNEXES OF EVALUATION 61
1
List of tables, pictures and figures
Figures
• Figure 1. Theory of change rebuilt from the formal documentation of the project
“Strengthening of protective environments for children and adolescents with approach to
Rights and Equity in Havana Vieja, Cuba "
• Figure 2. Elements that favor and hinder the development of museum classrooms
• Figure 3. Elements that allow museum classrooms to constitute environments
Protectors
• Figure 4. scheme of the theory of change tight for the project “Strengthening of
Protective environments for children and adolescents with a focus on rights and equity in
Old Havana, Cuba. ”
Tables
• Table 1. Meta population of the project between 2017 and 2021
• Table 2. Activities in which NNA participates in a situation of disability or social disadvantage
for years
• Table 3. Total distribution of workshops, and intergenerational workshops, for years between 2017 and
2022
• Table 4. Contents with a gender approach taught for years
Graphics
• Graph 1. Disaggregation of registration to A+ workshops by sex and age groups
• Graph 2. Percentage of students enrolled by courses according to skin color
• Graph 3. Percentage of students enrolled by courses according to sex
• Graph 4. NNA participation in various initiatives
• Graph 5. Calls according to type of activity that includes NNA from outside the territory
Old Havana
• Graph 6. Intergenerational workshops for years
• Graph 7. Quality of the physical environment
• Graph 8. Contributions of participation in project activities
• Graph 9. Effects of participating in personal life
• Graph 10 adolescent considerations about space A+
• Graph 11. Skills and benefits identified by young people who participated in the actions
of the project
• Graph 12. Workshop and volunteers by sex and workshops and volunteers by level of
schooling
• Graph 13. Actions indicated by workshops and volunteers before the detection of certain
situations.
• Figure 14. Experience replicability potential
• Graph 15. Number of museum classrooms and students according to years
2
Acronyms relationship
MINCEX - Ministry of Foreign Trade and Foreign Investment of Cuba
NN - Boys and Girls
NNA - Girls, Boys and Adolescents
OECD - Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development
OHC - City historian office
SPSS - Statistical Package for the Social Sciences (Statistical Package for Social Sciences)
TDC - Change theory
TDR - Terms of reference
UNICEF - United Nations Children's Fund
UNESCO - United Nations Educational, Science and Culture Organization
HIV - Human Immunodeficiency Virus
3
Executive summary
This (formative) evaluation was implemented from an external consulting, conducted by two
Specialists, one from the University of Havana and another from the Institute of Philo. It was done between
the months of July to December 2022, with the purpose of obtaining an external trial about the
convenience and strengthening of childhood protective environments, based on project execution
Ongoing “Strengthening of protective environments for children and adolescents with rights approach
and equity in Old Havana, Cuba. ”This project is part of the Child Social Program that includes
to adolescence, and develops the office of the historian of the city of Havana. Said project,
focuses on the need for these groups, to have specific programs that respond to
its particular characteristics, interests and demands. UNICEF and the historian's office have worked
jointly for a decade in promoting the rights and participation of children and
adolescents in this heritage and cultural promotion context. UNICEF has contributed to this development
both technical and financial advice.
Responded to the following specific objectives: 1) Determine the level of relevance, effectiveness and
Sustainability of the OHC-UNICEF Cuba Joint Project 2) Generate reliable evidence on the effect
real of project initiatives and activities in the participation and empowerment of children and
adolescents 3) Present a case study of the project that is currently implemented in the municipality
of old Havana, which contains a causal analysis of good practices and operating failures, in the face
to its continuity and its replicability in other territories 4) elaborate a theory of change based on assumptions
and risks for the creation and strengthening of protective environments for childhood and adolescence in
Cuba that contributes to the achievement of results of the programmatic protection component.
The evaluation covers the implementation period between November 2017 and November
2022, and also covered the center A+, the rest of the spaces where the social program is implemented
Infant and adolescent of the OHC. The methodology was based on a triangular or mixed approach, from
techniques such as: documentary analysis (542 documents), surveys (40 questionnaires to specialists and
Volunteers linked to experience and 10 to young people previously linked to the experience of the workshops
in A+ during his adolescence), semi -structured interviews (10 interviews between experts and main
managers and specialists linked to experience), and non -participant observation (21 observations).
A case study was carried out, based on a workshop designed from the systematization methodology
of experiences, with 13 specialists from the museum classrooms, complemented with data obtained from
key informants and documentary review.
It arrived among others to the following main conclusions:
Regarding the relevance criteria: 1) the project is aligned to the programming of the
OHC-UNICEF project. 1.1) The objectives of the project are coherence with national policies that
they defend the priority nature of childhood and adolescence as subjects of law and part of the
Social protection processes guaranteed by the Cuban State. 1.2) The proposal takes into consideration
elements of the context and the needs of the NNA of the territory of Old Havana, adjust its strategies of
intervention, and the schedule of activities, from where it justifies, guides and organizes its execution.1.3)
There is correspondence between the set of actions designed and then implemented for the scope of
The expected results in the short, medium and long term. The project suffers from limited coherence between
Objectives, results, indicators and verification sources. There is correspondence between the framework
Conceptual of the project, the expected activities and results. 1.4) The project frame incorporates the
4
Transversalization of equity, vulnerability, law and environment axes. 1.5) From design
Explains monitoring in terms of feedback to all activities.
Effective criteria:
1) The project has been inclusive taking into account variables such as sex, territory and skin color, but
Partially inclusive in relation to groups in disability or social disadvantage. 1.1)
The design starts from a universal perspective, and performs open calls to which they can appear
Nna of all the territories and provinces of the country. Specifically, the NNA of the territory during the course
school, and nna out in summer. 1.2) An intergenerational, integration approach is promoted
Community, with two main edges: activities that link NNA with their family, and friends and
Activities that encourage independence from the enjoyment of spaces created only for them.
2) The activities observed meet all levels of a protective environment, from the point of
Physical, emotional view, of the personnel involved, and of participation of NNA. 2.1) There is a positive balance
between the before and after the project actions, and the gain in terms is recognized
of new skills and knowledge. Most institutions where initiatives are developed
and project services have been offered and prepared for their development, although
There are areas of improvements such as the generalization of first aid kits in case of accident 2.2)
Project promote the transversalization and promotion of the gender approach. 2.3) The different actions
and initiatives developed by the project have promoted gain and social integration in NNA from
to promote new knowledge, such as vocational guidance, education with a perspective of
Rights and values, sex and reproductive education, artistic education, incorporating approaches
Transversal such as equity, disability, rights, gender and social participation. It fosters the
self -care and mental health states in crisis environments, and has enhanced well -being prevention
Psychological from an approach to multiple alternatives and positive vision. 2.4) It is affirmed in the narrative of
The interviewed people who produce behavior changes, positive transformations
In their behavior, improvements in their projection and are socialized with new values. An example of this is your
Expression in activities that develop independently as the radio program with you
We are +. 2.5) The project guarantees the training of specialists, volunteers, teachers and teachers
and other personnel linked to the set of activities. What is evidenced, for example, with the manual
of standards and procedures, methodological guide for cultural projects and educational work folder.
However, these training do not benefit specialists from the museum classrooms and
Specialists from the A+ Center and the Sub -Directorate of Cultural Management. 2.6) Specialists have acquired
New knowledge and skills, demonstrating a high level of capacities and professionalism. 2.7) se
Highlights the coordinated work and in alliances that are developed at all levels, adding each year new
Actors, institutions and organizations that enrich their work. 2.8) Monitoring processes are carried out
to the set of activities and services implemented, from models prepared by the
specialists linked to the project, from which improvements are affirmed to the strategies of
programming and communication, depending on attracting a greater amount of audiences to activities. 2.9)
The project has been adaptable to the changes produced during the period contemplated by the evaluation,
Tell yourself the arrival of the pandemic. The activities and workshops were developed taking advantage of the environments
Virtual, mainly the WhatsApp platform and the Telegram channel enabled. 2.10) The program
Cultural of the OHC and social networks are considered communication and dissemination strategies
fundamental of the initiatives that are convened from the project.
Sustainability Criteria:
5
1) The work developed over the years, the high degree of formalization of practices
implemented, the recognition granted by international authorities, comparative advantages of the
OHC, trained human resources linked to the project, proper use of financing are
elements that guarantee the sustainability of the project. Among the limitations are a
dependence on the voluntary nature of workshops, the limited guarantee of support sustained in the
time, of the institutions that currently provide financing, actions, etc., the poor state
constructive of some spaces and the absence of necessary implements to attend NNA in case of
need first aid. 1.1) The personnel linked to the project are trained and its training is diverse,
with great identification, responsibility and commitment to the work done. 1.2) Training is prioritized
constant personnel involved, for example, young people in training, with a view to promoting their
learning and overcoming. 1.3) The project implements actions on environmental sustainability. 1.4)
No clearly unsustainable areas were found. 1.5) Some replicable elements are: relevance
and usefulness of your social mission, strategic objectives, projections and forms of work, the logic of the
process that goes from activities to effects expressed in the theory of change, the program of
training that allows the permanent training of personnel, the way of efficient use of
resources, tools that allow methodologically to guide work, as well as the experience of
Museum classrooms.
The main lessons learned that are identified in the project are:
1) the coherence between the design of the actions and the needs of NNA, the previous work developed to
favor of the preservation of cultural historical heritage, with trained personnel and with great commitment
and motivation for their work, and at the same time, with central interest in developing actions of various kinds for the
Integral NNA Development, are basis and guarantee to sustain and boost work, in a Cuba scenario
that defends the equity and rights of NNA as the essence of its policies. Even in a context where
There is no previously defined and formalized childhood policy in all its components.
2) The flexibility and adaptability of the people involved in the implementation of the project are
necessary condition for the creation of new work strategies that allow continuing and advancing in
accompaniment to NNA, the adequacy of actions and the development of skills for work in
Changing environments. This was fundamental for work in virtual environments during the period of the
COVID-19, in which the usual face-to-face dynamics were considerably limited. This was a
learning process that contributed new elements to the sustainability of the project, and demonstrated the
Creative capacity against complex scenarios, where it is vital to maintain protective environments for NNA.
3) The establishment of multiactoral and intersectoral alliances, such as work between the OHC and
UNICEF Cuba constitutes a fundamental element for the favorable and accurate development of knowledge,
Creation and maintenance of protective environments as in this case the project evaluated. The articulation
From various actors it is an essential element that provides diversity to project actions, demonstrates
Teamwork, willing to collaborate, creative solutions, openness to different knowledge and experiences,
possibilities for solution of problems that respond to the territory collectively,
accompaniment in the conception of initiatives and articulation based on solving bottlenecks that
They can be generated.
4) The replicability of this particular project towards other institutional territories or conditions is
crossed by the specificities of constitution and operation of the historian's office of the
City. These grant prerogatives in the attraction, management and implementation of cooperation funds
International, which must be considered in the face of scalability assessment of this type of intervention.
6
Main recommendations
Of relevance: the OHC and UNICEF must review the approach of the indicators and sources of
Verification in correspondence with the proposed results.
Effectiveness:
1) OHC will develop a strategy to promote participation in different activities,
groups with special educational needs and in vulnerability, say for example
pregnant or child teenagers who have committed some fact that the law typifies as crimes. In this
sense, communication with the municipality prevention commission will be established,
2) OHC must include the proposed theory of change to monitor the development of the project having
in consideration the set of measurable indicators and sources of verification that are consistent with the
proposed objectives.
3) OHC from the information provided by other institutional actors within the territory, it must
update the most needy NNA identification, with a view to maintaining the effectiveness achieved by the
project so far.
4) The OHC will manage together with UNICEF and other instances, such as the Municipal Health Directorate,
the possibility of enabling a first aid kit for the centers related to the project where
carry out activities with NNA, and develop training on their use.
5) The OHC as a whole with UNICEF must review, adapt and guarantee the use of products
communicative that include a possible route of derivation of physical or psychological care to nna that
Identify at risk of violence.
Sustainability:
1) OHC and UNICEF must improve the strategy from the project that guarantees the permanence of the
volunteer linked to the diversity of initiatives and services.
2) OHC must deepen the inclusion of the environmental theme as a fundamental object of
NNA training in the different initiatives that are developed from the children's social program and
Teenager.
7
1. Background and context of the evaluation.
While Cuba has achieved universal health and education coverage and its information for childhood are
superior to the regional average, cooperation with UNICEF focuses on providing support to the improvement of the
Efficacy and efficiency of health, education, culture and child protection services, with approaches
Transversal of rights, equity and gender. One of the largest initiatives in these purposes is
Develop in the municipality of Havana Vieja in the province of Havana, capital of the country.
Old Havana constitutes one of the smallest municipalities in the capital and is considered the territory
older in the city. It has a territorial extension of 4.32 km2 and a population between 97,000
population. It is made up of seven popular tips, four of which make up the center
Historical. The historic center covers practically half of the municipality (2.14 km²) and 70% of its
population (66 752 inhabitants), of which according to the population census 48 % are men and 52 %
They are women. It includes the original area of intramuros and the expansion of the villa San Cristóbal
from Havana, founded in 1519. In 1978, together with the colonial fortifications system, they were
Declared Cultural Heritage of the Nation and in 1982, UNESCO includes them in the list of heritage
Cultural of Humanity. It is considered that its constructed fund has great patrimonial value based
mostly in a diversity of typologies of colonial housing dating from the 16th, eighteenth, eighth centuries
and XIX, to houses and apartment buildings from the last twentieth century. Other architectural typologies such as
Civil-public and religious, also present paradigmatic specimens at the scale of the city (Cabrera,
2014)
The management and management of the Historic Center is in charge of the Havana Historian (OHC) office.
This work covers a diversity of programs and projects in favor of human development and in support of the
management that develops from the local government of Old Havana. Among its main tasks are
finds to facilitate the integral development of the Historic Center and maintain its residential character. Propitious
The transformation of the living conditions of the inhabitants of the area, enhancing their values
socioeconomic, cultural and environmental and responding to the urgencies of the most vulnerable sectors.
This plan also has to provide solutions for new and growing needs that
It generates a developing community (Ibidem).
The OHC was instituted in 1938, and by 1981 it became responsible for conducting the
first restoration plans of the Historic Center; twelve years later, he subordinated directly to
State Council of the Republic of Cuba to facilitate its intervention.
The management and management that the office develops until today are protected, in addition, in the
Decree Law 143 approved in October 1993 by the State Council and Agreement 2951 of 1995. The
regulations establish special administrative regimes that give powers and competences to the office
To know, decide and control diverse issues, related to housing, property property
state, land use, investor process and others. Powers were granted to arrange contracts
With natural or legal, national or foreign persons, carry out commercial operations, control the
actions that are developed in the area, foster sources of financing and formulate and execute
Rehabilitation plans.
The previous budgets have made possible to develop a self -sustaining management model, in which
Through the administration of the tourism and real estate sector, the necessary financial resources are generated
to promote human development in its broader concept. The incessant work developed by the office
The historian has put special interest in protecting and revitalizing not only buildings considered
valuable, but the entire urban group of the historic center, thus contributing to perfect the
Social work referring to the attention of the resident population (Cabrera, 2014).
8
Since its creation in 1994 the Office of the Master Plan (Office for Integral Development Planning
of the Historic Center of Havana and its damping area) has promoted the realization of a series
of projects within the framework of the comprehensive rehabilitation process that takes place in the territory. These
projects cover from strictly urban themes, to others more focused on social issues,
cultural, economic and environmental, all of which constitute innovative proposals and
potentially transferable to other sites outside the historic center. An important part of these
Projects has had the support of other institutions, including international cooperation.
The main programs developed are aimed at: boys/girls, teenagers, young people, people in
Disability situation and older adults. The office has the Cultural Heritage Directorate
that attends the entire network of cultural institutions with a high thematic profile that covers culture, history,
Science, art, ethnography among other fields of knowledge. These institutions carry out continuous work
of promotion and research, which has as its premise the relationship with the visiting public, within which
The community of inhabitants of the Historic Center occupies a priority place, in addition to supporting the
Strengthening the curriculum of schools. Also has a strategic plan of
Integral development, which recognized childhood priorities early. That is why it was created
Two decades a children's social program, which later expanded to adolescence, considering the need
of this group of specific programs that respond to their characteristics, interests and demands
individuals. UNICEF and the historian's office have worked together for a decade in the
Promotion of rights and participation of children and adolescents in a heritage context.
This particular development in Old Havana is in line with the social protection system
Cuban, which identifies as an essentially protected group in the design and implementation
of programs, projects and services that make up the social policy system in the country. Said system
Depending on these objectives and higher interest in these age groups, it is in accordance with the
regulations that regulate and compromise States in the observation of rights
of minors. For this, Cuba has a variety of legal norms that frame the policy
In this area, despite not having an instance directly subject to the government dedicated to the
mission to guarantee the protection and rights of NNA. On the contrary, the set of actions and
Policies in this regard are shared by different actors and social agents that start from the
own state and government, parliament and its structures, and the agencies of the central administration
of the State, and non -governmental organizations, all to its different scales of action (Proenza &
Peña, 2021).
From this development, the project appointed “Social Development
Participatory integral of adolescents of Old Havana ”, which was followed by“ strengthening
NNA protective environments with rights and equity approach to Havana Vieja, Cuba ”currently
and implementation, and as a specific implementation of consolidated synergy between social objectives
from the OHC to infants and adolescents, and the goals of UNICEF. In the passage of a project to the next no
There was a proper evaluation, but with the transit from one cycle to another of cooperation between
UNICEF and the Government of Cuba, a continuity line has been produced essentially on the
sense of social inclusion of national and local policies that give priority to childhood more
vulnerable, and found in the municipality of Havana Vieja viability to expand the scope and improve
The results for NNA.
2. Evaluation object
The project entitled “Strengthening of NNA protective environments will be
Rights and Equity approach to Old Havana, Cuba. ”Program component interventions
9
From country, each child is protected against violence and exploitation, in which it is currently registered
This initiative is focusing for the first time and explicitly its interventions, on the prevention of
violence through strengthening protective environments. It is an evaluation oriented to learning
(formative) to examine the future perspectives of implementation and escalation of the project. Covered
the period between November 2017 and November 2022, taking as a starting point the
Creation of the Center A+ Adolescent Spaces, because one of the core elements of the project
currently. And although in recent years the project has transcended virtual actions to
other territories, adjusting to the situation caused by the Covid-19 Pandemia, continues to be
Geographically located in the municipality of Havana Vieja.
The project to be evaluated is part of the change theory of the programmatic component to which it is attached.
From this vision of change, the results of the project are based on the general idea that: if the
Institutions or protection professionals are better equipped to provide quality services to NNA,
In order to prevent violence and protect them from it, if you have acquire knowledge and competencies
necessary to demand their rights to a life free of violence, if families, caregivers and
communities will consider that all types of violence are unacceptable and harmful, and adopt
positive behaviors in raising children and daughters, children and adolescents will enjoy a
Violence free environment and will have greater well -being.
The project had to influence the strengthening of actors capacities and empowerment and
NNA participation. This is why the evaluation must determine to what extent a
Analysis of the present situation, of the evidence of how the change in that context and the
Assumptions and risks for its extension to other spaces for the creation and strengthening of protective environments
for childhood and adolescence. From here, UNICEF and its counterparts, say the OHC, could
examine evidence on progress, lessons learned and the implications of their results in
next stages. The children's and adolescent social program is made up of a diversity of initiatives that
They have a participatory and empowerment character within the sociocultural scenario of the municipality
directed to NNA. Among the projects implemented, children are mentioned, the children's guides,
The museum classrooms, and the program are one. In addition, school visits and programs are recognized
cultural that include exhibitions, contests, creation workshops, literary presentations, rocks,
Oral narration meetings, among others.
The A + center is recognized as a space for the cultural, social and integral development of the
teenagers of the municipality. From a sociocultural and protection projection, he enchants his work to the
integral development of this group through a strong educational work, which also tries to minimize the
possible disadvantage factors that can and negatively affect the appropriation and subsequent
development of behaviors considered as appropriate. For this they have implemented new methodologies,
participatory experiences, popular education tools and the development of different services,
Activities and workshops (Proenza & Peña, 2021).
As part of the operation of this variety of spaces considered protective environments, they are carried out
carried out actions that are assumed as protection services in order to prevent the
exploitation, abuse, negligence, harmful practices and violence against NNA, or responding to these
violations restoring the rights that may have been affected. A protective environment is identified
As a space without physical dangers, emotionally warm, with adults who act as guarantors of the
care and attention to your needs, capable of providing a good psychological and emotional treatment, free
of any form of violence, abuse or exploitation (oven, 2018). A protective environment is given by
Provide quality education, special training and friendly services from a development approach
10
inclusive, where the diversity of population groups that live in the
company. As intervention, the project is in the implementation phase, but did not count to the
Moment of evaluation with a theory of its own explicit change. Hence, the theory of change of
project that is displayed on the next page was produced by the evaluation team, and describes in the
execution time how the staggered sequence of change can be seen from the organization of
Activities, products and expected effects. In this regard, the
following:
Figure 1. Theory of change rebuilt from the formal documentation of the project
11
“Strengthening of protective environments for children and adolescents with rights approach
and equity in Old Havana, Cuba "
3. EVALUATION PURPOSE
This evaluation is part of the UNICEF Cuba Evaluation Plan of the approved country program
for the 2020-2024 cooperation cycle. It was implemented with the purpose of obtaining an external judgment on
of the convenience of the creation and strengthening of protective environments for childhood, from the
Execution of the project that currently takes place in the municipality of Havana Vieja. Seeks to provide one
systematization of findings in terms of relevance, effectiveness and sustainability, conclusions and
recommendations that will be used by UNICEF and its national and local counterpart to document
Good practices and lessons learned that accumulate the project in all its years of implementation. HE
also guides reliable empirical evidence about its current results and its potential for
generalization to other geographical and social contexts of the country, and provide elements to structure a
Theory of change about childhood protective environments in Cuba.
The evaluation examined two dimensions of design and implementation: programmatic and management.
The programmatic dimension included the evaluation of four thematic elements. These elements are
consider consubstantial to the expected achievement results and goals of the project, and are related to
the structure of the intervention, attending to the levels at which safe environments and
Protectors: physical, emotional, human resources and childhood participation and child participation and
teenager.
The management dimension included the operational processes of the project: organization, coordination and
Call for activities, services stability, information management that is generated,
internal communication of the OHC with the institutions involved and with UNICEF Cuba, monitoring plan
of the implementation, issuance of execution and feedback and accountability reports to the
benefited populations.
The evaluation was implemented in the scenarios where the activities of the
project, being part of the evaluation process all local institutions that provide services and
They participate in all the developing initiatives. The target groups included the different actors
of the project; managers, administrative, specialists, with the exception of NNA beneficiaries, their family and
the teachers for not having the corresponding government approvals.
The convenience of carrying out the evaluation at this time responded so much to the need to account
and learn about an intervention that has been developing, as to the need for information
resulting provides the bases to improve in the efficiency of processes and results, and
sustainability conditions. The evaluation at this time also allowed examining the probability
that the benefits of the project have continuity when financial support culminates, as well as the
viability of its extension to upcoming projects and, for use in promotion, communication of results
and fund mobilization. Since its implementation continues in the coming years, an evaluation is
strategic and timely at this time, since it allows to contribute a theory of change adjusted to the project, thus
how to place the emphasis on elements that contribute to their improvement, support and replicability.
These reasons motivated the conduction of a formative evaluation.
In this case, as will be seen later, boys, girls and adolescents had a limited participation in
The development of the evaluation, but their interests were reflected and prioritized as beneficiaries
primary project, in all exchanges, analysis and recommendations derived from the process of
assessment.
12
13
4. EVALUATION OBJECTIVES
GENERAL OBJECTIVE:
Obtain an external judgment about the convenience of the creation and strengthening of protective environments
for childhood, based on the execution of the project that currently develops in the municipality of the
Old Havana.
Specific objectives:
1. Determine the level of relevance, effectiveness and sustainability of the OHC-UNICEF joint project
Cuba.
2. generate reliable evidence on the real effect of project initiatives and activities on the
participation and empowerment of children and adolescents.
3. Present a case study of the project that is currently implemented in the municipality of Havana
Old, containing a causal analysis of good practices and operating failures, in the face of its
continuity and its replicability in other territories.
4. Develop a change theory based on assumptions and risks for the creation and strengthening of
Protective environments for childhood and adolescence in Cuba that contributes to the achievement of results
of the programmatic protection component.
For the development of these objectives, the first step was to determine the level of evaluability of the
project in question. For this, a previous analysis was required allowing the scope and
limitations of the evaluation process, enabling the adjustment in a consistent manner of the proposal
Methodological evaluation to the context and real conditions of the project to be evaluated.
5. EVALUATION SCOPE: EVALUABILITY AND LIMITANTS OF THE
ASSESSMENT
Project evaluation analysis was based on different criteria: the availability of information,
its relevance, and its usefulness. The sufficiency of elements that allowed the
Project evaluation in existing circumstances. Evaluation evaluation is a step
important because it has been said, limit the scope and limits of the evaluation according to the
circumstances mentioned above, and the possible conflicts and risks that may arise in the process
Evaluation in the scope of the above criteria (Casillas, García, Macía, & Rico, 2020).
On this occasion they were selected as principles of evaluability: data availability, reliability,
credibility, usefulness of the information available, utility and relevance of the evaluation. Regarding
These criteria, it was determined that the project has first -hand information from its
participants, as well as varied documentary in types and quantity of documents (reliable and credible) for
Evaluation, however, there was no databases to base the information presented
In the internal monitoring reports of the project, or with the possibility of dialogue with NNA and its
relatives due to restriction of permits for implementation. As a fundamental measure of
Mitigation of these deficiencies were surveyed to young people who participated in the actions of the
project when they were minors during the period that is evaluated. This also allowed having a trial of
Longest intervention effect. The greatest possible amount of participating adults was interviewed
From the experience in different roles, and the non -participating observation of a large amount of
spaces linked to the project. However, it is recognized that, although the project could be considered as
Evaluable, the scope of the evaluation have the limitation of not having the voice of NNA that are its
Fundamental beneficiaries and participants. For more details about this aspect see Annex 2 of the present
report.
14
Regarding the usefulness and relevance of the evaluation, it provides an external trial based on procedures
rigorous methodological, which guarantees objective judgments about project performance, and
identification of good practices and improvement areas that can continue to enrich and strengthen the
work that develops. This possibility and usefulness of the evaluation becomes more productive, since not
It is an impact assessment at the close of the project, but is produced in an intermediate period
of implementation and, therefore, it is possible to use its results for the improvement of the
Design, and realization of the current project.
6. Evaluation framework
Of the five standard criteria of OECD 1 (relevance, efficiency, efficiency, sustainability and impact)
Used by UNICEF, this evaluation adopts three of them, as stated in the objectives, these are:
Relevance, effectiveness and sustainability of the project. From here, they are listed the questions
main according to each evaluation criteria, and the sub -questions that allow the breakdown of the contents
To respond to the objectives set. The answers to these questions allow to assess compliance
of each criterion by the project, in a total, partial or non -compliance way.
It is important to declare that these questions in general received some modifications in two
Moments of the evaluation process. A first group of transformations was presented during the
Initial report, and other modifications were made to the extent that the evaluation was advancing
according to the availability of information and maturation of the analysis. Modifications imply elimination
of redundant questions in TDR or initial report, integration of questions, and question movement
between evaluation criteria, according to the definitions of each. There were also writing adjustments
For a better understanding of the scope of each question. These changes can be seen in the annex
3 of the current report.
CRITERIA BELONGING.
Definition: Degree to which initiatives, their expected products and effects coincide with policies and
Government priorities and other guiding organizations on the corresponding topics (example
UNICEF), as well as take into account needs of the populations involved.
Main criteria questions
1. How is the programming of the OHC-UNICEF project inserted in the global approach to protective environments for children
and adolescents?
SUBSTITUTES:
1.1 To what extent are the objectives of the program aligned with the priorities of the national government?
1.2 Does the project design correspond, according to the expected activities and results, with the needs of
NNA and local priorities?
1.3 Is there coherence in the conceptual framework of the project regarding its different components?
1.4 Does the conceptual framework of the project incorporate the transversalization of equity axes, vulnerability, rights
and environment?
1.5. How are monitoring processes in terms of
feedback?
Effectiveness criteria.
Definition: degree to which the satisfaction of the project objectives is achieved based on the results provided in the design and
achieved by its implementation within a certain temporal period.
Main questions of the criteria.
1 definitions of OECD evaluation criteria:
http://www.oecd.org/cad/evaluation/cadriteriaForevaluatingdevelopmentassistance.htm
15
1. What reach in terms of target population and coverage has the project had in its different initiatives?
SUBSTITUTES:
1.1 How is the project proposed to reach NNA residents in other territories outside of Old Havana?
1.2 How do project actions favor family, intergenerational and community integration at the level of your
design and/or implementation?
2. What transformations constitute improvements in the constitution of protective environments for so much from the point of view
physical as emotional?
SUBSTITUTES:
2.1 What balance can be made before and after implemented actions in terms of constitution of environments
Protectors, promotion and guarantees of the rights of NNA?
2.2 How has the gender approach taken into account in its implementation?
2.3 How do the types of actions and themes addressed in them promote capabilities and
social integration between NNA?
2.4 What level of capabilities have acquired a project participants in their different activities for
Identify and exercise their rights according to specialists who interviewed?
2.5 How do you guarantee the project that adults involved in their actions acquire competencies
necessary and work as guarantors of the safe environment in which the children participate?
2.6 What level of capacities have the adult and adult team acquired who have participated in the project for the
Promotion and guarantee of transformation and constitution of protective environments for NNA
2.7 What alliances and inter -institutional collaborations are given (actors and sectors, roles, forms of integration) and how
They facilitate or limit the constitution of safe and protective environments within the framework of the project?
2.8 How have the monitoring and feedback processes developed during project implementation
In the period analyzed?
2.9 Does the implementation of the project adapt to the changes produced in context during the period demonstrate
execution?
2.10 How effective are the communication and dissemination strategies of the initiatives?
Sustainability criteria.
Definition: Procedure to which the objectives, actions and results of the project can continue to be developed over time, a
time they finish the technical and/or financial support available and external; and that their activities, results and impacts do not affect
The environment in a broad sense. It also refers to the effective management of the risks and obstacles of the project.
MAIN QUESTIONS OF THE CRITERIA:
1. How sustainable is the project from the temporal point of view, once the external support that currently has
How much of resources and what are its limitations?
Sub -questions
1.1 Does the project have a trained and prepared personnel to assume design, update,
implementation and monitoring of activities, as well as to radiate such knowledge to the community environment and their
Radio of Action? And with professional technical support to sustain staff training?
1.2 What strategies are developed to guarantee and promote the permanence of the staff and their commitment to
The target objectives, populations and project activities?
1.3 How does the project guarantee environmental sustainability?
1.4 Are there areas of intervention clearly unsustainable?
1.5 What elements are considered favorable and replicable in the implementation of the project that are good
practices to keep in time?
7. Evaluation methodology
The implemented methodology incorporated multiple approaches that were integrated by applying a methodology
mixed or triangular. The adjustment of the terms of reference was based, trying to respond to the uses
Previous evaluation. It is considered an independent evaluation, aimed at generating learning
(formative) to examine the future perspectives of implementation and escalation of this project.
It constituted a transparent, inclusive and sensitive evaluation to gender and rights approaches
humans
16
7.1 METHODOLOGICAL DESIGN
The methodological design based on the evaluability analysis followed two steps. A first moment in which
The evaluation of the evaluation already reported in section 5 of this report, such as
tool to gain more quality and methodological rigor, as well as to optimize the usefulness of the
evaluation and credibility in the results achieved. A second step included the adjustment of the proposal
methodological to the evaluation process, taking into account the objectives and scope of the evaluation, and its
indicators A flexible design was formulated from the construction of analysis categories and
sub -questions, which allowed responding to the specific objectives proposed.
The mixed approach in the investigation was based on the combination of information sources, the combination
and use of methods and techniques for data collection and analysis. Direct contact with the
main protagonists of the evaluation process and users of the report, and the reference to the context of
production of the phenomenon studied, evidencing from this analysis the changes produced, the
limitations, the risks for its extension to other spaces, and good practices with potential
Replicability
Sources, methods and techniques for information collection:
Although the development of the methodology established a specific approach limited to each objective of
evaluation (Annex 4), in general, the qualitative analysis contributed the experience lived by the subjects
that are part of the project and its different activities from the interviews in depth and the
Experience systematization workshop applied to the case study of the museum classrooms.
In general, the qualitative proposal opened the subjective dimension of the process, in this case from the
opinions, perceptions, attitudes and imaginary of the participants both in the experiences to+ and in
those of the other actions of the project and especially the study case. The quantitative analysis on its part
He emphasized the standardization of values associated with the variables of the investigation, allowing to find
behavior patterns in data not immediately subject to the subjectivity of those involved
In the study and cover a greater number of people and spaces within a relatively time of time
short. In this case, the survey method was applied, and a quantitative variant of the observation does not
Non -covert participant.
Frame and sample procedure:
Although each type of information source has a different sample frame, the sample selection
In all, including the case study, proceeded intentionally, taking into account various criteria
sample that will justify their selection (Annex 4). As for the concrete actions to be analyzed (starting
of the observation), of a total of 93 contained in the summer schedule of the project, 21 were
chosen In the teaching period, another 2 workshops developed in the A+Center were included, and 2 activities
developed as part of the project we are one in the fifth of the mills, in addition to the experience
of the museum classrooms. The initiative of the museum classrooms as a case study is selected, when being considered
An unprecedented pedagogical experience in the country and in the world that, since its constitution in the year
1995, has enabled the permanence of NN of primary and special education in different institutions
Cultural of the Historic Center in Teaching and Extra -Extra -Extradocate. Experience has enabled the
Implementation of informal learning programs for the development of conceptions and attitudes
appropriate towards the cultural and natural environment, and has come to solve a set of recognized difficulties
related to the correct development of the educational teaching process of the municipality (Cárdenas, 2006;
Domínguez, 2019)
In relation to the questionnaires and interviews associated with the summer actions: the sample framework was
composed of project operators records, workshops, and other adults available for
17
investigation. Likewise, intentionally (according to theoretical criteria and availability to participate, thus
as a prior signature of informed consent), of a total of 149 adults, who participate in
Different positions in the planned actions, without repetitions, 40 questionnaires were applied, and 10
interviews, reaching 33% of the total adults that have been linked to date.
In the case study of the museum classrooms, meanwhile, a systematization workshop was also applied
Experiences, where many impressions, memories, perceptions and construction were collected
Collective memory and valuations of a group of adults linked to these actions.
Especially this case study was applied during the teaching period from September to November of the year
2022, taking into account the previous editions in the years that cover the period of evaluation, whose
Results were integrated into the rest of the analyzes carried out during planned field work.
This action allowed the reconstruction of experience from the experiences of the participants
Throughout the project evaluation period, hence stages were identified, the factors
intervening that favored and hindered the process, as well as elements that were good
practices and that should continue to be implemented. In this reconstruction of experiences, it is also
They intended questions for indirect access to information about participation and empowerment
NNA from the project.
Regarding the analysis of documents, the sample framework was the set of reports, folding,
brochures and other available materials where the objectives of the shares, their participants, etc. are collected.
The selection in this case proceeded to review 100% of the documents made available to the
evaluation and that are listed in the annexes.
Data analysis strategy:
Qualitative information was processed through a discourse analysis based on transcripts of
interviews and systematization workshop, with semi -code. It started from categories previously
built, but allowing the emergence of some constructs that were emerging in the
processing and recoding. Observation information was analyzed with procedures
quantitative, and was contrasted with the discourse analyzed, as well as the trends found in the data
arising from the analysis of the questionnaires. Quantitative data were processed with SPSS, through
bivariate analysis, looking for the interrelation between the variables available in the questionnaire provided
by the project itself, provided it was possible. The integration of all this information allowed to respond
to questions adjusted to work indicators, according to the relevance criteria, effectiveness
and sustainability of the project evaluated, as well as guarantee the development of the other objectives of the
assessment.
7.2 Ethical considerations
The evaluation complied with the evaluation standards and standards established by the evaluation group
United Nations (UNEG) 2. Had an external character and worked independently, based on
that empirically verified evidence was valid and reliable.
The ethical principles that guided the evaluation were those of independence, impartiality, credibility,
respect, honesty and integrity3. For the scope of these principles, rigorously used of the
methodology elaborated for the purposes of this investigation, assuming with total responsibility the
2Norms and standards for evaluation, UNEG, 2016: http://www.uneval.org/document/detail/1914
3 UNEG/UNICEF: Ethical Guidelines for an evaluations, 2008:
http://www.unevaluation.org/document/detail/102and code of behavior for evaluation in the un a system, 2008:
http://www.unevaluation.org/document/detail/100
18
Compliance with the actions planned as part of the work schedule, always with total coordination
with the remaining parts involved. A cordial, collaboration and
Constant dialogue with the people involved, the information obtained was used
avoiding assuming positions or decisions that were related to personal interests, even
avoiding performing assessments that were not backed up in concrete evidence. Respect remained
for the dignity and diversity of the people who were interviewed and were considered throughout the process of
Evaluation Respect for human rights, equity and gender equality4. It followed as maximum,
preserve the confidentiality of the information and data of the people involved respecting the rights
to provide information confidentially.
In the activities carried out, an informed consent in writing was signed, about its
voluntariness to participate. The consent specified the confidentiality and preservation requirements
of personal identity, ensuring that the information obtained would be used only for research purposes,
preserving data privacy. The associated risks were minimized for negative effects,
and to maximize the benefits of the main actors, providing unnecessary damages or damages that
They can derive from the findings of a negative or critical evaluation, providing them without compromising the
integrity of the evaluation.
All communication actions and evaluation training included previous information
on the ethical principles that guaranteed the quality of the process and the results of the evaluation. The
Evaluation also complied with the UNICEF procedure in terms of ethical standards in
Research, evaluation, information collection and analysis5. The reference group supervised the
Compliance with the minimum standards established in UNICEF policy.
8. Evaluation findings
This section presents the findings of the evaluation, responding directly to all criteria and
Questions in relation to the criteria relevant, effectiveness and sustainability of the project. Then
Other results components are presented, such as those of the case study.
8.1. Findings for evaluation criteria
1. Relevance Criteria
1. How is the programming of the OHC-UNICEF project inserted in the approach to protective environments
For nna?
The programmatic documentation available to the OHC-UNICEF project is inserted into the approach
on protective environments from defending the need to establish and strengthen spaces where
institutions, organizations and actors, comply with certain responsibilities that ensure the
NNA protection against situations of abandonment, violence, exploitation or any form of exclusion.
4 INTEGRATION OF HUMAN RIGHTS AND GENDER EQUALITY IN THE EVALUATION, 2011:
http://www.uneval.org/document/detail/980
5 UNICEF Procedure for Ethical Standards in Research, Evaluation, Data Collection and Analysis, 2015:
https://www.unicef.org/supply/files/attachment_iv-unicef_proedure_for_ethical_standards.pdf
19
There is a general perception from the project, which includes culture, cultural institutions and
Derived actions, as protective environments for NNA. It is assumed that from culture you can
transform people's lives, and that the project will put in the center NNA and their families, in order
to motivate them not only to obtain knowledge about the diversity of situations about violence
that can affect them at some point in their life, but also on the protection and care of
Cultural Historical Heritage. It is argued that the intervention to be carried out from the set of actions
proposals will favor positive socialization, backed by a culture of rights and equity, with
Views to promote possible changes in their behavior.
1.1 Is there alignment of project objectives with the priorities of the national government?
The objectives of the project are aligned with the national policies that defend the priority nature of the
Childhood and adolescence as subjects of rights, and fundamental part of the protection processes
social guaranteed by the Cuban State. Although it is important to point out here, that so far the country
It does not have a specific regulation that integrates the policy of the Cuban State towards childhood, neither
with a binding national entity that addresses the problems that concern
to the welfare of NNA. According to the experts interviewed, the set of actions and policies that
They serve NNA are shared by a diversity of actors and social agents who start from the
own state and government, parliament and its various structures and administration agencies
State Central, all in its different scales of action.
The project evaluated for the programmatic component “each child is protected from violence
and the exploitation ”that focuses on improving the quality of prevention and comprehensive protection services of
Nna in front of different types of violence, especially to the most vulnerable social profiles, and
Nna that have committed facts that the law typifies as crimes, with aggravated behaviors and/or victims of
Crimes The component is aligned with the guidelines of economic and social policy
approved in 2011 that guide the conceptualization and update of the Cuban economic and social model
and the elaboration of the Economic and Social Development Plan at 2030 (Pndes).
Within the framework of the 2020-2024 Country Program agreed by UNICEF and the Government of Cuba, it was defined as
goal that by 2024 more of territories and prioritized groups benefit from services and spaces
quality protection, free of violence. Among the expected results is that institutions,
professionals and communities increase their abilities to strengthen spaces for comprehensive protection,
free of violence.; that have more capacities to provide protection to NNA of territories and groups
prioritized, in situations of violence and other conditions of social vulnerability; and have
knowledge and tools for the prevention, treatment and social reintegration of NNA that have
committed facts that the law typifies as crimes, with aggravated behaviors and/or victims of crimes. To do this,
In alliance with various national organizations, evidence generation strategies are used,
systematization, management and exchange of knowledge; intersectoral integration; development of
capacities and communication for development, among others. Commitment and capacity is then recognized
Government for the integral protection of NNA, and to guarantee its proper development and well -being.
The project that we submit to evaluation “Strengthening of adolescence protective environments with
Rights and equity approach, in Havana Vieja, Cuba ”is then a sample of the alliance between the
UNICEF, the OHC and the government authorities of Havana Vieja. Is explicit in the terms of
Formulation that its general objective will be the consolidation of protective environments for NNA in Havana
Old, from the consolidation of professional, institutional and community capacities for the
I work with these groups, from a rights and equity approach. From the above it follows that there is
alignment between these normative projections of both the government and UNICEF, with the objectives and
20
implementation of the project evaluated, so it can be said that this relevance requirement is
complies.
1.2 Does the project design correspond according to the expected activities and results with the
NNA needs and local priorities?
The project design corresponds in terms of expected activities and results with the needs
of NNA and local priorities. From the project design it is defined that the actions to be
implemented are directed to NNA of Old Havana and other municipalities of the capital that participate in
The actions of the Child and Adolescent Social Program, as well as professionals/social actors who work
With these groups. Work is identified with population groups that will be treated in a particular way,
According to certain vulnerabilities or disadvantage situations: children of low -income families,
people in improper conditions of housing or coexistence, children without family protection, in
Disability situation, and nn that have committed that the law typifies as crimes.
The project takes into account other NNA needs of the territory, related to the lack of spaces
of recreation and recreation, of spaces where to carry out sports activities, and outdoors, situations
risk related to high HIV infestation rates, drug and drug use, and
High levels of alcoholism (Cárdenas, 2006; Collective of Authors, 2012; Domínguez, 2019). In it
Case of adult staff, the actions are directed teachers and specialists who are linked to the program.
From this point of view, the project gives NNA the opportunity to learn, express feelings,
emotions and protection of violence; In addition to contributing to prevention,
Identification, denunciation to attend to the victims of this scourge.
However, from the design the amount of population that could be benefited by
each initiative, nor its disaggregation by age groups in case of NNA, either how many or the type of
school that will participate and why your choice occurs, or the number of specialists or teachers who
They will be trained, and from what criteria will proceed to their selection. It is only declared that registration to
The workshops will be proportional by sex. Within the set of actions designed only two are intended
towards groups considered in a situation of vulnerability or at a disadvantage, without defining how many will be
beneficiaries of activity. (Project formulation: consolidation of childhood protective environments
and adolescence in Old Havana, July 2021-December 2024; Project formulation: “Participation
Infant and adolescent in Old Havana ”2017-2021)
This aspect is considered a difficulty in achieving the chain of expected changes, since the
absence of planning intentional processes towards certain sectors at a disadvantage makes its
effective inclusion, as will be seen later. It starts from a universal perspective where all can
participate; However, work with a diversity look or approach is not contemplated. To be
produce greater inclusion, it is not necessary to increase the number of activities or initiatives convened,
but from their design, children are included, for example, pregnant teenagers and
Nna that the law typifies as crimes.
1.3 Is there coherence between the conceptual framework of the project in relation to its different components?
It can be affirmed that coherence is perceived in the conceptual framework of the project, the activities designed and
then implemented for the scope of the planned results, but suffers from a limited coherence
between indicators and sources of verification.
The project declares that to promote a protective environment, the commitment and ability to
organisms and institutions, the existence of proper legislation and application, availability
of appropriate services for prevention and attention, among other factors. In the same way he recognizes that it is
necessary that the infants and adolescents have adequate information and that they are taken in
21
Consideration of attitudes, traditions, customs, behaviors and habits in which they develop.
It also establishes requires social awareness to strengthen commitment to its
protection and development, the preparation of communities and families and in general the people who live together
with them; as well as the significant participation of these in matters that concern them. (Formulation
of the project: consolidation of protective environments for childhood and adolescence in Old Havana,
July 2021-December 2024; Project formulation: “Child and adolescent participation in Havana
Old ”2017-2021). Consequently, planned activities are aimed at professionals/actors
social, nna and, in addition, to the generation of communicative products, public presentations, and others
Actions that allow to win in greater visibility to the project. For the scope of each result
They program a set of activities broken down by results, and show continuation. The
proposal is based including elements of the context, intervention strategy, as well as a
Schedule of activities, all in a way that is justified, guides and organizes the execution of the project.
The actions and results proposed in correspondence with the intention of consolidating environments are placed
protectors for children and adolescents of the municipality of Havana Vieja, through spaces of
Participation already existing that make up the institutional network of the historian's office and its program
Child and adolescent social. The actions are made up of results groups (see Annex 11).
From what is expressed then, it can be affirmed that the project is consistent in terms of the
correspondence between what is raised and the executed, as evidenced in the analysis of the criteria of
Effectiveness and sustainability that are submitted later, as well as in the proposed theory of change
made from the implementation of the project. It is enough at the time to emphasize that the actions
developed and derived products even point to positive purposes not foreseen in terms of
results, within which they highlight greater articulated institutional management to generate and maintain
sustainably safe environments and a high degree of formalization of the practices that allow
stability, recognition and legitimacy over time.
On the other hand, the analysis of the project documentation reveals the existence of some elements
contradictory in the approach of indicators and sources of verification of results. This observation
It behaves differently for project documents between 2017 and 2021, and its update for
the period between 2021 and 2024. With respect to the first years, the elaborated indicators do not allow
Produce a fact that reflects the true compliance with the expected result. For example, 14
Indicators, 12 are built by way of writing and outcome approach and 2 activities. The
Indicators whether quantitative or categorical should allow reflecting reality in the indicator6.
The proposed verification sources, such as: Technical Project Card, Execution Schedule,
Offers, purchasing committee, invoices, delivery minutes, listings of participants in the workshops, do not achieve
Verify one of the indicators, related to the satisfaction of girls, boys and adolescents.
However, although the verification source is not placed, it is found that the project conceives
Methodologies that allow incorporating the level of satisfaction. For example, in the route closing report
and gait from the year 2021, is collected in the conclusions: the surveys conducted showed that 78% of
6 An example to illustrate the above is that between 2017 and 2021 one of the indicators was: at 7 months of
Started by the project at least 100 girls are selected that will participate in each of the planned workshops. A
Better conception and writing could be a percentage of participation of girls and boys in the workshops planned at 7 months
of initiated the project. Another of the indicators placed is: At the end of the project the children participating in the
Workshops know their rights and have developed initiatives to promote them. The variant could be: degree of
Knowledge in the field of rights developed by girls and boys at the end of the project; Number and description of
initiatives developed by girls and boys where they promote their rights.
22
The participants evaluate the edition of the project and 20% of good, being this, being this
Reflection of public satisfaction. In this way, the indicator of
satisfaction and the source of verification.
Regarding the proposal from 2021 to 2024, it is necessary to build an indicator that tributes
more clearly to the element generation of communicative products that are included as part of the
Result 3. Those proposed are oriented more to the number of participants in activities and
diverse initiatives and to the amount of spaces, being more limited to monitoring the aspect of
Form the communicative products stated in the result. From here it can be said that this
requirement is met.
1.4. Does the conceptual framework of the project incorporate the transversalization of equity axes,
vulnerability, rights and environment?
The documentary analysis reveals that the conceptual framework of the project incorporates the transversalization of the
Axes of equity, vulnerability, rights and environment. An intergenerational approach is promoted, of
Community integration, which includes disaggregated and proportional population by sex. Understand
also to NNA in situations of disability and with special educational needs. The
transversalization of the gender approach, as well as the intention of working themes related to its
understanding and changing sexist attitudes and behaviors. The conceptual framework advocates inclusion
and the development of NNA from a rights approach, by a healthy recreation in the environmental environment, by
enhance your self -esteem, as well as for the promotion of creativity, communication, spontaneity,
teamwork, the development of skills for your life and the respect, recognition and guarantee of your
rights. From here it can be said that this requirement is also met. This requirement also
complies for the relevance criteria.
1.5. How are the programmatic dimension of the project for monitoring processes in
Feedback terms?
Regarding the management of monitoring, evaluation and feedback processes from the dimension
Project programmatic, it is explained that actions will be carried out systematically (with
monthly, quarterly, and annual periodicity) to ensure compliance with the tasks, planned objectives
and expected results, regulating the possible deviations that may occur, introducing themselves from
Hence the changes of considered necessary. From the monitoring it is declared that the
evaluation indicators, as explained above contain contradictory elements in their
approach and possible sources of verification. After the first period (2017-2021) the indicators
They were adjusted in the update of the new project design for the 2021-2024 period.
For monitoring, it starts from an evaluation model of the initiatives that occur as part of the
summer stage, which introduces certain aspects such as sex, age, territory, initiative in the participation,
assessment of the initiative and personnel involved, and possible recommendations in terms of new
activities for the following year. In the case of activities that are developed as part of the period
School also has an evaluation model, where specialists responsible from the
Subdirectorate of Cultural Management of the OHC supervise the initiatives throughout the year. From here
It can be concluded that this requirement is met for the relevance criteria.
As all the requirements proposed for the relevance criteria are met. Therefore,
It can be affirmed, based on the methodological orientation of the design built in the design, which indicates that
Four to five of the relevance requirements are met, so the project evaluated is pertinent.
23
2. Effective criteria
1. What scope in the meta and coverage population has had the project in its different
initiatives?
Regarding the scope of the target population and coverage in its different initiatives, it can be affirmed that the
project has been inclusive taking into account variables such as sex, territory and skin color. But it has been
partially inclusive in relation to groups in disability or social disadvantage. In
target population terms there is correspondence between the total population that will benefit and the NNA
In disabilities. However, in some activities such as creation workshops, the
percentage of adolescents benefited in a situation of disability or social disadvantage is well below
of the target population that was benefited by this activity.
1.1 How is the project to achieve residents in other territories outside Old Havana?
The design starts from a universal perspective that declares that all children can participate and be
benefited from all activities and services. Open calls are made to which they can
present a child of all territories, even from other provinces of the country. For the generation of
short, medium and long -term changes are developed a set of activities and services that can
Take advantage of the territory during the school year, and out outside the territory in summer period. He
Start of these initiatives dates back to 1995 with the creation of museum classrooms. However, it could
contemplate this perspective with a look or focus of diversity, where from the design it intentions
work with certain groups (those in disabilities or social disadvantage, such as
the case of adolescents during the gestation period, children who have committed facts that the law typifies as
crimes)
The project establishes in its terms of reference the target population that will benefit from the set of
its initiatives and services in the period between 2017 and 2021.
Table 1. Meta population of the project between 2017 and 2021
2017-2021 NN that will be disabled female male (this appears in the
beneficiaries terms of formulation of
project)
2017-2021 27 228 NNA 13 068 14 160 135
2021-2024 10 116 NNA 4878 5238 19
Totals 28 239. 17 946 19 398 154
Source: Preparation of the evaluation team
In project closing reports, only the entire NNA is contemplated that have been part of
Each initiative. The age group to which they belong, the frequency and duration of each
Initiative, linked institutions and themes that have been addressed. However, it does not appear
disaggregated way in activities how many of the beneficiaries are of the male or female, or
In many of the initiatives, the amount of population in disability or
vulnerability that has been part of them.
To assess the project in terms of whether it is inclusive or the analysis of the enrollment of the
29 courses offered as part of the A+ center during this holiday period. A total of 448 participated
teenagers, of them 138 (30%) of the male sex and 310 (70%) of the female sex. According to skin color
208 were white, 105 black, and 138 mestizos. Regarding sex and skin color variable
A tendency to greater participation of white adolescents in the workshops is appreciated
24
developed. In the closing reports analyzed, the behavior of these variables happens in a way
similar.
The following graph illustrates the analysis of the registration of the 29 courses.
Graph 1. Disaggregation of registration to A+ workshops by sex and age groups
Sex age groups
62
123
138
263
310
10 to 14 years old from 15 to 17 years old
Male female from 18 to 20 years
Source: Preparation of the evaluation equipment from registration data
The most represented age group was 15 to 17 years with 255 adolescents (58%) followed by the group
formed by NNA from 10 to 14 years, 123 (27 %) and a group of young people from 18 to 20 years (62) for a
13%. “Sometimes young people who want to be part of the initiative come and we cannot say no. If the
registrations are not totally full, because we can proceed to participate other people, say
young people as happened this year ”(specialist interviewed by the center A+). It was impossible to establish the
NNA number with some type of disability situation because it is not a variable that is collected to
Moment of registration.
The courses that most preference and of greater child registered during this period were: Photography
Basic, Photoshop, phrase, modeling, yoga, robotics, and feeling architecture. In most
Courses there is an overrepresentation of white adolescents; However, in the case of robotics
Most participants are male. The specialists interviewed point out that it is coming
producing a break with certain sexist stereotypes that determine that there are courses "only for girls"
or "only for men" opening a range of possibilities that allow them to learn about new
Themes
Figure 2. Percentage of students enrolled by courses according to skin color
Source: Preparation of the evaluation equipment from registration data
25
Figure 3. Percentage of students enrolled by courses according to sex
Source: Preparation of the evaluation equipment from registration data
If a balance of NN's participation in the different educational projects that are promoted
from the project and that are aimed at the formation of values, the vocational orientation in the
Artistic and Environmental Education, we can verify that, throughout the period evaluated, say since 2017
Until 2022, the initiatives where school visits are linked, the workshops for
teenagers and creation workshops. These initiatives include NN of all schools in
territory, which are in grades from third to sixth, in addition to adolescents who are part of the
Summer workshops enrollment (during the course and holiday period). In the period they have participated
60 000 NNA, a figure that far exceeds the total beneficiaries who had been projected in the
Initial project design. Here it should be noted that NNA can travel through several courses in the same
period before the variety of themes that are taught through the workshops.
It is worth remembering that there are two enrollment modalities: one with an open call, such as the case of
These workshops, the creation workshops, the competitions, and a closed call that is directed in a way
particular to the schools of the territory of Old Havana.
The initiatives that have the greatest participation are: the creation workshops for NN, the contests, and the
Workshops for NNA. Calling calls are held twice a year, in the period
from January to June and from September to December; In the case of competitions they can leave their call in
Any moment of the year, and the workshops for adolescents during the course and in the summer months.
Figure 4. NNA participation in various initiatives
NNA participation in various initiatives
TEEN FOR ADETING 13000
Theater activities 150
ROUTES AND ROYS 6000
Creation workshops 11000
School visits 33000
2100 museum classrooms
0 5000 10000 15000 20000 25000 30000 35000
NNA
Source: Preparation of the evaluation team
26
The project also reaches residents in other territories outside the old Havana through the
Open calls. In the case of the year 2022 the Center A+ hosted adolescents from all municipalities
of the capital, having greater assistance from those from the municipality ten of October (17%),
followed by Centro Habana (15%) and thirdly the municipalities of Havana del Este and Plaza de la
Revolution (11%). The same is possible to verify adolescents from other provinces of the country, such as Guantanamo
and the island of Youth. The municipalities of Cotorro (1%) and those of the Lisa (1.5%) are the least
represented. The above can be associated with that they are very distant territories of the historic center. In it
Case of Havana Vieja represented 9 %.
The following graphic illustrates the participation of NNA from other municipalities outside Havana to three
initiatives that develop in the project, which are the most represented.
Graph 5. Calls according to type of activity that includes NNA from outside the territory
Old Havana
Calls according to type of activity that includes
Nna outside the territory of Old Havana
2021
2020
2019
2018
2017
0 50 100 150 200 250 300
Summer Workshops Creation Workshops Contests
Source: Preparation of the evaluation team
The link to the activities of the NNA occurs in the institutions of Old Havana or in others
institutions also associated with the project, such as the fifth of the mills or the house of green tiles.
“The creation workshops have even allowed the program stay to leave the same borders
of the Historic Center of Old Havana, and are creation workshops that many times have registration
aimed at the community, schools, but many times they have open license plates and children,
girls, who can arrive and can participate in those creation workshops, which are for their learning, are
Spaces that favor vocational guidance and develop skills. They are next to those of workshops
summer, the ones that attract the most population. NNA comes from all over the capital, and they find a place
Here, they feel at home ”(Specialist interviewed by the Fifth Project for inclusion).
Although when observing the behavior of the previous variables the project is inclusive, in the case of
Some groups can be considered partially inclusive, say groups in disabilities
or social disadvantage. In terms of target population, a correspondence between the
Total population that will benefit, and in disabilities. However, in some
Activities, percentage of adolescents in disabilities is well below the population
goal that has been benefited from the activities that concentrate the most in the entire period studied.
We illustrate the above with two specific examples: in 2018 of 5000 adolescents who participated
of the “With you are +” program through the creation workshops, only 5 adolescents with delay
Mild mental and autism were inserted, for 0.1%. In 2019, 6000 adolescents linked to
Creation workshops, only 20 with mild and autismal delay for 0.3%were inserted. The above
27
comes to account for the need to intention the participation of these groups from the design of the
set of activities, services or initiatives that are implemented from the OHC and its program
cultural. Such is the case of pregnant adolescents, or in which they have committed acts that the law typifies
as crimes, population groups that could be favored as part of the experience and that
They are not included, although it is recognized in all the closing reports of the year as a weakness, or aspect to
improve. The project demonstrates that there is capacity to include others in disabilities
or social disadvantage, because there are not only conditions to do so, but also because it would be fair and very
necessary.
Below are some of the activities for years in which these children participated in
Disability situation or social disadvantage:
Table 2. Activities involved in disability or disadvantage
social for years
2107 • As part of the walking initiative we are 1 visited the rehabilitation service of
Pediatrics of the Julio Díaz Hospital.
2018 • Children's guides (this time developed as part of the school year) was integrated
To the special walk we are 1 and participated in the activity 10 nn deaf and
hearing loss.
• As part of weekly school visits they benefited with a turn of
Patrimonial Education, 1 or 2 groups of students with learning delay (here do not count
The figures in the reports)
• 26 children residing in a home of NN without a family beach protection to enjoy a
Visit for the Castle of Royal Force and the House of Poetry.
• 60 children and young people with intellectual disabilities of the Adelaida Piñera School and linked
To the fifth project for social inclusion, they reached the house of poetry and the Art Museum
Colonial to present their art and exchange experiences with other children.
• 5000 adolescents participating in the “With you are +” program through the
Creation workshops, 5 teenagers with mild mental retardation and autism are inserted
2019 • Special walk we are 1 (dedicated to children, adolescents and young people with needs
photoprotection specials (lupus, pigmentosa sclerodermia, pigmentosa xerodermia,
Mastocytosis)
• 6000 adolescents linked to the creation workshops, 20 were inserted with delay
Mild mental and autism
2020 • They were carried out during the first part of the year joint activities with adolescents with
Special educational needs of the project making roads.
2021 • Special walk we are 1 (dedicated to children, adolescents and young people with needs
photoprotection specials (lupus, pigmentosa sclerodermia, pigmentosa xerodermia,
Mastocytosis). 4 cycles of 2 workshops
Source: Preparation of the evaluation team
When comparing the number of activities that take place every year with those in which the
NNA participation in disabilities, it can be said that the project is partially
Inclusive, which is reinforced with little evidence of the participation of NNA in social disadvantage.
28
Another issue related to the partial inclusion, which emerged from the narrative of the people interviewed, has to
See with the participation in the experience of children heritage guides. In the case of this initiative
Consider by specialists interviewed that it is the most requested in the summer stage, and “… another
Thing that goes almost always is that the children of the people who work in the
office, of managers, but you have to understand that these children are there with their mothers, that they are
working and taking advantage of the activities for them also to be able to do something during the
Summer, because your family is working. The activities are not designed for them, but that they
They participate is very good, they are also vulnerable, because they are there until 8 p.m.
in cultural facilities. I cannot limit them, it is a positive result. I am not from
agreement that if I release a call, all are the children of ... but I think they must have
a space, and perhaps increase enrollment to come or access other children, it has to
There is a balance where everyone has an opportunity. Most workshops are for public
Open and many repetitions are made, that if you do not participate this time it can be the following, or
Also summer, that says that in a matter of opportunity we are quite good (specialist of
the Subdirectorate of Cultural Management).
1.2. How do project actions favor family, intergenerational and community integration
at the design and/or implementation level?
According to the specialists interviewed, the children's and adolescent social program has a work approach
which is based on promoting family, intergenerational and community integration. Importance is recognized
of linking the family to the activities that are developed, as well as promoting the relationship of NNA with
Other groups considered vulnerable such as older adults. It is claimed that activities
They are designed to link mothers, fathers or relatives who attend accompanying NN. "By
Example, in children's guides, they take that into account, that is, how I will involve the family
And how within the workshop that I am doing with the children I have two or three meetings in which
Participate the family, and be part of the whole process. The recognition of children is very stimulated,
As we show their creative work to the family, how we show their achievements, their progress, how we do
exhibitions when the workshop concludes so that the family comes, integrates and can enjoy all all
the skills that children have acquired. The museum classrooms themselves were a great challenge when
We set out that they were not only in the museums, and they were opened to other institutions, to be made
Museum classrooms in the centers for older adults that exist in the municipality and who are
particularly those of the historian's office ”(Specialist of the Sub -Directorate of Cultural Management)
Every year they are convened as part of routes and scoring intergenerational projects. He also has
It could be found that they attend mostly accompanied by the maternal figure (75% if calculated having
in consideration all editions). It is also recognized that NNA is part of these activities
because it encourages its cultural development and vocational training (80%), for the new knowledge that
They contribute (72%) and because they can occupy their free time productively (65%).
29
Graph 6. Intergenerational workshops for years
Intergenerational workshops for years
2022
2021
2020
2019
2018
2017
0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18
Workshops
Source: Preparation of the evaluation team
The following table shows how the call for workshops has behaved during the period
evaluated, which denotes its fluctuations in terms of call, associated according to the specialists
consulted at the arrival of pandemia.
Table 3. Total distribution of intergenerational workshops and workshops for years between 2017 and
2022
Total Year of Workshops Workshops
Intergenerational
2017 73 7 (9.5%)
2018 146 16 (11%)
2019 Disaggregated figures do not appear in the
report
2020 20 4 (20%)
2021 34 2 (6%)
2022 79 7 (8.8%)
Source: Preparation of the evaluation team
In the initiatives observed during the summer as part of the center A+ it was possible to verify that the mothers,
parents or relatives who accompany their adolescents are not part of the activities, only
those that are carried out to culminate the workshops and where they expose the knowledge learned
or the work done. This is an action that is created with all intention from the center so that
teenagers enjoy a space created only for them, from promoting integration principles
social, solidarity, empathy and acceptance. Similarly, as from the center, attention is provided and
psychological orientation may feel free to seek help in any situation that are
crossing. “… Parents are not included in the workshops, because we believe that the teenager is
Feel full of acting without being valued by another adult. They have a space created so they can
interact with others, come when they have no classes and take advantage of the services we offer, from the
vocational help, even some kind of orientation for example in sexual matters ”(specialist of the
Subdirectorate of Cultural Management).
In other spaces such as gaps if you intend to enjoy initiatives
in the company of his family or the group of friends. This could be found in the 12 activities that
They were observed outside the center, where all NN were accompanied by a relative,
30
being part of the actions carried out. In all the actions visited, the workshops promoted the
Participation of accompanying people making the activity more fluid and dynamic.
Since 2018, three of the museum classrooms have worked in centers where they are served in an integral way to
older adults, say the convent of Bethlehem, the convent of San Agustín and the Havana 620 residence.
The shifts on heritage issues are shared with them, both with those who reside in the institution
Like non -internal. The intention of the initiative is aimed at promoting awareness towards the
Heritage, artistic and vocational training, and above all the training in values, but is considered
According to the interviewees that sharing the course with older adults, allows to promote exchange,
The links and relations with this age group. This information was also found in the workshop of
Systematization of experiences, by specialists linked to the three museum classrooms. The actions
They have also favored community integration through linking the houses of culture of different
territories (6 are recognized in reports) for exhibitions and competitions, and to promote insertion
of community projects (10 according to the narrative of the interviewed people).
2. What transformations constitute improvements in the constitution of protective environments for NNA
both from the physical and emotional point of view?
In relation to the transformations that constitute improvements in the constitution of protective environments for
Nna both from the physical and emotional point of view, it can be said that the activities observed
They meet all levels of a protective environment, from the physical, emotional point of view, of the staff
involved, and participation of NNA.
Of a total of 93 actions to be carried out within the schedule of the Children's and Adolescent Cultural Program,
21 were chosen by intentional sampling to be observed, in several of the institutions outside and
Within the OHC (Annex 5)
In the case of the 11 institutions visited and as part of the observation it was found that, in terms of
Accessibility, the greatest difficulties are located in non -existence in all observed premises of
A first aid kit (100%), there is no information available for the orientation of NNA to
purpose of the actions to be carried out (100%), nor the identification of the spaces according to functions
and responsibilities (80% of the 11 institutions). These can be considered issues that arise when
The physical security of the spaces is thought.
31
Figure 7. Quality of the physical environment
physical environment quality
3, 6%
2, 4%
There is no information available on the actions to be carried out
3, 6%
Very high stairs
0%
Non -Excency of rubrics for spatial orientation
11, 22%
8, 16% The spaces are not identified according to their functions and
responsible
Bathrooms not adjusted to the needs of NNA
10, 20%
11, 22% not existence of a first aid kit
Non -existence and location of extinguishers
architectural barriers
4%
Source: Preparation of the evaluation team
It is important to note that with the exception of the A + center designed consciously for attention and
Work with adolescents, the remaining activities are carried out in cultural institutions (museums and houses
Museum) that already existed and complied with other missions when their use for others were decided
purposes, very different from the objective for which they were initially created. Thus, the places have gone
adapting gradually for work with NNA. If other indicators are taken into account for
Evaluate the physical quality of the environment, they are completed 100% in the observed places, say for example
hygiene, space safety and constructive state of properties where the
activities. Here reference is made to the initiatives that were observed.
On the other hand, it could be found that in all the institutions observed and according to specialists
In interviews, in 100% of the locations there is an adjustment of the furniture. There are blackboards and
Addments, equipment, accessories and technologies for the development of actions.
In relation to the quality of the intergenerational environment in the observations made, they are adjusted in the
totality of the activities observed The amount of adults according to space and action. In all
Actions are generated exchanges between NN with teachers and a comfort environment is forged where
They can express their concerns, and participate in the dynamics developed. Adult people
responsible for directing the activity pay attention and offer good treatment to the involved. In three of
The activities (robotics, modeling, phrase) participate with some type of disability situation,
Acceptance of differences could be observed even in the frames of an activity traditionally
exclusive
The issue of attention received could also be found from the surveys conducted to young people
They were part of the initiatives when they were teenagers. When asked about the attention received by
The adult staff with whom they had interacted, 100% described it as excellent. When asking to explain
Briefly their response, some arguments were given such as: ¨For the attention and patience they have. By
the charisma and the pretty way that they possess where they make you feel safe¨; ¨ They are very attentive, they make you feel
In a safe space, they listen and teach you ... "The attention received can be related to the fact of
that most were involved in the workshops on more than one occasion, after attending for the first time.
32
2.1 What balance can be made before and after the actions implemented in terms of
Constitution of protective and promotion environments and guarantees of the rights of NNA?
To establish a before and after from the actions implemented by the project, the evaluation
It relies on the questionnaires applied to young people over 19 who were part of the initiative.
Although they are not a representative sample of the number of adolescents who enjoyed the initiatives
In the period studied, they illustrate the impacts generated in the longer term in this population, and as the
Changes planned from the project have been allowing the scope of the expected results.
They were mostly linked to the workshops of the A+ Center (50%), secondly, at the Ministry Service
(40%), and finally to virtual workshops (10%). Among the main recognized contributions that are appreciated
In the graphic below it is mentioned: learn about different topics that are of interest (70%),
and with equal proportion of 10% receive psychological attention and guidance, share with others
adolescents and feel integrated and socially accepted.
Figure 8. Contributions of participation in project activities
Source: Preparation of the evaluation team
The following graph shows how participation in space resulted in important effects in its
lives: develop new skills and knowledge for 60% and be more independent and safe
of themselves/as 40%. Participate in project activities contributed new knowledge and
values that before participating did not possess: the right to have fun and play (40%), the right of
Nine having opportunities, services and protection during their development (30%), demanding the
fulfillment of their rights (20%) and the right of nna of not being discriminated against breeding,
Color, sex, language, political opinion, economic position or no other reason.
Graph 9. Effects of participating in personal life
Source: Preparation of the evaluation team
It is evident that most young people (80%) feel willing to transmit what they learned to
other/as nna; The above could be verified because as part of the A+center, of 29 workshops in this
Edition, 9 (31%) were part of the workshops when they were teenagers.
33
In the case of this requirement there is not enough evidence, because it was impossible to access
A NNA. So the requirement is fulfilled partially.
2.2 Has the project in its implementation taken into account the gender approach?
The project is inserted in the promotion policy of the OHC gender approach. Existence is verified
of diverse actions that promote their transversalization, such as training, planning and
development of activities with an inclusive scope, preparation of the gender strategy of the management
of Cultural Heritage of the OHC. At the close of this evaluation, the strategy is in the final phase of
Approval by the Board of Directors, and in the elaboration phase, a manual to transversalize the approach
gender in museums.
As part of the training processes, in 2021, he realizes workshops, such as the call
“Living adolescence in Covid 19: promoting good practices from culture as
protective approach ”, which was carried out virtually in three editions during the year 2020. Among its
objectives was: a) to know the potentialities of culture as a protective environment in situations of
physical isolation; b) Train around possible manifestations of violence (intrafamily and in
digital scenarios) and the way in which it can be exacerbated in situations of physical isolation, c)
Socialize resources to prevent violence towards adolescents in the domestic sphere and on stage
digital; d) Offer resources to prevent and/or act from culture to any type of discrimination,
Maltrate or violence towards this age group.
In addition to the contents given and highly valued by those who participated, they identified themselves
teenagers in complex situations within their homes, who were given advice and
Accompaniment by the work team involved. As evidence of what has been learned, it is found
The final activity of the workshop that appears in the closing report delivered. In this report it is also made
Reference to the opinions of adolescents in relation to the workshop:
“… I have learned to take care and defend my violence. I also had the opportunity to express myself
creatively and be myself, but the most important thing is that I could identify and stop violence before
that it can generate more violence "
“… It was a privilege because there are many teenagers who do not know all the options they have for
face situations of violence raised: violent environment, harassment, anxiety and stress caused by
The quarantine "
Another example of formative space was summer workshop, influencer (measuring social networks
against violence in childhood and adolescence), made in the center to+ adolescent spaces. The space
He contributed knowledge about non -violence towards NNA, cyberviolences, harassment, sexism and
gender identities. Communicative products, resources and materials were shared to deepen
On these themes. It works in articulation with the campaigns evolves, against violence against
women and girls; and measure, against violence in childhood and adolescence, whose essences tax
the purposes of the project.
In the memory of the encounter, which is in synthesis testimonies of the work days, a teenager
He said: “The first clash I had in the workshop was to discover that being influencer was not like
I thought, but these days we would talk about being influenced by nonviolence. (...) I want to know what is
Sexism, why girls harass us more on social networks, why we see well and attractive
That a boy publishes photos with a bare chest, and why if a girl goes out in bikini we immediately thought
evil of her and judge her. I want to understand that of inclusive language and gender identities. ”
34
On the other hand, formative processes have also been developed that involve adults to
strengthen their abilities in the gender approach, and has sought professionals with preparation in these
Topics to guide, from both Cuba and other countries.
Of a total of 35 training offered, 6 (17%) were specifically dedicated to promoting
knowledge associated with the gender approach:
Table 4. Contents with a gender approach taught for years
Years theme
2018 bulling, cyberbulling and symbolic violence
2018 learn from experiences in adolescence work from the work of the
Gender, antipatriarchal and antihegemonic approach.
2018 gender and tics. The role of women from the media.
2018 Gender Violence. Recognition and management of violence between
teenagers.
2018 inequalities and gender stereotypes, its impact and manifestation in the
adolescence. Gender rights and opportunities from the deconstruction of
Stereotypes
2019 Reproductive health, gender and sexual rights
Continuing with the expected chain, these activities implemented constitute aspects
Positive as long
which favors the transversalization of the gender approach to the project, and allows to comply with these
Effective Requirements.
23. How the types of actions and themes addressed in them promote the gain of
capacities and social integration between NNA?
If the expected chain is followed for the generation of new capabilities in NNA within the
Project, one of the main activities implemented are the workshops (summer and during the course
school) and the initiatives that are developed by the children's and adolescent program.
Next, the set of the most relevant actions implemented in the period are explained,
Taking into consideration how the capacities gain and practice have promoted and practice
Integration of NNA.
School visits It is declared that as part of school visits the registration has covered all the
NN of the primary and special education of the municipality. It is considered an alternative education that
It enables NN to approach heritage institutions by promoting love for the
Heritage, for history and research. “There are projects that we carry out as school visits,
Because the museum classrooms are not enough for everyone to reach the Historic Center project, a
more project to bring them closer to the environment, so that they develop, but school visits tend
Little apocus to expand the fingerboard, and involve all the primary schools of Old Havana,
involves all groups of primary schools in the rotations we do ”(Specialist the
Department of Sociocultural Research and Educational Programs of the Cultural Subdirectorate).
In the reports produced by the project, the Totals of NN participants appear for years in the visits
School In these totals, NN is included with special educational needs, but they do not appear all
disaggregated figures. An example of this is that in 2018 a space only for NN was dedicated with disorders
in learning by various museums of the Historic Center.
35
Creation workshops. They are an interactive learning space that promotes in NN the training of
Values related to heritage, art, science, nature and crafts. Also from
They proceed to vocational guidance and artistic and environmental education. The activity is carried out in
two periods: one period that includes the entire school year, and the other during the summer stage as part
of routes and gait. In recent years, treatment to environmental issues has been favored
especially those related to the preservation of the natural environment and the recycling of raw materials. By
Another part, some states of opinion that appear in the closing reports of the year of the year of the year are enunciated
Child and adolescent social program (2019) presented on the initiative:
“Sometimes they help us paint, create figures in third dimension and give us talks and learn.
Then we can improve the work of the school and go better in history subjects ”(Child of
ten years, fifth grade)
“Through the workshops, things are learned that apply to school, in the final works and I can
Help my brother do the tasks of his degree ”(11 -year -old girl, sixth grade).
Despite the good recognition of this initiative in NN according to the reports, the actions
developed have been decreasing at the time associated with the emergence of the Covid 19 pandemic,
although it is important to mention that it has been reharmed for its reach to other audiences through the
Virtual modality. In 2020 and 2021 8 and 51 workshops were held respectively, of the total workshops
They performed throughout the year.
Contests. Stimulate interest in school nn that are linked to OHC projects in
knowledge and awareness in historical and heritage issues, as well as for the development of new
Writing, research, painting skills. The first calls were only dedicated to
Schools of the territory; Then in 2019 its extension to NN of other territories and provinces of the country was decided.
Pandemia was also considered to be affected by the number of calls. Themes are varied depending on
of significant dates and commemorations. Among the main modalities are the arts
plastic (drawing, marquetry and modeling), literature (narration and poetry) and photography. Besides, I know
They made a total of 25 exhibitions and audiovisual projection spaces, music and
Theater for children and adolescents.
Children's guides. This project has the fundamental mission to develop knowledge and
Skills for heritage communication from an early age. Has transcended from the space of the
summer period and has been inserted in the school stage promoting the training of students of the
territory, as well as those that are integrated into the museum classrooms “… we propitiate a change of roles, which
They are protagonists of that visit. The children's guide children's project is an example of how
These roles are changing and empowered infants in that cultural process they are living.
Our institutions take into account in the development of their projects, the participation of children and
girls who are in that classroom museum. " (Specialist of the Subdirectorate of Cultural Management).
At the end of the NN initiative they must share the knowledge acquired in a graduation exercise that
It includes guided tours of family, friends and people from the community. Through evidence
contributed to the evaluation, 38 photos and two videos can be found, where 6 NN are responsible for the
Guided tours by several institutions of the Historic Center. “One notices the change of the NN, when
You see a girl who entered here without being able to speak by grief, and now you see an empowered teenager who can
direct a route alone without accompaniment. " (Specialist of the Subdirectorate of Cultural Management)
above is evidence of profits, which are acquired that are part of the experience,
recognized by specialists.
36
In 2019, it was recognized as a novel experience, which involved NN integrated to this experience, the
Children's Crusade by southern Matanzas developed in May. Constituted an experience of
cultural exchange between Havana infants and others from the Jagüey Grande and Ciénaga localities of
Zapata Involved visits to museums, cultural centers and recognition of cultural and natural heritage
of the town, with tours of the farmhouse, of Manjuarí, of crocodiles, the herbarium, the
50th anniversary of the carbonera dinner with Fidel, the Treasury Lagoon in the Boca-tourist complex
Guama, among others.
We are special walking: project aimed at infants, adolescents and young people with educational needs
special. Here special gaps are included through various places in the historic center. To him
moment, according to the closing reports consulted and in the interviews, in the three editions
Deaf and deaf and hearing loss, with physical and motor disability, with disorders have participated, with disorders
of the autistic spectrum and behavior and others with special photoprotection needs, in addition to NN
that live in homes of NNA without family protection. Many of the workshops that carry out in attention
This group is developed within the Fifth Project for inclusion. Here a number have been taught
important of workshops such as speech therapy, painting, animals assisted by animals, psychoballet, gardening between
others.
A medium -term result of this initiative, offering continuity to the first activities carried out
It has been the constitution of the project “touring paths for social inclusion” with the objective of
link these young people to the work world. He started with 8 young people who had been part of the gaps
in the holiday period (5 women and 3 men). Today 5 work in the institution, which
It denotes that, based on the actions carried out by the project, important changes have been generated in
The life of these people and their relatives. "The mothers approached when we gave the first
walk special, and asked us to draw a strategy to occupy the free time of those young people who
They had already completed all possible studies. Thus the strategy of bringing them here and with a
Sensitive and trained personnel, guide and teach them as much as possible. First they went through
The gaps, then the fifth project was formed by inclusion, and then this new project
that tries to have a greater impact ”(main specialist of the fifth of the mills).
Ministry service: the Ministry Service enhances the prevention of psychological well -being from a
Focus of multiple alternatives and a positive vision for the adolescent population and their families. His
main objective is to enhance reflexive skills about how to promote self -care and states
of mental health in circumstances of crisis. The space facilitates support materials (folding, infographics and
audiovisual) as strategic tools for self -care to consider to foster states
of mental health, using all possible platforms. We could assess as essential the role they play
These products in the expected change chain that is promoted from the project. In the period they have
a total of 182 teenagers benefited with psychological orientation, and 197 have been part of the
Workshop A+ Happiness.
Actions for adolescents: It is included in the workshops, conferences, directed visits and other
cultural activities, developed in museums, museum houses and cultural centers belonging to the
OHC. Themes such as plastic arts, theater, sculptural ceramics, wire, dance, fish and
Cuban reptiles, phrase, television, literature, environment, poetry, astronomy, instruments
Africans; While at the same time, novel proposals such as philately, physical health, music, graffiti,
Audiovisual production, edition, design, cinematographic appreciation, cartoon, performance, literature and
nutrition. Lines considered strategic such as vocational guidance, education with
Perspective of rights and values, sexual and reproductive education, artistic education, citizenship,
37
Environmental heritage and education and others of artistic and trades (science, plastic arts, production
Musical, ceramics, dance, theater, counseling, wire, photography, locution, cartoon, edition,
journalism, etc.) incorporating transverse approaches such as equity, disability, citizenship, rights,
Gender and social participation. A “open doors” day is held every third Saturday of the month to
Link adolescents who are not from the territory to the various initiatives. This activity is convened to
through social networks and in the cultural program of the office to promote adolescents access
outside the territory of Old Havana. We can illustrate what represents the A+ center for adolescents
From a survey applied in 2019 (Project Closing Report, 2019).
The main associations in the graph below are concentrated in the consideration of this as a
Single teaching space, which provides them with new knowledge and in which they can also have fun.
Graph 10 Adolescent considerations about space A+
interesting
only
Well
love
amazing
spectacular
fun
training
learning
teaching
0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14
Source: Project Closing Report, 2019
As for the contribution of services and workshops for the integral development of adolescents, the
93% considered that the center a+ tribute its participation and integral development from a perspective of
equity and rights. In relation to skills and benefits, they express more frequently
possibility of accessing safe and trustworthy spaces, the achievement of better interpersonal relationships without
prejudices or stereotypes, as well as equitable participation without sex distinction.
38
Graph 11. Skills and benefits identified by young people who participated in the
Project Actions
Greater knowledge about healthy lifestyle
Greater learning on responsible sexuality
Achievement of better relationships with other teenager without ...
Appropriation of new knowledge for the care of ...
Access to safe and trustworthy space
Creation of audiovisuals that help equity between ...
Participation without distinction by sex
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70
Source: Project Closing Report, 2019
It is possible to verify that all initiatives have the fundamental mission to provide new
knowledge about a diversity of topics and nna skills that are part of their initiatives.
The specialists consulted reaffirm that the programming and the set of these initiatives come to create
an awareness of rights subjects in NNA. The right to culture is then identified as universal
To participate and enjoy spaces from cultural diversity. Therefore, museums and institutions
cultural are seen as spaces that play an important role in children as subjects of rights and
opportunities. They are considered to be spaces where they not only participate in educational processes but also
Cultural processes in a more free, participatory and autonomous way.
The evidence shows that from the actions and themes addressed, profits are promoted,
capacities and integration between NNA; From the above it can be affirmed that this requirement is met.
2.4 What level of capabilities have the project participants acquired in their different
activities to identify and exercise their rights according to specialists who interviewed?
According to the specialists interviewed, it is defended that NNA has acquired new knowledge
and skills from being part of the project initiatives; They improve their reading, their writing, their
scenic projection, your calligraphy; They are socialized with new values of respect, solidarity, love of
neighbor. Here it is mentioned to be able to direct by themselves the routes and savings during the holiday period,
The radio program with you are + that every Wednesday comes to the air at 7 at night. This space
It is designed only by adolescents from the issues to be treated and the space of driving and realization.
Changes in behavior and positive transformations of behavior are perceived, especially from
of the case study “… you cannot access NNA, but we can categorically affirm that
Those children change when they go through these spaces. First they win in security, in confidence; This center
He turns his house, sometimes they come here and stay hours, they speak to Eugenio, with the receptionist, and you see
who arrived with very bad habits and after a few months they treat you with respect and ask that others
do it too. It is an incredible thing and one feels that he works well. You see them down the street and they are helping
To their parents, they speak with more ease, with more conviction of themselves. ” (Center specialist A+)
According to the narrative of the interviewed people, important changes are generated in NNA from the
activities to which they are linked, allowing them to develop and enhance capacities that allow them
Identify and exercise your rights. However, given the impossibility of accessing interviews with NNA no
39
The first person evidence of this information could be obtained. It can then be affirmed that the
requirement is met partially.
2.5 How do you guarantee the project that adults involved in their actions acquire
necessary competences and work as guarantors of the safe environment in which they participate?
The project has guaranteed the necessary skills that favor the development of environments
protectors from the participation of specialists, managers, teachers and teachers in actions of
overcoming In the period some of the most involved national institutions in the processes of
Training were the Center for Youth Studies, the Faculty of Communication, the project
Skown, the Network of Popular Educators, the Network of Men's, Women's Magazine, the project
Manglar alive and the art project. International institutions such as UNESCO, NGO Kultura,
Communication, the Basque Cooperation Agency, and of course UNICEF. In 2018, 2019 and
2022 The greatest number of training (48) and participation in national events and
International (23) of the period evaluated. Among the issues addressed, construction can be indicated
Joint methodologies for work with adolescents, the cultural participation of NNA in fields
Community, reproductive health, gender and sexual rights, responsible use of technologies, between
others. Providing the personnel involved in the development of the set of initiatives is recognized as a step
fundamental in the achievement and maintenance of the expected changes. In interviews they also
Recognize as an important aspect:
“I think we arrive very strengthened today by all training, training and one's own
Experience we have acquired all these years. I can talk about the year 1995 when chance took us to
create the experience of museum classrooms, at all these years of conformation and maintenance of
Our actions in time. (…) It has been a stage of strengthening and we have one million things left
to do, but that we must continue looking for people to continue acquiring knowledge ”
(Specialist of the Subdirectorate of Cultural Management)
Similarly, the joint construction of work methodologies between institutions has allowed the
Formation of important products that viable, organize and facilitate network work. It has
Manual of standards and procedures and educational work folder with methodological orientations for
the design, planning, development and evaluation processes of cultural actions, and a guide
Methodological for the elaboration of sociocultural projects. Even with a adjusted survey model
to public, whose model appears in the annexes of the evaluation. This requirement is met.
2.6 What level of capabilities has the adult and adult team acquired who have participated in the
project for the promotion and guarantee of transformation and constitution of protective environments for
Nna?
Since the project, capacities have been generated in adults who guarantee environments
Protectors The training of personnel working in the development of actions is considered important
that pay the protective environments. The data show that, although most people involved
They have a higher or university educational level, they do not always have academic training in the issues
related to the project. In some spaces this formation coincides with the role they perform. Of the total of
Workshop and specialists who answered the questionnaire, most are women (67%) with level
University schooling (75%).
40
Graph 12. Workshop and volunteers by sex and workshops and volunteers by level of
schooling
1 upper level or
University
3 Medium Technician
13 women 6
Average level
27 men 30
Pre -university
Source: Preparation of the evaluation team
The new acquired capabilities enable according to the narrative of the specialists surveyed
guarantee the protective environment where they develop their activities. For example, most people
surveyed (57%) replied that they would assume institutional measures in the event that they were attending the
Activities with visible body lesions. These measures include contacting competent personnel,
Say the personnel working in the school addresses or with the psychologist of the Center A+. They would mediate in
case of situations of aggression (70%); and would take proactive and accompaniment measures in case
The NNA goes to them requesting help (84%). In the event that NNA is shown hyperactive and/or with
Difficulties of attention, would seek a useful activity and not proceed to control the child (53%). Among the
People surveyed, a single person referred to control.
Graph 13. Actions indicated by workshop and volunteers in the absence of certain
situations.
90% 84%
80% 74%
70%
70%
57%
60% 53%
50% 43%
40%
30% 30%
26%
30%
17%
20%
10%
6%
10%
0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0%
0%
AGGRESSION SITUATION VISIBLE INJURIES IN A HELP A HELP BY INCIDENCE OF INCIDENCE OF
From one child to another part of the child behavior behavior
Retrayed hyperactive
Mediation measures proactive and accompaniment measures
Institutional measures disciplinary measures
Source: Preparation of the evaluation team
In the interviews, reference was also made to this topic of control, from the knowledge that favors the
Constitution of protective environments:
“Control is a slightly more authoritarian concept, more vertical and I believe that what we are looking for in that
Protective environment is the possibility of actively participating, to dialogue, which is a concept that has
that evolving in the whole city, in society all (…) to give that access security, but, that
Control cannot be an authoritarian, vertical concept that oppresses. When it becomes a
oppression is no longer a protective environment ”(Cultural Management Specialist)
41
It is also confirmed in the workshop with specialists from the classroom specialists the desire for new learning about
certain themes that could favor the constitution of protective environments, such as some
Psychology elements, as well as techniques and methods for child teaching. Is identified as necessary
also, to have personnel prepared for psychological care not only to NNA but of support to
adult people who accompany them. However, a physical care referral route is not recognized
or psychological, especially in case of the NNs that are used once situations of
danger or risks of violence.
The acquisition of capacities has allowed over time to increase the number of actions and
initiatives for NNA, of the number of workshops, training and learning to function
In the virtual environment, necessary for all the activities generated in the pandemic.
2.7 What alliances and inter -institutional collaborations (actors and sectors, roles, forms of integration)
They constituted and how they facilitate or limit the constitution of safe and protective environments in the
project frame?
For the scope of the expected results from the project, an essential activity that has won the
Chain of changes in time for the formation of protective environments has been and continues to be the
Establishment of important and sustained alliances between different institutions and organizations. According to
The specialists interviewed claim, all the actors involved have the same purpose, that
translates into empowering children as subjects of law, which they feel like they can and should participate,
that they perceive that they are really involved, that they are accepted, valued and with confidence to decide in
The framework of the spaces that have been previously established for them. “Sometimes not
It is so much necessary that whoever interacts with NNA is a very trained person, it is necessary to be sensitive
For work with them, to understand them, to treat them with love, with respect, without shouting them ”(expert
interviewed).
The recognition and sustained work developed from the Child and Adolescent Social Program with the
step of the years, has allowed to expand the spectrum of systematic institutions and links in the
Exchange of new experiences and methodologies for work with NNA. Strategic alliances are
They have formed at different levels. “I believe that the main alliance throughout this process has been with
Education, with the Municipal Directorate of Education. It is a basic alliance for everyone
The projects, in fact, in any different action, a specific project, the same orchestra
Symphony, we reconcile with education, because we also have to be responsible for the project
that we do, that they are of the knowledge of the educational authority, and of acceptance and validation for its
part. It is a constant dialogue process. That I think has been the first alliance. Then with the
Intendance, with the government of the municipality, and with the different ministries that from the sector that
represent and with their various agencies support us in the development of all
Activities ”(Specialist of the Sub -Directorate of Cultural Management).
Much of the workshops are linked to the initiatives voluntarily, it is impossible to fix
Then a number of how many have been linked in total to the initiative. "I think they are all alliances
Important, in fact, a project support group itself was established in the adolescence project
which are those we call right now to develop the workshops, because we have no financing
To pay a teacher's teacher. We really do it for the provision, for collaboration, and in
That sense alliances grow constantly. It is what has allowed the sustainability of the project,
In this case especially. Right now most of the workshops we did in the summer, were possible
For alliances with institutions, with personalities that made these workshops possible
will carry out ”(Specialist of the Sub -Directorate of Cultural Management).
42
In the same way, the work carried out by the research centers and the academy in the processes is recognized
of training of specialists who are linked to the project, and of course with international cooperation
through the facilities offered from the decentralized management process itself that characterizes
The OHC. “… UNICEF's role has been decisive since the accompaniment of creation and
conformation of these spaces, I believe that where we most felt the accompaniment of UNICEF was in
the project to strengthen the integral training of adolescence in old Havana and the
creation of the center. ”Another valuable relationship is with the different local development projects that work
today in the territory and also pay all the initiatives implemented.
A very important product within the change chain has been the constitution of the network
Inter -institutional for the integral development of adolescence (Ridia) coordinated by the Center A+
Adolescent spaces that brings together the work of a significant number of institutions that appear listed
as part of the annexes of this evaluation. The set of these institutions and organizations is part
of a protection system that is characterized by intersectorality, a very high degree of formalization
of its practices and a preventive and social approach. Work then allows organizing activities
cultural such as exhibitions, concerts, contests; as well as to share knowledge, tools
and experiences at work for and with children and adolescent.
2.8 How have the monitoring and feedback processes developed during implementation
of the project in the analyzed period?
The set of activities that are carried out throughout the year is subject to internal monitoring processes
with a monthly, quarterly and annual periodicity. According to Dan, the specialists interviewed tell the
monitoring is done through a report of the sociocultural activity that includes type of
Activity, type of public, number of participants, specialist in charge of the activity, observations. In
The case of questionnaires there are two models, one that applies to NN up to 6 years that must fill the
family that accompanies them in the activity, and the other model that includes the person who participates, greater than
6 years old. An assistance report is also recognized that is then processed to establish statistics
of participation. The Cultural Management Specialists of the Office participate in this activity. From
This monitoring the specialists interviewed realize that adjustments are produced in the programming per year
following, taking into consideration those most requested workshops by NNA. In it
case of the initiatives that are developed throughout the school year, the specialists evaluate to show
achievements and processes of initiatives in the same period and in time.
The information provided by all the interviewees allows us to affirm that there is a process of
monitoring of all the initiatives that are carried out by the project, however, there is no
evidence at the time of forming the report on how the feedback process occurs, say
The adjustment of programming and communication strategies, depending on achieving greater
Participation in the various workshops and spaces convened for NNA. Hence it is considered that
requirement is met partially.
2.9. Does the implementation of the project adapt to the changes produced in the context demonstrate
During the execution period?
The project and its actions have been able to adapt to the set of changes produced in the action context
in which it has developed. The initiatives arose from the need to adapt the work agendas to
the isolation circumstances imposed by the Covid-19 pandemic to guarantee the continuity of
the processes and actions that are directly taxed to the protection of NNA. The activities and workshops are
They developed taking advantage of virtual environments, mainly the WhatsApp platform and the channel of
43
Telegram enabled, which could be verified through evidence of these workshops on the network (photos of
WhatsApp).
According to reports reviewed as part of the Routes and Way Project in 2020
They developed 14 workshops on digital platforms, in which a total of 9 institutions were involved in the
Directorate of Cultural Heritage between them: House of Poetry, Planetarium, Center for the Interpretation of
Cuba-Europa Cultural Relations (Palace of the Second Cape), Quinta de los Molinos, showcase of
Valonia, José Martí's home house, Hispano -American Cultural Center, Casa de Africa and the Subdirectorate
of cultural management. Another of the activities recognized by the specialists as more significant during
The confinement stage was the virtual workshop “Living adolescence in Covid-19:
promoting good practices from culture as a protective environment ”, in three editions. The initiative
arose from the need to adapt the work agenda to the insulation circumstances imposed on
cause of COVID-19, in order to guarantee the continuity of processes and actions that directly tax
NNA protection. In 2021 a total of 21 moderate workshops were implemented in real time
By specialists, 1 on Telegram and the rest by WhatsApp. By way of tutorials, on the social network Facebook,
13 initiatives were deployed by the center A+ adolescent spaces and the planetarium of Havana.
Of these proposals, 31 aimed at infants and adolescents. This year the first edition was held
Virtual workshop children's guides coordinated by several institutions: house of green tiles,
Santo Domingo de Atarés Castle Museum and the Cultural Management Center. One of its main achievements
was being oriented to infants resident in Miramar and the popular advice tallapiedra and Jesús
María, places where the workshop promoting institutions are located.
For example, in 2021, more than 70 % of NNA that joined the workshops by the platforms
Digital participated in 2 to 5 of these initiatives, recognizing the variety and interesting of the themes
that were addressed, according to the information from the opinion states that emerged that year
(PSIA CLOSURE REPORT 2021)
2.10 How effective are the communication and dissemination strategies of initiatives?
Initiative communication strategies are effective according to the people interviewed. HE
They manage from the Communication Department of the Sub -Directorate of Cultural Management where they exist
professionals from various disciplines linked to the development of this activity.
From there public studies are carried out, the dissemination of activities is implemented through various
supports and media such as Habana Radio radio station, in magazines like “With Can You Take the Game Vara and
with a hat ”dedicated to communicating the work that is carried out from the institutions from the institutions
Cultural of the OHC, "Adolescent Magazine" and in printed supports such as the Cultural Program of the OHC.
In addition, they use various social networks and WhatsApp and Telegram groups, as well as the Havana website
Cultural. An official page on Instagram @Espacios AdolesCuba and a Telegram channel was created.
According to the closing reports reviewed, the most recognized route through which they know
of the diversity of initiatives and services is the cultural program of the OHC (70%), in a second place to
through friends and family (54%), and thirdly on the web (32%). However, diffusion through
of the mass media is still considered insufficient (12%) when it could be a resource
Better used for its level of scope.
3. Sustainability Criteria
1. How sustainable is the project from the temporal point of view once external support ends
What currently has the availability of resources and what are its limitations?
The project is considered to be sustainable once external support for various reasons ends. HE
evidence in interviews conducted in the solidity of the work developed throughout the
44
years through the program of workshops and very diverse services that are coordinated from the territory. HE
recognizes a high degree of formalization of the practices that have enabled the stability of the actions
In time, its recognition and social legitimacy that transcends the space of the territory of Havana
Old.
Another element that points to sustainability is the favorable perception of the work done, from the
recognition of international authorities following the conception of the institution and good management
of the project. The project can continue taking advantage of the set of comparative advantages offered by the
OHC to implement and develop actions of this nature, being inserted in a dynamic
individual administrative and fiscal management of the local government of Old Havana.
The human resource is recognized as an essential aspect in the possibilities of sustainability of the
long -term experience, for their level of identification, responsibility and commitment to work
performed. The permanence of the billed personnel as part of the institutions and volunteer that
It is linked every year without receiving any material benefit or remuneration is an aspect
decisive to point out. This element contains nuances, then, although it is evident of the interest in working
With NNA, and the commitment to the processes, 50% of the people surveyed consider as a
Risk The voluntary nature of workshops.
On the other hand, the use and management of the financial resources provided was carried out efficiently and
strategic The purchase of equipment, the enabling of spaces and new technologies
To carry out the actions with a better quality and incidence in the public towards which the
activities. According to the questionnaires, specialists consider that constant support is required
of institutions that finance or guarantee the development of activities, which may constitute a
Limitation for the process. However, those who occupy the positions of greater responsibility within the
Project consider that there is resilience capacity to overcome difficulties (if presenting)
Regarding economic resources, from the inventiveness and agency of the specialists or the actors in
pro of the development of the activities. In this sense, it is affirmed:
“It has been done with funds and without funds (…) the historian's office has had accompaniment in
certain moments of the process, of cooperation, but that has not been the impulse (...) we
We have a solidity, that is, without being invested in this from the external contribution there was already a
Work result. So that indicates that it is a basis for sustainability (...) not just material support
It makes these processes possible. Because we have done many of these with the minimum conditions
indispensable, by the way in which it is conceived within the operating structure of the
Office, which has that responsibility, that mission. (…) When the project of the Museo Non -Classrooms emerged
There was no international financing for this project, and was born in difficult conditions, in plenary
Restoration process and was possible ”(Specialist of the Subdirectorate of Cultural Management).
It should be noted that the OHC is a budgeted unit of the Cuban State. This implies that it offers a contribution
local to the development of the project that constitute both human and material resources (salaries, services,
local) for the development of activities. Similarly, it supports relations with other entities of the
International cooperation. Another element that constitutes a limitation is the constructive state of
Some spaces that imply not open a museum classroom during a course, as evidenced in the workshop
of systematization, or the need for maintenance due to the absence of current water, matters of
plumbing or others of this nature, which hinder work in these spaces.
“We live in old buildings with moisture, with impairment for time, where sometimes not
Restoration or maintenance can arrive at the right time, because resources are required
Very specialized, and sometimes there is a process that we have had to close. (…) That has been I created the
45
Fundamental limitation. It has been the investor and maintenance processes of our spaces "
(Specialist of the Subdirectorate of Cultural Management).
It is valid to mention that, in the course of the evaluation, 11 classrooms were in operation
Museum, so there is an institutional will that this experience remains, and they are carried out
diverse efforts to advance repair. However, as indicated by the theory of change, the
Impossibility of acquiring resources can limit the process, aspect that can be related to
United States block impacts against Cuba, identified as one of the risks.7
identifies as a limitation the absence of necessary implements to attend NNA in case of needing
first aid.
1.1 Does the project have trained and prepared personnel to assume design tasks,
update, implementation and monitoring of activities, as well as to irradiate such knowledge
to the community environment and its radius of action? And with professional technical support to sustain the
staff training?
The project staff is trained and their training is diverse, which allows you to assume tasks that go
From the design, update, implementation and monitoring of activities. The questionnaires and
interviews showed that training goes from the humanities, exact sciences to science
Social. Most have a higher or university educational level and be linked 4 to 9 years in their
task. Other people in less proportion have linked from 1 to 3 years and finally 10 people carry
more than 10 years linked.
The strengthening of professional, institutional and community capacities, based on actions of
Training to the diversity of actors, allows to assume with responsibility and commitment the tasks of
Prevention, promotion and attention to NNA in its different areas of action. The personnel formed has
acquired necessary tools from participation in training during the period
evaluated. The evidence shows the approach of themes such as the prevention of violence, socialization
positive, the responsible use of ICTs, issues on the attention to NNA in vulnerability, the
confrontation to situations such as the one caused from Covid 19, with a gender and rights approach.
For example, between 2018 and 1019, he realizes 35 training, 22 in 2018 and 13 in 2019,
In topics such as popular education, inclusion of adolescents with special educational needs,
Mental health and peace schools. In the effectiveness criteria other data were offered that enrich this
Aspect of training, relating other issues addressed. It is worth saying that the evaluation team
does not count at the time of delivery of the report with total data of the number of professionals who have
Received training and disaggregated by sex.
These training processes are favored by the establishment of alliances with various
institutions and organizations, which constitute professional technical support for their support. They
contribute to training and accompaniment in themes of interest to training staff,
what is verified in the evaluation through the documentary review and the interviews conducted.
1.2 What strategies are developed to guarantee and promote the permanence of the staff and their
Commitment to the objectives, populations and project activities?
7 The United States blocking against Cuba constitutes a commercial, economic and financial siege imposed from the
February 7, 1962. Throughout these years, the damages caused by the block ascend to 154 217, 3 million
dollars The blockade implies or set of sanctions that prevent trade, transactions and exchanges of diverse
nature with Cuba. The current Biden government has maintained the majority of the 243 measures applied by Donald Trump
Against the island, with the intention of generating material and shortage in general, which affects dissimilar areas of the
daily life of Cuban and Cubans. Information available at:
http://www.cubadebate.cu/especial/2022/10/21/cuba-en-datos-como-se-cuenta-el-l
46
Actions are not properly developed to promote the permanence of personnel. Without
However, in interviews it is explained that from the OHC human resources, actions are carried out,
For example, care strategies for training with a view to promoting their learning and
overcoming The establishment of links within the work teams is recognized as a
element that favors the permanence of the staff. This benefits the design and implementation of actions
of the project, given the accumulated knowledge, the experience in the community environment and its possibilities of
Socialize learning with younger people in experience.
1.3 How does environmental sustainability guarantee and promote the project?
Another element that points to sustainability is related to the environmental approach and how the actions that
They develop are environmentally friendly. In this sense it is valid to emphasize that from the
Project actions are implemented that include awareness in workshops, actions that allow the
NNA interaction in spaces such as the ecological classroom within the ecological garden, in parks, and others for
The care of the built heritage, as well as the environment in which they are daily develop. In the
face -to -face and virtual workshops intentions care for the environment, for example, with the use of
recycled materials and talks about the importance of vertical gardens in urban contexts. This
Information was obtained from interviews and documentary review. At the time of evaluation, no
This information is available in terms of total participants disaggregated by sex. However,
The evidence allows my action for the planet to be placed as an example, made between 26 and 30
April 2021, with the intention of enhancing adolescents for communicative production
on issues related to climate change and RRD, and promote reflection on their participation
in mitigation and adaptation to climate change. It was performed virtually by the platform
Telegram, and led to learning on vulnerabilities to climate change in Cuba, as well as
Adaptation and mitigation commitments. The workshop motivated the collective construction of products
communicative with interesting and attractive language to place these issues creatively in networks
social.
1.4 Are there areas of intervention clearly unsustainable?
There was no unsustainability element within the framework of the territory of Old Havana. However,
The particularities of this territory must be taken into consideration when explaining these experiences
in other territories that do not have equal normative frameworks. This can be considered a limiting
when replicating the project in other territories.
1.5 What elements are considered favorable and replicable in the implementation of the project and that
Are good practices to keep in time?
Regarding elements that are considered favorable and replicable in the implementation of the project and that
Good practices are to keep in time, the different methods applied show that:
-The experience is replicable by the relevance and utility of its social mission, because the
knowledge that manages to convey to NNA in terms of empowerment, equity and rights, and because
There are spaces and personnel interested in other territories, which could join this type of activities.
47
Figure 14. Potential for replicability of experience
80% 70% 65%
60%
40%
40%
13%
20%
0%
relevance and utility importance of demand in other spaces and personnel
of your social mission knowledge interested
transmitted
Source: Preparation of the evaluation team
- Strategic objectives, projections and forms of work, as well as the logic of the process that goes from
activities until the effects expressed in the theory of change, are elements to be shared, which can be
Readequate to the diversity of scenarios and possibilities of each locality, in the intention to create and
Hold protective environments for NNA.
- In the same way, the training program that allows permanent training can be replicable
of personnel linked to the set of activities. Also the form of efficient use of
resources that have been contributed by cooperation.
- Several tools are identified that can be adapted and replicated in other contexts. Tell yourself, by
example, the educational work folder, repositories with audiovisual material, computer material,
The elaborated didactic material. Similarly publications and documentation that allow guiding
Methodologically work.
- The experience of the museum classrooms constitutes a favorable element that can be replicated, having in
Tell the positive results for NN that influence the development of capacities and
acquired skills, which favors comprehensive training. In the reconstruction of the case
They identified other good practices of the case, deployed in section 8.2, corresponding to their
study.
8.2. Presentation of the case study: the museum classrooms as a case
Project copy.
The Museum Classroom project emerges in 1995 at the initiative of the historian of the Eusebio Leal city. The
Noises produced by repairs in the Plaza Vieja prevented NN concentration in schools
closer. Given the need to continue the school year in better conditions, a change is decided
Transitory of premises, from the most affected classrooms to two museums of the Historic Center. The good ones
results obtained by the NN as part of this initial experience incited to the extension of the
Initiative over time, implying the rotation of the municipality's schools by the different institutions,
Like museums, promoting the linking of curricula with learning programs
informal. When an unprecedented pedagogical experience is considered today, given the excellent results
that they have been able not only to the behavior and abilities acquired of NN, but in the
Improvement of school efficiency indicators such as assistance and punctuality, performance
Academic and in general the quality of learning in NN, it was decided to choose this initiative as a case of
study.
From the review of the annual reports of the Child and Adolescent Social Program of the years that
Understand the evaluation we could verify that, until the arrival of the pandemic, the NNs increased that
48
They were part of this initiative and also the links with new institutions, with a view to guaranteeing the
Effective development of the strategy.
Figure 15. Number of museum classrooms and students according to years
Source: Preparation of the evaluation team
It is necessary to remember that, as already explained in the evaluation, the evaluation team could not access
nn, so the information obtained is limited to the perspective of adults about the
process. To address the case study, a workshop was carried out from the systematization methodology of
experiences. The workshop allowed the reconstruction of experience from the experiences of thirteen specialists
(See Annex 9). Stages were identified, the intervening factors that favored and hindered the
process, future challenges, as well as elements that were good practices and that should continue
implementing. In this reconstruction of experiences, questions were also intended for the
Indirect access to information on the participation and empowerment of NNA from the project.
The identified stages were: a first when the NN arrives at the institutions begins their
training. A second from which changes of behaviors are appreciated from the
work done, where NN accept and identify the environment, and a third stage when they leave the classroom
Museum, and the results can be appreciated, and teachers receive recognition from NN
and his parents for the work done.
“The three stages are not always obviously seen. If the formation cycles are longer
because the results are better, when the NNs are for three years, for example, the
Results, if they change years after year it is not the same. Improvement is appreciated, but it is never the same as when I know
Spend a longer time being part of the experience. You note the changes, they come out with greater
knowledge, greater responsibility. Teachers have time to interact and work on the
Child, transmit your knowledge. The time within the institution is very important ”(specialist
of Asia's house)
Next, the main elements that favor and hinder the development of the
Initiative according to the criteria of specialists:
49
Elements that favor
Commitment of specialists to exercise responsible work.
Provision of teachers who are linked to experience.
Local with good physical conditions, outdoor spaces and
Resources, enabled for activities, play and snack.
The work sustained for more than a school year to appreciate
changes.
The family that gets involved in activities.
Take activities from institutions to circles and schools.
Positive experiences in behavioral changes and
NN learning.
Elemets that hinder
The work that is
Perform in the museum classroom.
The closure of a museum classroom due to repair.
Absence of first aid kit.
Figure 2. Elements that favor and hinder the development of museum classrooms
Among the main challenges according to specialists are recognized:
● Strengthen alliances between museum classrooms and school institutions. It is explained that in the
most spaces This alliance becomes effective and works very well, in others
Value the positive benefit of the Museum Classroom for NN, which can sometimes limit visits
To museums for the development of activities. In the latter case, some schools are
distant from the historic center and the lack of transport conditions the possibility of participating in the
activities. In the closing reports of the year it is recognized that the staff of teachers is not
completely covered, therefore, on many occasions they are not enough to make these
Transfers
● Achieve deeper training in issues such as psychological care, techniques and
Methods for child teaching, which level the training received by these specialists in
relation to others that are also part of the project, such as those linked to A+ and
belonging to the Subdirectorate of Cultural Management.
● Have psychological advice (for example, psychopedagogues) that accompanies emotionally not
only to students but also to teachers.
● Prioritize the constructive arrangements of the institutions where the classrooms are located
Museums
The figure below gives accounts of the elements recognized by specialists that allow the
Constitution of museum classrooms as protective environments, and also taxed the formation
of the theory of change.
50
Preparation
ón del
staff
Work
Interaction with
In alliance people
Elements to work in
With the institution
Education The work of cultural
Museum classrooms.
Around
protective
Social intention.
Conditions
Reason
Physical Local
Historical
pleasant
cultural for
adjusted to nn
approach nn
Figure 3. Elements that allow museum classrooms to constitute environments
Protectors
The experience of the museum classrooms constitutes a favorable element that can be replicated, having in
Tell the positive results for NN that are evident in the development of capacities and skills
acquired, which favors its integral formation.
Within the experience of the museum classrooms, the following elements identified by
Workshop specialists, as good practices to share:
● The maintenance of the same NN group during more school courses in the museum classroom, allows
Observe greater changes and transformations.
● The use of novel techniques and dynamics, such as dramatizations of José Martí's works,
Games, contests, with different topics than usual, encourage participation and increase
The motivation of NN and teachers.
● NN participation in museum's own activities, stimulates study, improves learning
and intergenerational integration with the personnel working in the institution. Integrate them
Cultural of the museum, makes them participants in the management and safeguard of heritage.
● Generate interactive teamwork activities, and spaces from artistic manifestations
such as African theater or other literature and painting; Power values, develops its general culture
Integral, motivates them, develops communicative capabilities and sensitivity towards heritage
Cultural historical.
● It is also considered a good practice, the systematic participation of children and adolescents
in training processes and of different creative nature in which they are empowered and acquired
learning, because then they become workshop in these processes, favoring the
continuity of experience.
● Another good practice is the use of existing participation spaces for the
Constitution of protective environments, such as those that make up the institutional network of the OHC.
51
9. Change theory
The project evaluated did not have a theory of its own change explicitly, but it was inserted
Within the logic of the TDC that responds to the UNICEF programmatic protection component. The TDC
which is shown on the following page, it illustrates not only the sequence of changes in the execution time of the
project, but those activities and products that could be incorporated into this sequence of change, which
They will allow a better achievement of effects and impacts. The graphic places what should be maintained and
in which new activities put the emphasis, according to the analyzes from the evaluation.
As can be seen, the purpose of TDC implies the existence of childhood protective environments and
Adolescence On the way that travels the project to reach these impacts, activities are generated
of training, articulation, communication, creation of spaces, services and supplies for work, which
They favor the achievement of results in a shorter and longer -term NNA. They can be incorporated into these
other activities such as the adequacy and use of communicative products that include a derivation route
For NNA at risk of violence, as well as management to enable a first aid kit in the
Project spaces. The products indicate achievements in terms of the acquisition of
Professional and institutional capacities, work tools, NNA capacities, alliances,
communicative products and resources that favor the protective environment, among other aspects. With respect
For the purposes, it is worth saying that the results proposed in the formulation of the project are maintained, and
They identify two other related effects, which emanate from the analysis of project practices. On the whole
They pay the impacts, in dialogue with the programmatic component of the UNICEF country program.
It could be verified how the training processes that have been developed in topics of diverse interest
previously cited in other sections have resulted as a qualified and prepared personnel for the
Process conduction. In this sense, it was proposed to enrich this preparation promoting a
greater participation of museum classroom specialists, as well as teachers and teachers, these processes of
training, as well as the development of a permanence strategy for voluntary people who are
They involve the project, leads to the achievement that these people get involved, maintaining their stability
for commitment and motivation for the purposes of the project. This also favorably affects that
NNA acquire capacities and achieve positive socialization, because by enhancing knowledge of
people in charge of activities, there is a better conduction of learning spaces, with the
Acquisition of tools that favor work with NNA. These tools are also acquired to
from the use of methodological norms, procedures and instruments that guide the
I work with these groups, since they are adjusted instruments for work with those ages. All this taxes
directly to the effect related to the strengthening of capacities ranging from the personal
to the institutional and to a lesser extent the community, favoring the formation of environments
Protectors, from gender and rights approaches, learning for NNA work with needs
special educational, as well as the use of ICTs, which have been an essential element due to
Impacts of Covid 19.
The development of workshops in both school and vacation times, face -to -face and virtual, power
that nna are empowered, acquiring diverse abilities that allow them to improve their relationships, their life
school, encourage their independence and values, as well as the knowledge and exercise of their rights, which
They constitute long -term profits by acquiring a preparation on the different topics. Similarly, the
creation of the A+ center and the existence of other created spaces that are used for realization
Of activities since the purposes of the project, it favorably affects NNA. Therefore it is also conducive
the increase in the participation of pregnant and nna adolescents who have committed facts that law
typifies as crimes in project activities, as it implies that these vulnerable groups can
52
develop in safe and positive socialization environments, as well as acquire capacities and skills
that due to their own conditions they could be more limited. These benefits also apply to creation
of the fifth space for inclusion, aimed at NNA with special educational needs. This achieved,
In addition to generating a space adjusted to the needs of NNA with special capacities, creation
of the project touring roads for social inclusion, which has favored training and employment to
This specific group.
On the other hand, the knowledge of a care route for nna at risk of violence, thus
As the possibility of having a first aid kit and knowledge about its use, it can favor
the institutional articulation and the maintenance of safe environments.
The creation of counseling services impacts the development of healthy mental health and a
positive socialization, constituting emotionally safe spaces in which they feel in confidence.
These environments are also generators of joints and alliances for collective work based on
related objectives. Alliances are built as part of the training dynamics, with personnel
external with experience in themes of interest to the project, voluntary people who join for
coordinate workshops or other activities of different nature, which positively impact both the
strengthening of long -term capacities, professionals and institutional, as in the preparation of
NNA.
On the other hand, the formation of communicative products allows to reflect their interests, develop
capacities and skills from prominence, which favors the exercise of their rights. The products
They imply greater knowledge and recognition of the public about the practices that are carried out,
motivating from the call and giving visibility and legitimacy to the spaces. These activities and
products are taxed by effective preparation on various issues through training, as well as
their participation in spaces that, due to their conception and design, prepared personnel, content addressed and
Work dynamics, become comprehensive protection spaces. The acquisition of diverse materials
nature generally taxes the existence of resources for the implementation of the project, element
which favors the development of actions of different types, and that is important for this purpose. They are located
Also in the TDC risks that can limit its existence, such as the impacts of the blockade, and the support of
external funds to get them.
The monitoring of activities is essential in obtaining reliable evidence for monitoring
of the project, for relations with the donor, and for feedback, evaluation and processes
systematization of experiences. The correct monitoring favors the quality of institutional management
thus giving recognition, validity and legitimacy to experience. At the same time, prepared staff,
alliances, articulations and evidence of the work done also contribute, giving greater
credibility, solidity and formalization of practices, as a longer term effect. All this constitutes
a route of successive approaches in terms of results achieved, which generates the creation and
maintenance of protective environments for childhood and adolescence. In this process it is also worth having
in account that there are assumptions of the context that can favor escalation, such as priority to
Country level of these themes granted by political support, the comparative advantages of the OHC
and existing regulations that protect these types of processes.
Similarly, it can also be limited by aspects such as those mentioned above
related to resources, emergencies of natural or epidemiological origin (as was the case of the
COVID 19) as well as the maintenance of this generally stable qualified personnel. THE THEORY OF CHANGE
that is presented is a valuable and typical model of the project, which allows you to identify steps
intermediates necessary to achieve the planned impacts. It is a useful tool at this time
53
of the project, because it focuses on those elements in which to place the emphasis when there has not yet
concluded, as well as identifies a probable scaling route for the replicability of experience.
The entire process described above, can be schematized in the TDC adjusted as follows:
54
Figure 4. scheme of the theory of change adjusted for the project “Strengthening of
Protective environments for children and adolescents with a focus on rights and equity in
Old Havana, Cuba. ”
In the previous scheme, blue lines or funds represent the reconstructed theory of change
In the description of the evaluation object, the green line frames constitute those aspects that
After the review of the project, they are considered necessary to be included in the change chain
To achieve the proposed objectives, the violet funds, correspond to confident purposes not
previously identified by the project, but contribute to the achievement of the expected impacts.
10. Conclusions
The following conclusions are structured according to each evaluation criteria, and responding to the
objectives and questions of this.
Conclusions related to evaluation criteria
Relevance criteria.
1.The project is aligned to the programming of the OHC-UNICEF project that advocates the need
to create and strengthen protective environments for old Havana and other territories, from the
consolidation of professional, institutional and community capacities for work with these groups,
from a law and equity approach. The need to take advantage of the spaces of
existing participation of the OHC and its social and adolescent social program.
1.1 The objectives of the project are coherence with the national policies that defend the character
priority of childhood and adolescence as subjects of law and part of the protection processes
social guaranteed by the Cuban State. The country has a set of legal norms that
They frame the NNA Attention Policy, however, so far it does not have a regulation
specific that integrates the policy of the Cuban State towards childhood; either with an entity of character
Binding national that addresses the problems that affect the well -being of NNA.
1.2 The proposal takes into consideration elements of the context, intervention strategies, as well as
The schedule of activities. From here justified, guides and organizes its execution. Equal
form takes into consideration the needs of the territory of Old Havana.
1.3 There is correspondence between the conceptual framework of the project, the set of actions designed
and then implemented for the scope of the expected results in the short, medium and long term. Without
However, the project suffers from a limited coherence between indicators and verification sources.
1.4 The project framework incorporates the transversalization of equity, vulnerability, law axes
and environment.
1.5 From the design, the need for monitoring processes in terms of
Feedback to the set of activities that are summoned to improve or enrich
The work in its practical implementation.
Effectiveness criteria
1. As for the scope of the target population and coverage, it can be said that the project has been inclusive
taking into account variables such as sex, territory and skin color. But it has been partially inclusive in
Relationship to groups in disability or social disadvantage. In terms of target population
There is correspondence between the total population that will benefit and the NNA in disability.
However, in some activities such as creation workshops, the percentage of teenagers benefited
in a situation of disability or social disadvantage is well below the target population that was
benefited by this activity.
55
1.1 The design starts from a universal perspective that declares that all children can participate and be
benefited from all activities and services. Open calls are made to which
NNA of all territories can be presented, even from other provinces of the country. For generation
From the short, medium and long term changes, a set of activities and services are developed that
You can take advantage of the territory during the school year, and out of the territory in period
summer. The beginning of these initiatives dates back to 1995 with the creation of the museum classrooms. Without
However, this perspective could be contemplated with a look or focus of diversity, where from the
design intentions with certain groups (those in disability or in
social disadvantage, as is the case of adolescents in a period of gestation, children who have committed
facts that the law typifies as crimes)
1.2 An intergenerational, community integration approach is promoted, which includes population
disaggregated by sex and age, in a situation of disability and with special educational needs.
Hence, actions are promoted for the scope of this purpose as intergenerational workshops.
Now, several levels are recognized in relation to family participation; a level that intensates that
The activities link NNA with their family and friends to strengthen ties and generate new
learning and another level that encourages the independence of adolescents from the enjoyment of
spaces created only for them, where they can feel free to participate, to express themselves, foster
ties or winning in greater independence. In addition, they can seek help or advice in case of needing it.
2. In relation to the transformations that constitute improvements in the constitution of protective environments
For nna both from the physical and emotional point of view, it can be said that the activities observed
They meet all levels of a protective environment, from the physical, emotional point of view, of the staff
involved, and participation of NNA.
2.1 It can be affirmed that there is a positive balance between the before and after the
diversity of actions from the project, based on the impacts generated in the long term on the
Young people over 19 who were surveyed. Gain is recognized in terms of new
skills and knowledge especially in terms of rights, in the possibility of expressing themselves of
more creative way and feel more integrated and accepted socially, in recognizing and power
face situations of violence, in being more independent and with their own, in the
possibility of sharing with others in safe environments, and in winning in greater independence and
Responsibility for the development of activities in their personal and academic life. From the point
of constructive physical view of the majority of the institutions where the initiatives are developed and
They offer project services have been prepared and prepared for their development,
although it is important to note that some aspects of physical security with implications for
NNA integrity are not sufficiently guaranteed, say for example the attention of first
Aid in case of accident.
2.2 The project is inserted in promoting the OHC gender approach. The
implementation of diverse actions that promote their transversalization, such as processes of
Training, planning and development of activities with an inclusive approach.
2.3 The different actions and initiatives developed by the project have promoted profit and
Social integration in NNA from promoting new knowledge, prioritizing lines
considered strategic such as vocational guidance, education with rights perspective
and values, sex and reproductive education, artistic education, incorporating approaches
Transversal such as equity, disability, rights, gender and social participation. It has
promoted in the self -care and mental health states in crisis environments, and I have
56
enhanced the prevention of psychological well -being from a multiple alterative approach and
positive vision.
2.4 NNA have acquired new knowledge and skills from being part of the set
of the initiatives that are developed by the project. Changes of
behavior, positive transformations in your behavior, improvements in your projection and are
Socialized with new values. It is important to note that this information comes from
narrative of the people who were interviewed.
2.5 The project guarantees throughout the period evaluated training processes of the
specialists, volunteers, teachers and teachers and other personnel linked to the set of
activities. In the period a total of 48 training and assistance to 23 events are recognized
national and international. The above has allowed the formation of work products
important that viable, organize and guide network work, for example, the manual of
Standards and procedures, methodological guide for the elaboration of cultural projects and folder
of educational work. However, these training do not benefit in the same way
Museum Classroom Specialists and Center Specialists and Management Sub -Directorate
cultural.
2.6 It is recognized by the specialists that the NNA give acquired new
knowledge and skills in their integration into the diversity of initiatives, which put into practice
Not only in school space, but in activities that develop independently
as the radio program with you are +.
2.7 An outstanding aspect of the project has been its projection to coordinated work and in alliances
that develop at all levels; In the period studied, new ones have joined every year
actors, institutions and organizations that enrich the work dedicated to NNA.
2.8 It is recognized as essential to carry out monitoring processes to all activities
and services implemented, based on evaluation models that have also been prepared by
The specialists linked to the project. It is claimed that from these activities there is a
feedback process that implies improving programming and communication strategies,
depending on attracting a greater amount of public to activities.
2.9 Another meritorious aspect has been the adaptation of the project to the changes produced during the
Period that contemplates the evaluation, say the arrival of the pandemic. The activities and workshops are
They developed taking advantage of virtual environments, mainly the WhatsApp platform and the
Telegram channel enabled.
2.10 The cultural program of the OHC and social networks are considered
fundamental communication and dissemination of the initiatives that are convened from the project. HE
Consider that mass communication spaces such as TV and radio should be better
used to reach a greater amount of public given its wide range.
Sustainability criteria
1. It is considered that the project is sustainable due to the strength of the work developed over the years,
The high degree of formalization of the practices implemented, the recognition granted by authorities
international validating the work, the comparative advantages of OHC herself to implement and
develop actions of this type, the human resources trained linked to the development of the project and
The good use of financing for the development of actions. Among the limitations of the project are
They find the voluntary nature of many workshops that are linked to the initiatives, the
absence of support by the institutions that finance or guarantee the development of lagoons
57
activities, the poor constructive state of some spaces and the absence of implements
necessary to attend NNA if you need first aid.
1.1. The personnel linked to the project are trained and their training is diverse. Its
level of identification, responsibility and commitment to the work done. The data show that
The majority of people linked to the project at work with NNA have a
Higher or university educational level. The permanence of the billed personnel as part of
the institutions and volunteering that is linked every year without receiving any benefit
o Material remuneration is a decisive aspect to point. Training processes are
They favor the establishment of intersectoral alliances that constitute technical support
professionals to support training processes
1.2 Among the fundamental strategies developed from the project is the training
constant personnel involved which allows you to assume with responsibility and commitment the
Prevention, promotion and attention tasks in different areas of intervention. He
Personnel have acquired necessary tools from participation in training process
during the period evaluated. The joint construction of work methodologies between the
Diversity of institutions linked to the project has enabled the formation of important
and innovative products that viable and strengthen network work. From the resource office
OHC humans are carried out actions, for example, care strategies for young people in
Training with a view to promoting your learning and overcoming.
1.3 The project implements actions on environmental sustainability that include the
awareness in workshops, actions that allow the interaction of NNA in spaces such as the classroom
which is located in the ecological park, in parks and others with a view to the care of heritage
BUILDING. In many of the workshops taught, care of the environment is intended to
through the contents that are taught.
1.4 No clearly unsustainable areas were found within the framework of the territory that covers
The OHC in Old Havana, but the peculiarities of this territory must be taken in
consideration when applying this experience in other territories that do not have equals
Normative frameworks. This can be considered a limiting when replicating the project in others
territories.
1.5 As replicable elements of the project are: relevance and utility of its mission
social, strategic objectives, projections and forms of work, as well as the logic of the process
that goes from activities to effects expressed in the theory of change, the program of
training that allows the permanent training of personnel linked to the set of
activities, the way of efficient use of resources that have been provided by the
cooperation, tools that allow methodologically to guide work as well as the
Museum classroom experience.
11. Lessons learned
1) the coherence between the design of the actions and the needs of NNA, the previous work developed to
favor of the preservation of cultural historical heritage, with trained personnel and with great commitment
and motivation for their work, and at the same time, with central interest in developing actions of various kinds for the
Integral NNA Development, are basis and guarantee to sustain and boost work, in a Cuba scenario
that defends the equity and rights of NNA as the essence of its policies. Even in a context where
There is no previously defined and formalized childhood policy in all its components.
58
2) The flexibility and adaptability of the people involved in the implementation of the project are
necessary condition for the creation of new work strategies that allow continuing and advancing in
accompaniment to NNA, the adequacy of actions and the development of skills for work in
Changing environments. This was fundamental for work in virtual environments during the period of the
COVID-19, in which the usual face-to-face dynamics were considerably limited. This was a
learning process that contributed new elements to the sustainability of the project, and demonstrated the
Creative capacity against complex scenarios, where it is vital to maintain protective environments for NNA.
3) The establishment of multiactoral and intersectoral alliances, such as work between the OHC and
UNICEF Cuba constitute a fundamental element for the favorable and accurate development of
Knowledge, creation and maintenance of protective environments as in this case the project evaluated.
The articulation of various actors is an essential element that provides diversity to the actions of the
project, demonstrates teamwork, willing to collaborate, creative solutions, opening to different
knowledge and experiences, possibilities for solving problems that respond to the territory in a way
collective, accompaniment in the conception of initiatives and articulation based on solving necks of
bottle that can be generated.
4) The replicability of this particular project towards other institutional territories or conditions is
crossed by the specificities of constitution and operation of the historian's office of the
City. These grant prerogatives in the attraction, management and implementation of cooperation funds
International, which must be considered in the face of scalability assessment of this type of intervention.
12. Recommendations
These recommendations are derived from the conclusions that were reached during the evaluation and were
adjusted and validated in workshop with representatives of the OHC8 and UNICEF involved in them.
They are ordered according to the evaluation criteria that were analyzed in this report, and in their writing
The specific actors responsible for its implementation are explained in bold:
Relevance recommendations:
● The OHC and UNICEF must review the indicators and sources of verification in
correspondence with the results currently described in the documents of the
Project (Urgent Action: 6 months)
Effective Recommendations:
• OHC must include the proposed change theory to monitor project development
taking into account the set of measurable indicators and verification sources that are
consistent with the proposed objectives (urgent action: 6 months)
• The OHC from the information provided by other institutional actors within the territory,
You must update the most needy NNA identification, with a view to maintaining effectiveness
achieved by the project so far (urgent action: 6 months)
• OHC will develop a strategy to promote participation in different activities,
groups with special educational needs and in vulnerability, say for example
pregnant or child teenagers who have committed some fact that the law typifies as crimes.
8 Among the representatives of the OHC and the Project Management participated in the Validation Workshop La official
of UNICEF Protection Program, Cultural Management Specialists of the OHC, from the A+Center,
Humanitarian matters of the OHC, among others.
59
In this sense, it will establish communication with the Municipality Commission. (action
Urgent: 6 months)
● OHC must intention the participation of museum classroom specialists, and teachers and
teachers, in the set of training that are offered to professionals and specialists
linked to the project (urgent action: 6 months)
● OHC must continue to create and strengthen new alliances with other interested institutions
in linking to the activities and initiatives developed from the project (in the medium term: 12
months)
● The OHC will manage together with UNICEF and other instances, such as the Municipal Directorate of
Health, the possibility of enabling a first aid kit for centers related to the project
where activities with NNA are carried out, and develop training on its use. (action
Urgent: 6 months)
● The OHC as a whole with UNICEF must review, adapt and guarantee the use of products
communicative that include a possible path of physical or psychological care a nna
that are identified at a risk of violence. (Urgent action: 6 months)
● The UHC and UNICEF must enhance the formation of the adult team that are involved in the
Activities with NNA, on issues related to violence prevention and the derivation route
before the corresponding entities for their treatment. (Urgent action: 6 months)
Sustainability recommendations:
● The OHC and UNICEF must improve the strategy from the project that promotes the
permanence of volunteering linked to the diversity of initiatives and services (in the medium term:
12 months)
● OHC must deepen the inclusion of the environmental theme as a fundamental object of
NNA training in the different initiatives that are developed from the social program
Infant and adolescent (in the medium term: 12 months)
Other recommendations:
● UNICEF must deepen the work of law before the Cuban government, to continue advancing
in the materialization of a specific policy that identifies as a strategic line the creation and
strengthening of childhood and adolescence protective environments in the country, which serves as
regulatory framework to similar projects that could be materialized in the future in this regard
(Urgent action: 6 months)
● UNICEF must deepen the work of law before the Cuban government so that this potentiates the
mechanisms or normative bases that allow other territories to have similar
possibilities such as those that OHC has to implement projects of this type (access to
financing resources, transform infrastructure and create protective environments) (medium
Term: 12 months).
● UNICEF must establish better coordination in the planning and design processes of the
Evaluations to guarantee access to essential data sources, including NNA's voice;
all of which would raise the level of evaluability of future practices in this regard (action
Urgent: 6 months).
60
13 Evaluation Annexes
ANNEX 1. Terms of reference
Annex 2. Project Evaluability Matrix
ANNEX 3. TABLE OF MODIFICATIONS OF GENERAL AND SUB -QUESTIONS
According to TDR, initial report and final work questions for criteria of
ASSESSMENT
Annex 4 Methodological Procedures for the scope of each objective of
The evaluation
ANNEX 5. Listing documents analyzed and interviewed people
Annex 6. Workshops that were part of the observation
ANNEX 7. places where questionnaires were applied
Annex 8. Information collection instruments
Annex 9. Experiences described by participants of systematization
ANNEX 10. DECLARATION OF INFORMED CONSENT
Annex 11. Protection protocols (identity, data, security)
ANNEX 12. Definitive work schedule
Annex 13. Project results and activities table
ANNEX 14. Institutions and organizations linked to work with the
Child social program
Annex 15. Training for adults and adults involved in the processes of the
PROJECT
Annex 16. Compliance with indicators and subindicators according to criteria of
ASSESSMENT
ANNEX 17. BIBLIOGRAPHY
61