Evaluation of the National Plan of Action for Realization of Children’s rights in Turkmenistan for 2018-2022 (NAP) and
UNICEF’s contribution to its design, implementation and monitoring
Evaluation of the National Plan of Action for
Realization of Children’s rights in Turkmenistan
for 2018-2022 and UNICEF’s contribution to its
design, implementation and monitoring
2022
EVALUATION REPORT
Commissioner: UNICEF CO Turkmenistan
Consultant: DESSISLAVA ILIEVA (Ms.)
i
Evaluation of the National Plan of Action for Realization of Children’s rights in Turkmenistan for 2018-2022 (NAP) and
UNICEF’s contribution to its design, implementation and monitoring
Contents
Acknowledgements iv
List of abbreviations and acronyms v
1. Executive summary vii
2. Background 1
2.1. Object of the Evaluation 1
2.2. Theory of change 1
2.3. Stakeholders and their Role 3
2.4. Context 3
2.4.1. Political, Socio-Economic and Legal Context 4
2.5. Significance of the evaluated intervention 6
3. Purpose, objectives and scope of the evaluation 6
4. Evaluation Methodology, Quality Assurance, and Ethics 8
4.1. Evaluation design 8
4.2. Conceptual framework 8
4.3. Evaluation criteria 9
4.4. Data sources, collection methods and sampling 9
4.5. Data analysis 10
4.6. Ethics 11
4.7. Limitations, constraints and mitigation strategies 11
4.8. Evaluation management 12
4.9. Evaluation Oversight – Evaluation Steering Committee 12
4.10. Work plan 12
5. Gender Equality, Equity, and Human Rights Based Approach (HRBA) 13
6. Evaluation findings 14
6.1. Relevance 14
6.2. Effectiveness 18
6.2.1. Progress towards goals 18
6.2.2. Overall NAP progress and contribution to SDGs 57
6.3. Sustainability 60
7. General conclusions and lessons learned 64
8. Recommendations 67
ANNEXES 70
Annex 1 Evaluation matrix 70
Annex 2. List of Key informants 75
Annex 3. NAP framework of goals and objective 76
Annex 4. Compliance to UNICEF Ethical Standards Research, Evaluation 81
Annex 5. Research Ethics Approval 82
Annex 6 Data collection tools 83
Annex 7. Evaluation implementation approach 98
ii
Evaluation of the National Plan of Action for Realization of Children’s rights in Turkmenistan for 2018-2022 (NAP) and
UNICEF’s contribution to its design, implementation and monitoring
Annex 8. Documents reviewed 99
Annex 9. List of piloted community-based services 101
Annex 10. Availability of child protection interventions across the three levels of prevention 102
Annex 11. Levels of participation 108
Annex 12. Terms of Reference 109
Figure 1 Theory of Change ...................................................................................................................... 2
Figure 2 Evaluation methods ................................................................................................................... 9
Figure 3 Key milestones predefining NAP development ...................................................................... 15
Figure 4 Groups of children covered by the NAP ................................................................................. 17
Figure 5 Neonatal mortality rate ............................................................................................................ 26
Figure 6 Infant mortality rate ................................................................................................................. 26
Figure 7 Under-5 mortality rate ............................................................................................................. 27
Figure 8 Main causes of death ............................................................................................................... 27
Figure 9 Exclusive breastfeeding of children 0-5 months (%)………………………………………. 27
Figure 10 Maternal mortality ……………………………………………………………………….. 29
Figure 11 Stunting 2000 - 2019 (%) ...................................................................................................... 30
Figure 12 Anemia prevalence (%) ......................................................................................................... 31
Figure 13 % of population having access to clean water ....................................................................... 31
Figure 14 Official school ages and school age population .................................................................... 34
Figure 15 Participation in education by levels ....................................................................................... 34
Figure 16 Unemployment rates and Working poverty rates .................................................................. 39
Figure 17 Working hours lost due to the COVID-19 crisis ................................................................... 40
Figure 18 Share of youth not in employment ........................................................................................ 40
Figure 19 Recipients of childcare social benefits .................................................................................. 41
Figure 20 Percentage of disability pensioners who are children ............................................................ 41
Figure 21 N of children with disabilities living in families with no working adults…………………..41
Figure 22 Coverage of community-based services for children ........................................................... 42
Figure 23 Placements in infant homes and child homes ........................................................................ 43
Figure 24 Share of residential care placements in boarding schools and share of CWD in public residential
care ......................................................................................................................................................... 44
Figure 25 N of children employed through employment agencies ........................................................ 49
Figure 26 Children with at least one living parent and separated from their family .............................. 50
Figure 27 Children placed in institutions………………………………………………………………51
Figure 28 Progress in ensuring child participation across child-related sectors .................................... 56
Figure 29 NAP progress against N of indicators ................................. 5Error! Bookmark not defined.
Table 1 NAP stakeholders ....................................................................................................................... 3
Table 2 Evaluation Users and Uses ......................................................................................................... 8
Table 3 Assessment of relevance ........................................................................................................... 14
Table 4 Relevance to context ................................................................................................................. 16
Table 5 Progress towards Goal 1 ........................................................................................................... 19
Table 6 Progress towards Goal 2 ........................................................................................................... 24
Table 7 Progress towards Goal 3 ........................................................................................................... 32
Table 8 Progress towards Goal 4 ........................................................................................................... 38
Table 9 Progress towards Goal 5 ........................................................................................................... 44
Table 10 Progress towards Goal 6 ......................................................................................................... 53
Table 11 Evaluation of child participation ............................................................................................. 54
Table 12 Assessment of sustainability ................................................................................................... 60
Table 13 Recommendations with priority status .................................................................................... 67
iii
Evaluation of the National Plan of Action for Realization of Children’s rights in Turkmenistan for 2018-2022 (NAP) and
UNICEF’s contribution to its design, implementation and monitoring
Acknowledgements
The evaluator would like to thank the Government of Turkmenistan, specifically the Institute of State, Law
and Democracy and UNICEF Country Office Turkmenistan, for their leadership of this evaluation, for
providing all the requested documentation and contextual information, and for answering all the evaluator’s
questions and sharing their insights.
The evaluator also wishes to express gratitude to the Young Sustainable Development Goal Ambassadors
for collecting data from parents and children, as well as the Ministry of Education and the Women’s Union
for organizing the recruitment process for children and parents to inform this evaluation.
Special thanks go to Sofiya Yuvshanova for lending her continued support to the evaluation throughout the
process.
iv
Evaluation of the National Plan of Action for Realization of Children’s rights in Turkmenistan for 2018-2022 (NAP) and
UNICEF’s contribution to its design, implementation and monitoring
List of abbreviations and acronyms
CFS child-friendly school
Covid-19 Coronavirus SARS CoV-2
CO Country Office
CPD Country Programme Document
CRC Committee on the Rights of the Child
CRPD United Nations Convention on the Rights of Persons with
Disabilities
CSO civil society organization
ECD early childhood development
ECDI Early Childhood Development Index
FGD focus group discussion
GANHRI Global Alliance of National Human Rights Institutions
GoT Government of Turkmenistan
HDI Human Development Index
HR human resources
HRBA Human Rights Based Approach
ILO International Labour Organization
IR inception report
ISLD Institute of State, Law and Democracy
JP Joint Programme
KII key informant interview
M&E monitoring and evaluation
MFE Ministry of Finance and Economy
MICS Multiple Indicator Cluster Surveys
MLSPP Ministry of Labour and Social Protection of the Population
MHMI Ministry of Health/ Ministry of Health and Medical Industry
MoI Ministry of the Interior/ Ministry of Internal Affairs
MPI Multidimensional Poverty Index
NAP National Plan of Action for Realization of Children’s Rights in
Turkmenistan 2018–2022
NEET not in employment, education or training
NGO non-governmental organization
OECD Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development
OECD DAC OECD Development Assistance Committee
PP purchasing power
PPP purchasing power parity
SEND special educational needs and/or disabilities
SDGs Sustainable Development Goals
SMART specific, measurable, achievable, results-focused and timely
SOP standard operating procedure
ToC Theory of Change
ToR Terms of Reference
U5MR under-5 mortality rate
UNCRC United Nations Convention of the Rights of the Child
v
Evaluation of the National Plan of Action for Realization of Children’s rights in Turkmenistan for 2018-2022 (NAP) and
UNICEF’s contribution to its design, implementation and monitoring
UNDP United Nations Development Programme
UNEG United Nations Evaluation Group
UNFPA United Nations Population Fund
UNICEF United Nations Children’s Fund
UNODC United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
UN-SWAP United Nations System Wide Action Plan
WHO World Health Organization
vi
Evaluation of the National Plan of Action for Realization of Children’s rights in Turkmenistan for 2018-2022 (NAP) and
UNICEF’s contribution to its design, implementation and monitoring
1. Executive summary
This is the final report of the Evaluation of the National Plan of Action for Realization of Children’s rights
in Turkmenistan for 2018-2022 (NAP) and UNICEF’s contribution to its design, implementation and
monitoring. The evaluation was commissioned by UNICEF Country Office (CO) Turkmenistan to
Dessislava Ilieva, individual international consultant based in Bulgaria. The evaluation was undertaken
between Jul - Dec 2021.
The objects of this evaluation are:
• The National Plan of Action for Realization of Children’s rights in Turkmenistan for 2018-2022
(NAP), with a Road Map for Its implementation and Indicator’s Framework.
• UNICEF’s contribution to the design, implementation and monitoring of the NAP
• Impact of COVID-19 global pandemic on the implementation of NAP
• Contribution of the NAP to the implementation of SDGs.
The NAP is based on the principles and provisions of the Constitution of Turkmenistan, Law of
Turkmenistan on ‘State Guarantees of the Rights of the Child’ and other international agreements in the
interest of children, to which Turkmenistan is a party. The NAP was adopted in 2015 and has been
instrumental in implementing the majority of the recommendations of the Committee on the Rights of the
Child (CRC). The Plan identifies key areas of state social policy in the interests of children based on the
principles of the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child.
The Government of Turkmenistan (GoT) is committed to advancing the 2030 Agenda, adopted the
Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) in 2016 and has been working on integration of SDG targets and
indicators into national programmes and plans of actions, including the NAP, as well as on design of an
SDG monitoring system with technical assistance from the United Nations (UN).
The NAP is significant in terms of bringing together the effort of UNICEF, national partners, other UN
agencies and public organisations in delivering towards children’s rights. This is the first ever such a
comprehensive and multi-lateral effort to ensure rights of the children of Turkmenistan and a
comprehensive strategic document that is endorsed at the highest political level.
The main purpose of the evaluation is to:
• Generate substantive evidence-based knowledge by identifying good practices and lessons learned
from the implementation of NAP.
• Give adjustment necessary for the planning and implementation of support under the current UNICEF
CPD 2021-2025 and a basis for the development of the new NAP 2023-2028.
• Strengthening UNICEF contribution to the realization of child rights and protection of children’s
access to quality services.
The timing of the evaluation is critical as the new Country Programme of Cooperation with the UN and
UNICEF was signed in 2020, current NAP will be completed in 2022 and the development of a new NAP
2023-2025 will be started this year. Thus, the evaluation will help to shape the programming and
policymaking in child-rights, including main elements of cooperation with UNICEF.
Evaluation methodology
The evaluation has both summative and formative dimensions and uses mixed-methods. The evaluation
was guided by the participatory approach as it engaged all key stakeholders during all stages of the
evaluation. The NAP result-framework is organised around children’s rights as per the UN Convention of
the Rights of the Child (UNCRC). The evaluation was performed along OECD DAC evaluation criteria:
Relevance – The extent to which NAP is relevant to the context and needs of children and families.
Effectiveness - The extent to which the NAP achieved its set goals. The objectives under each NAP
priority area were used to measure progress. The evaluation also analysed NAP contribution to SDGs.
Sustainability: The extent to which the achieved outcomes for children are likely to sustain after the
programme period.
The evaluation methodology involved a set of data collection methods (desk review, key informants
interviews and focus group discussions) and analytical methods (stakeholders’ analysis, qualitative and
content analysis).
vii
Evaluation of the National Plan of Action for Realization of Children’s rights in Turkmenistan for 2018-2022 (NAP) and
UNICEF’s contribution to its design, implementation and monitoring
Desk research: The desk research was based on the available sources of secondary information concerning
children’s right interventions and gaps, data on achievements towards SDGs, available national data,
evaluations, monitoring data collected, etc.
Key Informants Interviews (KIIs) and Focus group discussions (FGDs): The data collection was
conducted in the period 10 Oct – 31 Dec 2021. It comprised online interviews. The evaluator conducted 19
interviews with key informants, individually and in a group. Data collection on velayat level was supported
by 8 Young SDG ambassadors after receiving an ethical training by the consultant. The SDGs
Ambassadors conducted 18 FGDs with children and parents.
Key findings
Relevance
The context of planning of the NAP is that of modernising the care systems in Turkmenistan following the
country’s independence, the ratification of the UNCRC in 1991 and other international human rights
conventions and protocols. The state introduced a number of national programmes and regulative
frameworks relevant to children’s rights regarding health, education, family upbringing, social support,
protection of the child from economic exploitation, etc. Some targeted children specifically (e.g. Law of
Turkmenistan on Promotion and Support to Breastfeeding, 2016; the law on State Guarantees of the Rights
of the Child, 2014, National Programme of Turkmenistan on early development and preparation of children
to school for 2011-2015, etc.). The NAP was approved by the Decree of the President of Turkmenistan of
22.06.2018. The Plan was elaborated considering the recommendations of the UN Committee on the Rights
of a Child (2015), with the participation of respective ministries and agencies, institutions and public
organizations of Turkmenistan, together with the UNICEF CO in Turkmenistan.
The evaluation did not identify government-led comprehensive needs assessments of children groups and
their families, national programmes’ evaluation reports or impact assessments of legislation or policies that
may have informed the design of the NAP. It had been informed by situational analysis conducted by
UNICEF in 2019.
The process of planning the NAP has employed a mixed approach to defining goals and objectives. On the
one hand the planning was based on the rights of the children generally (benefitting all children), and on
the other hand a focus was placed on certain groups in terms of vulnerability.
The NAP is equipped with a results framework but it was formulated as insufficiently specific, measurable
and realistic. Furthermore, the NAP has a wide strategic focus against a limited timeframe i.e. 5 years.
The NAP is generally aligned to the strategic priorities of child-rights’ national strategies as well as
strategic priorities identified in UN recommendations. The design of the NAP is moderately relevant to the
needs of the children as it is oriented to all children but some vulnerable groups identified by the
preliminary analysis as priority were not covered by the NAP on the level of objectives.
Effectiveness
The NAP priorities are organised under six goals areas with 36 objectives under these goals. An overall
strategic goal is missing. There has been considerable progress in establishing an enabling environment for
realising children’s rights in Turkmenistan. Turkmenistan has built on previous effort for ensuring an
environment for realization of human rights and child’s rights in the country in the area of human rights
protection, gender equality, protection of women’s, children’s rights and rights of people with disability,
youth policy, implementation of international conventions in the area of human rights protection.
Turkmenistan made some progress in improving children’s health and contributing to the targets on
children’s health such as high immunisation rates (achieved with UNICEF support), access to clean water,
reduction of malnutrition. There is significant progress in reducing stunting and development of young
children. Further effort is required to reduce mortality rates and prevalence of anaemia as well as enabling
better access of children with disabilities to specialised healthcare.
There is progress towards schools becoming more child-friendly, mostly in the area of early education for
children. These efforts have produced a notable increase of the children attending pre-school and pre-
primary school but coverage is still insufficient. There is a conducive environment for increasing placement
of children with special educational needs in boarding schools, often away from their families. Whilst such
placement serve good educational purpose, it poses some limitations in exercising the child’s right to live
with its family, especially for children with disabilities.
viii
Evaluation of the National Plan of Action for Realization of Children’s rights in Turkmenistan for 2018-2022 (NAP) and
UNICEF’s contribution to its design, implementation and monitoring
There is no conclusive evidence that NAP interventions have contributed to better employment rates and
living standards of families. For the most vulnerable children and their families, support is still insufficient,
in particular single parents or parents with disabilities. Disability is a significant factor on the family
income as well as in terms of social inclusion. Among the most significant changes during the NAP
implementation has been the introduction of a modern concept of social services in the community and
introducing the profession of social worker. This is an achievement of a number of programmes and
interventions of which the NAP, being a national strategic child’s-rights document, is overarching. This has
contributed to a more enabling environment for family-support programmes in the community and is a
ground for developments in other areas e.g. child protection and child justice.
An important step is the introduction of a specialised approach to children in contact with the law.
Turkmenistan justice provides some essential elements of a child justice system in line with international
standards. This needs to be built on by shifting the system orientation from ‘correction’ to ‘resocialization’
and ensue that interventions are based on interdisciplinary assessments which respond to the needs of each
child, including psychological and emotional needs. The concept of coordination for effective governance
of child protection and child justice is present but requires coordination mechanism for oversight of
children’s rights to be operationalised, including by describing the functions of agencies and law
enforcement bodies in terms of joint working and reporting.
Child-centred systems are still in the process of understanding what child participation is. Turkmenistan
has made the most progress regarding protecting the child's right to participation and the least progress in
creating space for actual participation.
In terms of COVID it should be noted that although some NAP interventions had to be readjusted, the
government put efforts to ensure the overall implementation of the NAP. Importantly, with support of UN
agencies, GoT did manage to sustain all essential health and education services in the country without
interruption.
Sustainability
The NAP ensured high level of sustainability of child’s rights mechanisms specifically in terms of
establishing the Ombudsman’s office.
NAP is fully aligned with the SDGs which demonstrates the high Government commitments towards
Sustainable Development Agenda. Data collection for children is strengthened in a sustainable way with
UNICEF and UN sister agencies. UNICEF has contributed significantly through raising the country’s
capacity to collect data on children. However, the culture to develop policies and services based on strong
detailed specific and measurable results frameworks according to the principles of strategic planning is not
yet fully in place.
Universal inclusive services for young children are in place but their scaling up and full coverage depends
on human resources investment and upgrading the capacity of education and healthcare. There is potential
for sustaining the achievements in the child protection system, including child justice. General and
specialised community-based support have a good replicable potential. The GoT has shown a commitment
to updating its legislative and regulatory regimes in favour of children’s rights, including in the area of
child protection and child justice. New laws on the treatment of victims of crime and defining the social
work function show important momentum in this area. To remain on this promising course of action it
requires the conceptualization of a robust child justice system capable of realizing the full rights for all
children who come into contact with the justice system, whether as victims, witnesses, accused of a crime,
or in a civil or administrative proceeding.
Conclusions
In terms of relevance to the context, the NAP is generally aligned to the strategic priorities of child-rights’
national strategies as well as international strategic priorities identified in UN recommendations. In terms
of needs, there is moderate alignment between the needs addressed by the NAP and needs identified by
CRC recommendations and situational analyses. The internal causal links between goals, objectives and
interventions are mostly implicit. The result-framework is designed to capture outcomes for children
mainly on the level of activities and needs to be strengthened to include more comprehensive and valid
indicators on the level of goals and objectives.
In terms of effectiveness there has been considerable progress in establishing an enabling environment for
realising children’s rights as well as independent guarding of children’s rights e.g. establishing the
ix
Evaluation of the National Plan of Action for Realization of Children’s rights in Turkmenistan for 2018-2022 (NAP) and
UNICEF’s contribution to its design, implementation and monitoring
Ombudsman body. However, establishing permanent interagency body monitoring children’s rights in
every sector has not yet been achieved.
Significant progress was made in terms of data collection e.g. State Committee of Statistics of
Turkmenistan has been instrumental in collecting data for MICS 2019 and the country completed a
voluntary review on the achievement of SDGs. Yet there are still gaps in terms of data collection coverage
and data accessibility e.g. disaggregated data on children in conflict with the law and child victims and
witnesses of crime collected and shared systematically would greatly improve the planning of targeted
response to children in need.
Healthcare has improved in a number of areas e.g. immunisation, breastfeeding, nutrition, early childhood
development, maternal mortality, etc. There is room for development in terms of accelerating the reduction
of child mortality and further building on the existing achievements in the area of specialised care for
children with disabilities. There is progress towards schooling becoming more child-friendly, mostly in the
area of early education for children. However, there is a conducive environment for increasing placement
of children with special educational needs in boarding schools, which prevents social inclusion being
achieved for children with disabilities. Possible factors, among others, are social norms of parents,
specialised skills in working with children with disability being more available in special schools vs.
mainstream schools, community-based services for families of children with disabilities still not being
widely available. Feedback from parents indicates that disability may be a great factor on the family
income as well as on the level of social inclusion of children. The extent of this vulnerability requires
further studies.
Introducing the concept of social work and community-based services is one of the most significant
changes during NAP implementation. Family separations are on the increase hence gaps are wider for
families who face difficulties in taking care of their children and there is a risk of children being separated.
Main factors are: underdeveloped network of family-support services to address difficult life situations,
lack of reintegration services, and underdeveloped inclusive education combined with the lack of services
for disabled children. Turkmenistan has made progress mostly in terms of creating a more enabling
environment for family-support programmes. Components of a child-friendly justice system are in place
and provide good ground for modernising the child justice system towards shifting from “correction” to
“socialisation”; improving the coordination among law enforcement and child protection entities;
developing effective prevention and response programmes based on all needs of children in contact with
the law and children victims or witness of violence.
In terms of sustainability there has been development towards child’s rights mechanisms e.g. establishing
the Ombudsman’s office. Further promotion of child-friendly complaint mechanisms would strengthen the
position of the Ombudsman as a voice for children’s rights. Child’s rights monitoring can be sustained by
fostering data-driven decision-making culture and by introducing strong monitoring and evaluation results-
frameworks that allow for measuring progress for children in accordance with the principles of strategic
planning.
Lessons learned
It is vital to support child-rights legislation along with developing other enabling factors. Legislation
alone is not a guarantee that these rights will be automatically exercised without also addressing social
norms and professional norms, capacity building of the systems around the child (healthcare, education,
child protection and justice).
High quality data is essential for priority setting, monitoring and achieving results. Continuous
monitoring of children’s rights across all areas ensures timely identification and development of
interventions addressing the most urgent bottlenecks.
Children’s needs are complex needs and cannot be addressed by each sector separately or on its own. An
integrated approach should be fostered when designing new services and, therefore, capacities of all child-
relevant systems need to be addressed simultaneously: education, health, child protection and justice.
Importance of focusing on a limited number of priorities. Achieving strategic and long lasting impact is
challenging if NAP pursues multiple and too broad goals, and is spread too thin. Within the limited
timeframe of the NAP long-term vision and one strategic goal need to guide and steer the NAP.
Strong partnerships and collaboration are essential to achieving strategic results. The nature of
development challenges faced by Turkmenistan require extensive collaboration with various partners,
collective planning, implementation and monitoring.
x
Evaluation of the National Plan of Action for Realization of Children’s rights in Turkmenistan for 2018-2022 (NAP) and
UNICEF’s contribution to its design, implementation and monitoring
Public associations can be an indispensable partner to the GoT to assume the provision of services to
children and families because they are closest to the communities and their needs. Social contracting
legislation may boost nation-wide service providers as currently they largely depend on insecure own
funding.
Child participation is a clear principle to understand, yet, very difficult to operationalise. Decision-
makers should operationalise participation horizontally i.e. across various child-related areas e.g. when
developing community-based social services, making schools more child-friendly, improving access to
specialised healthcare for children with disabilities, etc.
Recommendations
Next NAP needs to preserve its comprehensive approach to children’s rights. At the same time, a vision of
change, one overarching strategic goal of the NAP and a detailed Theory of change should be developed
along with a high-quality result-framework with SMART objectives. ToCs development should become a
truly analytical and participatory exercise engaging multiple stakeholders.
The voice of children would be stronger in Turkmenistan if a permanent interagency body specifically
coordinating the work of all agencies relevant to children’s rights. It could be established as a separate body
or a specialised structure specifically responsible for children’s rights within existing human rights bodies
such as ombudsman or Inter-agency commission.1
The efforts in healthcare need to build on the work of the current NAP by extending access to specialised
care for some groups of children (e.g. children with disabilities, especially in remote areas) as well as
furthering the effort to reduce child mortality. Nutrition was reflected in the current NAP but there are still
some gaps (e.g. reasons for anaemia prevalence) requiring further analysis to inform next NAP cycle. Next
NAP needs to further address system changes that enable children with disabilities have better access to
specialised healthcare and rehabilitation services close to their community. Early childhood development
services need to be further developed and scaled up.
Rehabilitation services for children with disabilities at school age, too, need to be designed in a way that
meet their educational needs to enable their participation in mainstream school and prevent their placement
in a boarding school away from their families.
Any family-support services and child protection services (including child justice) need to be based on the
concept of case management, which is currently being introduced in the country. The efforts towards
creating the legislative environment for that as well as improving and expanding the workforce needs to be
extended in the next NAP cycle.
Next NAP should place bigger emphasis on inclusive education i.e. mainstreaming inclusiveness in the
meaning that any school is able to respond to the needs of every child, including children with special
needs. Social and professional norms need to be addressed through campaigning and promoting the right of
the children to receive quality education and live in its family at the same time.
Next NAP needs to extend its emerging good practices in child protection into the next period of planning.
Building on the models for community-based services for children and families within JP, next NAP needs
to address the need to scale these up. Service quality standards need to be elaborated in a way to include
mechanisms for participation of children as one of the underlying quality principles.
Follow-up child justice reforms need to consider strengthening the child justice legislative environment in a
way that ensures that rights of children in contact with the law are protected at all stages. Consideration
needs to be made to strengthening interagency coordination in the area of child justice; enhancing
prevention (comprehensive juvenile delinquency measures based on assessed risk factors) and response
(well-coordinated community-based child support programmes enhanced with professionally trained
workforce and developed on data-based pillars).
Data collection should be strengthened across all sectors of child well-being i.e. education, health, social
protection and justice.
It is vital that NAP encourages public associations of parents’ groups and grassroots organisations to be
involved in provision of services through more enabling legislation and funding.
1 The Inter-Agency Commission on Implementation of Turkmenistan’s international human rights obligations and incorporation of
the standards of the international humanitarian law is an advisory cross-sectoral body established to coordinate efforts of the state
agencies, local executive authorities, and enterprises, institutions, organizations, and voluntary associations, to implement
Turkmenistan’s international human rights commitments.
xi
Evaluation of the National Plan of Action for Realization of Children’s rights in Turkmenistan for 2018-2022 (NAP) and
UNICEF’s contribution to its design, implementation and monitoring
2. Background
This is the final report of the Evaluation of the National Plan of Action for Realization of Children’s
rights in Turkmenistan for 2018-2022 (NAP) and UNICEF’s contribution to its design, implementation
and monitoring. It was developed after conducting an external evaluation commissioned by UNICEF
Country Office (CO) Turkmenistan. The evaluation was undertaken between July 2021 to April 2022.
This section lays out the broader context in which the intervention was planned and implemented,
including a brief introduction to the regional context in which the interventions under evaluation took
place.
The National Action Plan (NAP) on Children’s rights was approved in 2018 and has been instrumental in
implementing the majority of the recommendations. The Plan identifies key areas of the state social
policy in the interests of children based on the principles of the UN Convention on the Rights of the
Child, to which Turkmenistan is a party.
All goals and objectives included in the NAP on Children’s rights are aimed at the realization of rights
and social safeguards for children, implementation of which requires an integrated approach, coordination
and cooperation of state bodies and public associations. The aim, objectives, policies and indicators set
forth in the NAP on Children’s rights, represent an integrated ‘roadmap’ aiming at the implementation of
the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child by Turkmenistan. NAP was developed with consideration
of the UNICEF programmatic priorities and include all the areas of the UNICEF Strategic Plan and
Country programme Development (CPD). The CPD 2021-2025 was developed for addressing the main
priorities and challenges identified during implementation of the NAP.
The current evaluation is part of the effort of the GoT and UNICEF to assess the progress of the country
towards realisation of children’s rights and fine-tune further efforts in the next planning cycle of the NAP.
2.1. Object of the Evaluation
The objects of this evaluation are:
• The National Plan of Action for Realization of Children’s rights in Turkmenistan for 2018-2022
(NAP), with a Road Map for Its implementation and Indicator’s Framework.
• UNICEF’s contribution to the design, implementation and monitoring of the NAP
• Impact of COVID-19 global pandemic on the implementation of NAP
• Contribution of the NAP to the implementation of SDGs.
2.2. Theory of change
The NAP was not based on a clearly stipulated Theory of Change (ToC). The Theory of change was
reconstructed here, as requested by ToR, for the purpose of being tested during the data collection to
better understand the logic behind the interventions. Additional emphasis was given at reviewing
UNICEF’s core roles towards addressing bottlenecks in child’s rights implementation and improving
effective coverage with evidence-based interventions. The evaluation findings will be used by UNICEF
and Government of Turkmenistan to refine the paths of change to follow during the next implementation
period of NAP.
Turkmenistan created a favourable environment to realize rights of children and women. It ratified the
Convention on the Rights of the Child, the United Nations Convention on Rights of Persons with
Disabilities, Convention on the Elimination of all Forms of Discrimination against Women and aligned a
number of national laws with the Conventions. The new Constitution recognizes the primacy of
universally accepted norms of international law.
However, at the time of inception of NAP there was not a separate governance entity specifically focusing
on children’s rights in Turkmenistan, child mortality rate was still high and access to healthcare services
1
Evaluation of the National Plan of Action for Realization of Children’s rights in Turkmenistan for 2018-2022 (NAP) and
UNICEF’s contribution to its design, implementation and monitoring
was improved but remained reduced for vulnerable groups of children and families. Cross-sectoral
strategies for addressing child’s rights implementation and data collection systems were underdeveloped
leading to insufficient data to enable proper instalment of individualized and community-based services.
The “final destination” of the NAP is the full realisation of rights and safeguards for children in
Turkmenistan. The rationale behind NAP is that by creating enabling legislation and fostering child
participation, the capacity of the support systems will be strengthened to reach to every child in the
country, including the most vulnerable. NAP foresees capacity building interventions towards systems
that safeguard child rights e.g. introduction of social work profession and piloting community-based
services for children and families.
The assumption has been that the capacity of the child-oriented systems will be built and services scaled
up nationally within the timeframe of the NAP so that goals can be achieved by 2022.
Risks analysis was not clearly identified in NAP but other documents reviewed during desk research
indicate that possible risks might be related to the slow and complex process of building the capacities of
the child-related systems. That includes the influence of professional norms (social work was yet to be
introduced as a profession, case management not yet introduced as an approach, etc.) as well as social
norms (formal care outweighs family-based care for some parents due to limited access to community-
based care especially for children with special needs).
The NAP framework reveals that goals and objectives are of different dimensions e.g. goals are defined
as rights and sometimes objectives are defined as interventions. There is justification of the NAP but it is
insufficient to determine which bottlenecks it addresses specifically as well as what is the specific
intended outcome and impact and how these will be measured on goal level (in addition to interventions
level). Figure 1 is a visualization of perceived ToC at NAP inception, as it was recreated by the evaluator
based on the result-based framework of the NAP at the stage of the desk review:
Figure 1. Theory of Change
2
Evaluation of the National Plan of Action for Realization of Children’s rights in Turkmenistan for 2018-2022 (NAP) and
UNICEF’s contribution to its design, implementation and monitoring
In implementing this pathway of change, the NAP places responsibility on government, line ministries
and agencies. However, the efforts at the government level are to be enhanced by the activity of public
associations, partnership with media and international organisations.
In this process, UNICEF has contribution through its core roles e.g. supporting government systems in
data collection capacity to better monitor child’s rights realization, advocating for child’s rights,
providing advice to government, building partnerships with civil society and other UN agencies,
modelling and testing support services in the community, as well as bringing together international best
practices.
2.3. Stakeholders and their Role
The implementation of the NAP involve a range of stakeholders: See Table 1
Table 1 NAP stakeholders
UNICEF CO Supports the Government to design, implement and evaluate the NAP. Makes sure there is alignment
Turkmenistan between the NAP and UNICEF Country Programme Document. UNICEF is a lead agency in the Joint
Programme (JP) on Introduction of the community based social services, piloting community based
social services and specialized social services together with other UN agencies. The JP partly
addresses some of the NAP goals.
ISLD and Inter- Coordinate the design and implementation of the NAP. Provide general oversight to all agencies
ministerial involved.
Commission
UN agencies UNICEF, UNDP, UNFPA, UNODC together with national partners support the design,
implementation and evaluation of the JP in alignment of child-related components with NAP goals.
Parliament Explores best international practices and uses them towards harmonising the national legislation
according to the CRC and other important treaties to which Turkmenistan is a party.
Ministries Ministry of Labour and Social Protection, Ministry of Health and Medical Industry, Ministry of
Education, Ministry of Finance and Economy, Ministry of Internal Affairs and Ministry of Culture are
involved in thematic areas of the NAP in terms of design and implementation
Municipalities Ensure harmonization of the NAP nation-wide actions with local actors to collectively deliver results
(Hakimliks) for children.
Partner NGOs and Involved in implementation of activities such as service provision and direct work with children and
Civil Society families as per NAP priorities.
Organisations
2.4. Context
Turkmenistan is a Central Asian country with a territory of 491,200 km2, much of which is barren land.
Turkmenistan’s neighbouring countries are Kazakhstan and Uzbekistan (in the North and North-East),
Afghanistan and Iran (in the South), and in the West along the Caspian Sea, it borders on Azerbaijan and
Russia. The most densely populated areas are the southern, eastern, and northeastern oases, with
approximately 15.5 % of the population living in the capital of Ashgabat2.
Map of Turkmenistan, source worldatlas.com
2 ToR, citing The State Statistics Committee of Turkmenistan, Statistical Yearbooks of Turkmenistan 2020
3
Evaluation of the National Plan of Action for Realization of Children’s rights in Turkmenistan for 2018-2022 (NAP) and
UNICEF’s contribution to its design, implementation and monitoring
2.4.1. Political, Socio-Economic and Legal Context
In 1924, Turkmenistan became one of the republics of the Soviet Union. After the collapse of the USSR
in 1991, Turkmenistan gained independence. Turkmenistan is a democratic, law-based and secular
presidential republic. Turkmenistan adheres to the status of “permanent neutrality”, as stated in the
resolution of the UN General Assembly of December 12, 1995, and, therefore, it is not a member of any
political association or regional integration organization3.
The President is the highest official acting as Head of state, Head of Government and Commander in
chief of the armed forces, who has the power to appoint and remove members of the Cabinet of Ministers,
heads of local authorities of the executive power, state prosecutors and judges, make recommendations to
the Parliament on the Ombudsman, and take decisions about holding elections and referendums.
At the initiative of the President of Turkmenistan new constitutional law was adopted in September 2020
introducing amendments to the Constitution of Turkmenistan4: introduction of bicameral system of the
representative body of legislative power, with Halk Maslahaty and Mejlis forming the Milli Gengesh of
Turkmenistan – the Parliament. Changes to the Constitution came into force as of 1 January 2021, and
elections to Halk Maslahaty were held at the end of March 2021.
An important development is that an office of the Ombudsman for human rights was established in 2017
covering children’s rights too.
Turkmenistan has extensive natural gas reserves ranking 4th place globally. The state-dominated economy
is strongly dependent on oil and gas, which comprised more than 90 percent of national exports in 20155.
Turkmenistan has achieved relatively high levels of socio-economic development. Turkmenistan’s
Human Development Index6 value for 20197 is 0.715, which places the country in the high human
development category - positioning it at 111 out of 189 countries and territories. Between 2010 and 2019,
Turkmenistan’s HDI value increased from 0.666 to 0.715, an increase of 7.4%.
Between 1990 and 2019, Turkmenistan’s life expectancy at birth increased by 5.4 years, mean years of
schooling increased by 0.4 years and expected years of schooling increased by 1 year. Estimations8 of
Multidimensional Poverty Index (MPI9) indicate that in Turkmenistan 0.4 percent of the population (24
thousand people) are multidimensionally poor while an additional 2.4 percent are classified as vulnerable
to multidimensional poverty (141 thousand people). The MPI, which is the share of the population that is
multidimensionally poor, adjusted by the intensity of the deprivations, is 0.00110, where average for
Europe and Central Asia MPI value is 0.004.
Situation of children. The total population of Turkmenistan is estimated at 6,126,746 people for 202111,
of which children comprise 33.3% of the population12. With its independence in 1991, Turkmenistan has
been transitioning through a number of changes in its political, social and economic life. In the recent
years there have been a number of reforms in many areas of social life including education, healthcare
3 UNICEF in Turkmenistan, Analysis of Situation of Children’s and Women’s Rights in Turkmenistan, Ashgabat, 2019
4 In its meeting of 25 September 2020, the People's Council of Turkmenistan adopted the Constitutional Law of Turkmenistan
"On amendments and additions to the Constitution of Turkmenistan".
5 UNICEF in Turkmenistan, Analysis of Situation of Children’s and Women’s Rights in Turkmenistan, Ashgabat, 2019
6 Human Development Index is a summary measure for assessing long-term progress in three basic dimensions of human
development: a long and healthy life, access to knowledge and a decent standard of living
7 http://hdr.undp.org/sites/all/themes/hdr_theme/country-notes/TKM.pdf
8 Ibid.
9 The 2010 Human Development Report introduced the MPI, which identifies multiple overlapping deprivations suffered by
individuals in 3 dimensions: health, education and standard of living.
10 Source: ToR; Since 2018, HDRO and the Oxford Poverty and Human Development Initiative jointly produce and publish the
MPI estimates. The latest release from July 2020 covers 107 developing countries (countries that lack survey data that allow for
the calculation of the MPI are not included). The most recent survey data that were publicly available for Turkmenistan’s MPI
estimation refer to 2015/2016.
11 Turkmenistan Population – live (2021) - Worldometer (http://srv1.worldometers.info/world-population/turkmenistan-
population/)
12 ToR, citing State Statistics Committee of Turkmenistan, 2020.
4
Evaluation of the National Plan of Action for Realization of Children’s rights in Turkmenistan for 2018-2022 (NAP) and
UNICEF’s contribution to its design, implementation and monitoring
and social support. It is in this context that the country adopted a range of new legal acts, programmes and
strategies aimed at protection of the rights of children.
The Government of Turkmenistan (GoT) is committed to advancing the 2030 Agenda and adopted SDGs
in 2016 and has been working on integration of SDG targets and indicators into national programmes and
plans of actions, including the NAP, as well as on design of an SDG monitoring system with technical
assistance from UN. The country adopted 148 SDG targets and 175 SDG indicators, 30 per cent of which
directly concern children13. UNICEF has actively supported the government to improve the availability
and use of child-related data14.
Turkmenistan created a favourable enabling environment to realize rights of children and women. It
ratified the Convention on the Rights of the Child, the United Nations Convention on Rights of Persons
with Disabilities, Convention on the Elimination of all Forms of Discrimination against Women and
aligned a number of national laws with the Conventions. There is no separate governance entity
specifically focusing on children’s rights in Turkmenistan.15 However, the basic principles of the CRC
have been incorporated into national laws e.g. Law On State Guarantees of the Rights of the Child that
provides for the state guarantees for a healthy living environment, adequate care, protection from
exploitation at work. Similarly, the State Programme of Youth Policy for 2015-2020 focuses on creating
favourable conditions for full participation of young people in the socioeconomic, political and cultural
life of the state and society.
Despite the significant progress, the NAP addresses a number of challenges lying ahead. Specifically,
there is a need to further expand health facilities in rural areas, introduce inclusive education, build the
systems’ capacity in the field of healthcare and education in line with international standards, ensuring the
rights of all children to quality education with special attention to children with disabilities. There is also
a need to focus more efforts on ensuring the practical implementation of legal and policy frameworks and
strengthening coordination between various policy makers on both central and local level. Moreover, the
need remains to further build the systems’ workforce in order to improve the provision of services to
children in need of protection, e.g. children victims or witness of violence and children in contact with the
law or in proceedings.
NAP is putting more focus on vulnerability and vulnerable groups as identified in situational analysis16:
the care for children dominated by medical mode of disability that prevent inclusion of children with
disabilities; children in rural areas and selected regions experiencing gaps in education, health and social
services; gaps in the legislation and its realization in relation to stateless children, etc. As vulnerable groups
are often excluded from decision-making process and their perspectives are not considered, the NAP
considers participation as an area of particular attention as a way of maing national policies more
effective in addressing gaps in rights realization in supporting vulnerable groups of children and women.
The National Plan of Action for Realization of Children’s rights in Turkmenistan for 2018-2022 was
adopted as a response to this new context and specifically to the 2015 Concluding Observations of the UN
Committee on the Rights of the Child. Stemming from the Committee’s recommendations as well as
national strategic priorities in maternity and child healthcare, juvenile justice, early childhood
development, education and social inclusion of children, NAP focuses on key topical priorities for
children.
The NAP covers the following priority areas in the interests of children and SDGs implementation:
1. Ensure realization of general measures for implementation of the CRC in Turkmenistan;
2. Ensure the rights of the child for life and survival, in particular through strengthening maternal and
child health and promotion of a healthy life style;
3. Ensure the rights of the child for education and development, so all children were able to fully
realise their potential, in particular, through quality education and social protection provided to them;
13 ToR
14 UNICEF in Turkmenistan, Baseline Assessment for Child-related SDG indicators in Turkmenistan, Ashgabat, 2018
15 UNICEF in Turkmenistan, Analysis of Situation of Children’s and Women’s Rights in Turkmenistan, Ashgabat, 2019
16 ibid
5
Evaluation of the National Plan of Action for Realization of Children’s rights in Turkmenistan for 2018-2022 (NAP) and
UNICEF’s contribution to its design, implementation and monitoring
4. Improve living conditions and ensure economic well-being for children and families, including
issues of protection in emergency, while focusing on disaster risk reduction through strengthening the
actions on preparedness to emergency and response;
5. Protect the rights of all children for the life free from violation, exploitation, cruel and negligent
treatment, in particular, through enhancing the efficiency of the system of services for protection and
support of vulnerable children and through implementation of measures aimed at prevention of
placing children without parental care in orphanages and children’s homes;
6. Ensure the rights of children for freedom of expression on all issues related to their interests and
rights to actively participate in social, cultural, economic and public life.
The National Action plan on Children’s rights incorporates a result-based frameworkwith goals and
objectives. It is organised around topics and subtopics, each of them referring to a list of interventions
along each topical section. Indicators are available for interventions and activities, but not on the level of
goals.
The National plan on Children’s rights has a special focus on ensuring the rights of disadvantaged
children, such as the children with disability, migrant children, stateless children, low-income children,
children without parental care and children in the conflict with the law.
NAP budget. Comprehensive data on the budget of the NAP was not provided for this evaluation since
this data from the government is not accessible
2.5. Significance of the evaluated intervention
The NAP is significant in terms of bringing together the effort of UNICEF, national partners, other UN
agencies and public organisations in delivering towards children’s rights across. This is the first ever such
comprehensive and multi-lateral effort to ensure rights of the children of Turkmenistan and a
comprehensive strategic document that is endorsed at the highest political level. The NAP is a strategy
towards modernising all child-relevant sectors.
3. Purpose, objectives and scope of the evaluation
The main purpose of the evaluation is to:
• generate substantive evidence-based knowledge by identifying good practices and lessons
learned from the implementation of NAP.
• adjustment/redirection necessary for the planning and implementation of support under the
current CPD 2021-2025 and provide a basis for the development of the new NAP 2023-2028.
• strengthening UNICEF contribution to the realization of child rights and protection of
children’s access to quality services.
The timing of the evaluation is critical as the new Country Programme of Cooperation with the UN and
UNICEF was signed in 2020, current NAP will be completed in 2022 and the development of a new NAP
2023-2025 will start the same year. Thus, the evaluation will help to shape the programming and
policymaking in child-rights, including main elements of cooperation with UNICEF. The evaluation’s
findings will also inform the update of the Situation Analyses on children and women, the state-party
report to the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (CRPD) and CRC Committee in 2022
and SDG-related progress reports
Objective: The key objective of this evaluation is to explore progress in the implementation of the
priority areas that constitute the program of work under the National Action Plan and identify the main
successes, challenges and lessons arising from the implementation of the NAP 2018-2022.
In terms of accountability, the evaluation independently assesses the overall progress towards intended
outcomes, and, where possible, seeks indications of possible effects on the most vulnerable groups of
children (including children living in the rural area, children with disabilities, children in conflict with the
6
Evaluation of the National Plan of Action for Realization of Children’s rights in Turkmenistan for 2018-2022 (NAP) and
UNICEF’s contribution to its design, implementation and monitoring
law, etc.). An analysis of UNICEF’s added value to the implementation of the NAP was included in the
evaluation design.
Scope of the evaluation
The programmatic focus are all the six Goal areas of the NAP with the exclusion of the activities covered
in other up-coming or past evaluations.
The following components of the NAP were excluded from this evaluation:
• 3.4.1. Ensure enabling conditions for social integration and realization of the rights of children
with disabilities, including legislative measures, data on children with disabilities, access to
inclusive social services and support services, and encouraging the participation of CWD in
public life. This component is covered by the ECD Evaluation, current survey on people with
disabilities and partly by up-coming Evaluation of the Joint Programme of Social Services.
• 4.2.3. Ensure the necessary volume and level of social services to protect and support a
disadvantaged child. This will be covered by the up-coming Evaluation of the Joint Programme of
Social Services.
• Efficiency – comprehensive data on the budget of the NAP was not provided for this evaluation since
this data from the government is not accessible. Hence, the ToR excludes efficiency as an evaluation
criterion given that insufficient financial data will not enable cost-effectiveness analysis of the NAP.
The NAP is due to be completed in 2022 and the evaluation is being performed in the last year of
implementation. Therefore, the evaluation has both summative and formative dimensions. It provides
recommendations for improvements of the effectiveness, scale up and sustainability of Government’s
work on child rights and UNICEF’s support. Furthermore, the evaluation adds value for Ministry of
Education and Ministry of Healthcare and Medical Industry in terms of planning their next cycle of NAP
implementation based on the findings, conclusions and recommendations from this evaluation.
Special emphasis was placed on ensuring that children (boys and girls), who are direct beneficiaries of the
interventions are heard, have opportunities to communicate their views, and participate in the evaluation
process. Other stakeholders whose participation was important to assess the relevance, effectiveness and
sustainability of the programme include parents (both mothers and fathers). Central Government, local
community leaders, municipality management and public organisations were consulted in assessing the
relevance, effectiveness and sustainability of the NAP implementation.
Time scope: 2018 to 2021
Geographic scope: national, covering Ashgabat city and 5 velayats: Ahal, Balkan, Dashoguz, Lebap and
Mary. The evaluation was conducted online. Young SDG Ambassadors were involved to conduct Focus
Group Discussion (FGDs) in all velayats with children and parents, while the consultant provided online
support. The FGDs could not be run face-to-face due to the pandemic situation. All except one FGD were
conducted online via Zoom.
Intended use: The knowledge generated by the evaluation will be used by:
- ISLD and line Ministries for planning and implementation purposes of the relevant state
programmes;
- Municipalities, NGOs and other stakeholders for improving their activities;
- UNICEF Turkmenistan for further expanding and improving its programmatic activities in this
field.
The evaluation findings targets the following users as indicated in Table 2 below:
7
Evaluation of the National Plan of Action for Realization of Children’s rights in Turkmenistan for 2018-2022 (NAP) and
UNICEF’s contribution to its design, implementation and monitoring
Table 2. Evaluation Users and Uses
Users Uses
ISLD and Inter- Take decisions and develop strategic orientations on the NAP implementation and
ministerial development of the new NAP, including the allocation of human, material and financial
Commission resources based on the evidence generated by the evaluation.
Use best practice lessons to accelerate child rights agenda implementation towards national
SDG targets.
UNICEF Country Improve the programme strategic notes, tailor strategic approaches depending on the changing
Office context. Document lessons learnt and best practices that can inform development of a new
NAP. Incorporate best practice and draw on lessons learned (i) to improve the performance of
future interventions in the field of child rights; (ii) to improve planning/programming of the
future interventions; (iii) to strengthen the ME component and ensure strong evidence-based
approach in planning and strategizing
Municipalities Adjust and optimize the NAP implementation mechanisms on local level based on the lessons
(Hakimliks) learned from the evaluation.
Adjust monitoring approaches to enhance quality program delivery.
Improve budget allocation and effective budget usage procedures, harmonization of actions
with all actors to minimize expenses and avoid leaving gaps or overlapping in covering critical
needs
Use best practice lessons to accelerate reform implementation towards national SDG targets.
NGOs and other Build on the evidence generated by the evaluation to improve
Civil Society performance in the implementation of NAP interventions. Strengthen capacity where it is
Organisations lacking.
Donors and other Influence the future design and scale-up of child-rights agenda
development partners
Secondary audiences: MPs need to be informed in order to introduce necessary legislative changes.
International, academic, private and civil society organizations including UN agencies and educators will
use the results of the evaluation to gain more knowledge and to improve their advocacy and practical actions
in introduction and implementation of the child rights programmes.
4. Evaluation Methodology, Quality Assurance, and Ethics
This section covers the evaluation design, the methodology, the evaluation limitations, constraints and
mitigation strategies applied, as well as description of the evaluation oversight and management and the
research ethics.
4.1. Evaluation design
The evaluation has both summative and formative dimensions and uses mixed-methods. The evaluation
was guided by the participatory17 approach as it engaged all key stakeholders during all stages of the
evaluation - inception, implementation, analysis, and dissemination.
The evaluation was informed by the opinions, experiences, and suggestions of key stakeholders, including
UNICEF staff from all sectorial departments (health, child’s rights, education, and child protection) and
partners from public organizations, line ministries, other UN agencies active in the country, Parliament,
Prosecutor’s Office and human right’s independent institutions i.e. the Ombudsman Office. The
methodology for this evaluation involved a set of data collection methods (desk review, key informants
interviews and focus group discussions) and analytical methods (stakeholders analysis, qualitative and
content analysis) to assess along the evaluation criteria i.e. relevance, effectiveness and sustainability.
4.2. Conceptual framework
The evaluator conducted the analysis along an evaluation framework developed to respond to the
evaluation questions stipulated by the ToR. The evaluation framework is provided as Annex 1 to this
report. Some of the ToR evaluation questions were regrouped by the ET and equipped with sub-questions,
evaluation indicators, data sources and evaluation data collection methods.
17 Participatory evaluation is an approach that involves the stakeholders of a programme or policy in the evaluation process.
This involvement can occur at any stage of the evaluation process, from the evaluation design to the data collection and analysis
and the reporting of the study
8
Evaluation of the National Plan of Action for Realization of Children’s rights in Turkmenistan for 2018-2022 (NAP) and
UNICEF’s contribution to its design, implementation and monitoring
4.3. Evaluation criteria
The evaluation was performed along OECD DAC evaluation criteria as follows:
Relevance – The extent to which NAP is relevant to the context and needs of children and their
families.
Effectiveness - The extent to which the NAP achieved its set goals.
Sustainability: The extent to which the achieved outcomes for children are likely to sustain after the
programme period.
4.4. Data sources, collection methods and sampling
The evaluator used qualitative and quantitative approach for this evaluation. The approach enabled cross-
verification or validation of data gathered from different sources, including the secondary evidence. The
methodological approach enabled achieving depth and coverage, authenticity, reliability, and
triangulation of findings. The methods used for the evaluation are illustrated in Figure 2.
Figure 2 Evaluation methods
Primary data:
Evaluation
-Key
Secondary data: Informants with both
Desk review interviews summative and
formative
-Focus Group dimensions
dsicussions
The methodology for this evaluation involved a set of data collection methods (desk review, key
informants interviews and focus group discussions) and analytical methods (stakeholders’ analysis,
qualitative and content analysis).
These methods have been elaborated in the following sections.
Desk research
The desk research was based on the available sources of secondary information concerning children’s
right interventions and gaps, data on achievements towards Sustainable development Goals (SDGs),
available national data, evaluations, monitoring data collected, etc.
The evaluator reviewed more than 40 documents. Annex 6 provides a full list of reviewed literature. The
desk review continued throughout the evaluation and enabled better understanding of the context,
intervention, results, challenges and learning. A systematic approach was applied during desk research
which entailed initial screening and classification (whereby documents were organised and catalogued
according to the type of documents), broader themes were identified (while keeping in view the
Evaluation Matrix), and relevant information was extracted through general reading. The information
gathered was used to appropriately respond to evaluation questions either on its own or with the support
of the primary data collected through field research.
Training
As per ToR, data collection on velyat level was supported by 8 Young SDG ambassadors (2 in each
velayat) as part of UNICEF’s overall vision of youth inclusion and professional development. They are
socially active people, leaders of their local communities. In order to ensure quality data collection by
them, the consultant provided 1.5-day online training for SDGs Ambassadors to prepare them to conduct
FGDs. The training consisted of theoretical and a practical skills component, covering the following
topics: Purpose of the training and purpose of the evaluation; Roles and responsibilities of the SDG
9
Evaluation of the National Plan of Action for Realization of Children’s rights in Turkmenistan for 2018-2022 (NAP) and
UNICEF’s contribution to its design, implementation and monitoring
ambassadors; FGD as a data collection method; following the FGD guides; Method of collecting the data,
recording data and reporting data to the consultant; Confidentiality issues and ethical considerations in
interviewing adult respondents and children.
The evaluator was available to the SDG ambassadors for assistance by email to support any clarification
prior to and during the focus group discussions.
Key Informants Interviews (KIIs) and Focus group discussions (FGDs)
A non-probability sampling method (purposive sampling) was used to select the sites and participants for
this qualitative evaluation study.
The sampling methods for respondents’ selection below were based on the following criteria:
• country geographical coverage and a diversity of beneficiaries;
• balance of government and non-government partners; inclusion of all relevant UN sister agencies and
other development agencies;
• coverage of all main stakeholders
Using the method of in-depth semi-structured interviews and expert consultations, the evaluation gained
the perceptions, opinions and practices of the stakeholders. A non-probability sampling method
(purposive sampling) was used to select the participants for this evaluation study.
The data collection stage of the evaluation was conducted in the period 10 Oct – 31 Dec 2021. It
comprised online interviews.
The evaluator conducted 19 interviews with key informants, both individual and group interviews as
follows:
-Programme managers of UN agencies involved with the government in a Joint programme to develop
and establish services for specific vulnerable people including children,
-The government of Turkmenistan with the relevant line ministries and agencies responsible for the
implementation of the related components of the 6 goal areas in the NAP: Ministry of Labour and Social
Protection of the Population, Ministry of Education and Ministry of Internal Affairs (responsible for
juvenile justice)
-Managers of residential institutions under the Ministry of Education, Ministry of Labour and Social
Protection of the Population
-Public associations – non-governmental organisations involved in NAP implementation
The SDGs Ambassadors conducted 18 FGDs with children and parents from the following specific
populations: Parents (mixed male and female) of young children, Parents (mixed male and female) in
need of government support, Parents (mixed male and female) of children with disabilities. Children of
school age i.e. 16-17 in all 5 velayats covering all country. Young people (aged 18 or above) leaving
formal care (residential institution).
(A list of Key informants is attached as Annex 2 to this report).
4.5. Data analysis
The following tools for data analysis will be employed:
Qualitative analysis – description of the facts in the context of the relations among them, argumentation
and evidence. This analysis is based on data from interviews and desk review and will explain the review
findings.
Quantitative data analysis - analysis of secondary quantitative data i.e. available statistics will be
analysed to look at patterns and trends.
Stakeholder analysis – analysis of the perspectives of different stakeholders and how these help mapping
strengths and weaknesses. Also this method will facilitate the analysis on the coherence criteria.
10
Evaluation of the National Plan of Action for Realization of Children’s rights in Turkmenistan for 2018-2022 (NAP) and
UNICEF’s contribution to its design, implementation and monitoring
Comparative analysis – comparing approaches and their relevance to implement certain policies.
Comparative analysis will demonstrate the similarities and differences between the concept and process
of providing social support within the framework of the traditional state service providers and the newly
emerging service models.
Most significant change – the ToR specifically asks the evaluator to use the technique during all
assessment methods alongside other more rigorous approaches. The most-significance-change analysis is
based on generating and analysing personal accounts of people of change and deciding which of these
accounts is the most significant, and why. It will also seek to identify changes that would not have
occurred without UNICEF.
4.6. Ethics
The evaluation adhered to all applicable UNEG ethical norms and standards18, and UNICEF procedure on
ethical standards19 as are prescribed in the relevant key guiding documents. The description below
outlines key aspects of each dimension:
• Independence and impartiality: The evaluator ensured independence from the Programme during
all phases of evaluation. The evaluator had no conflict of interest and no role in the implementation of
Programme activities.
• Credibility: The evaluation was planned with inclusive and participatory data collection
methodology (involving a range of relevant stakeholders for feedback) and triangulation of reported
findings by using an analysis of evidence from both secondary and primary data sources
• Human Rights and Gender Equality: The evaluator integrated the principles of Human Rights and
Gender Equality (HRBA and UNSWAP) at all stages of the evaluation.
• Evaluation ethics: The evaluator considered and respect local culture, beliefs, customs, and values
during fieldwork. She upheld the rights of institutions (organizations) and individuals (organization’s
representatives) by requesting verbal informed consent and maintaining the confidentiality of all
respondents. The evaluation process was conducted with sensitiveness to beliefs, manners, and
customs of the social and cultural environment in Turkmenistan. All interviews and preliminary
contacts were organised in a culturally appropriate way. The evaluator did not assess the personal
performance of individuals and balanced an assessment of management functions with due
consideration of this principle.
• Professionalism: The evaluator is professional with extensive knowledge, training, and experience
working with multiple clients on local and international projects.
• Privacy of Participants: The participants were informed of who would have access to their private
data, and that an authorised team member will remove all identifying information of the respondents.
All the data was saved in separate folder that was end-to-end encrypted and accessed to core
evaluator only.
Since the evaluation involved children in the data collection, the evaluation methodology and data tolls
underwent an ethical review by the Ethics Review Board (ERB). Research Ethics Approval is attached as
an annex to this report.
4.7. Limitations, constraints and mitigation strategies
Find below a list of limitations and constraints for this evaluation with mitigation measures applied:
The following limitations of the evaluation were factored in:
• Incomplete result-based framework of NAP – The result-based framework of the NAP (Appendix to
NAP) is equipped with objectives to the goals but with no objectives indicators and expected outcomes.
Where indicators are available, they refer to the key actions only. Where indicators to key actions refer
to numbers, baseline and targets are missing, which makes the assessment of progress difficult.
• Mitigation strategy: The consultant rearranged result framework under each goal to the extent possible.
Where indicators for the goal were missing, the goal was decomposed to outcomes and indicators were
suggested to enable the judgment of progress.
18 UNEG Norms and Standards of Evaluation (2017); UNEG Evaluation Reports Standards (2015).
19 UNICEF Procedure for Ethical Standards (2015).
11
Evaluation of the National Plan of Action for Realization of Children’s rights in Turkmenistan for 2018-2022 (NAP) and
UNICEF’s contribution to its design, implementation and monitoring
• Limited data availability, including disaggregation: The justification section and the evaluation
framework of NAP does not contain limited baseline data to ground the goals on. The mid-term review
conducted in 2020 documented limited comparative data or mid-term data (with very few exceptions
of some non-quantified data). Narrative component to the mid-term review was not identified to feed
information on any relevant trends that might have occurred during NAP implementation. No publicly
available data on child-related indicators is available on the official website of the State Statistical
Committee of Turkmenistan.
• Mitigation strategy: MICS data had been provided to inform previous UNICEF publications as part of
joint initiatives/projects and these were used for this evaluation. MICS 2015 and Transmonee data were
used as baseline on some of NAP indicators. Additionally, the consultant also relied on data provided
by officials during primary data collection (interviews) and internationally recognised sources such as
WHO, World Bank, UN, etc. Additionally, judgments were made based on trends indicated in previous
publications or/and last publicly available data in English or Russian.
• No pre-existing theory of change was developed to justify the NAP.
• Mitigation strategy: A large number of documents were reviewed to inform the reconstruction of the
Theory of change retroactively.
• Limited use of data collection tools: Due to Covid-19 situation, no travel was foreseen under this
assignment. This limited the efficiency of data collection as well as reduced some of the methods that
could be used e.g. on-the-field observation. Also, no national consultant or team consultants with
specialised knowledge under each topical area was envisaged in the ToR to support the work of the
Evaluator.
Mitigation strategy: The Evaluator trained young SDG Ambassadors to cover data collection in regions.
Additional topic-specific literature was explored to deepen the knowledge of the consultant on the
developments under each sector in the country.
5. Evaluation management
This section covers the evaluation management arrangements, evaluation team and functions,
implementation phases and deliverables under each evaluation phase.
5.1. Evaluation Oversight – Evaluation Steering Committee
The evaluation was commissioned by UNICEF CO Turkmenistan and was supervised by Child rights
monitoring and evaluation specialist at UNICEF acting as Evaluation Manager for this evaluation.
Support for this evaluation was provided by all UNICEF programme staff.
The Evaluation Reference Group (ERG) comprised of the representatives of the major stakeholders
including Evaluation Manager, Deputy Representative (or OIC), UNICEF Programme staff, Regional
Monitoring and Evaluation Advisor.
5.2. Work plan
The evaluation was implemented between August and December 2021. The implementation did not face
any major delays. The field work related to FGDs with children and parents was originally planned for
October 2021 as part of the field work schedule. However, COVID-19 pandemic situation caused change
of format (from face-to-face to online) as well as rescheduling the groups to December 2021. This caused
minor internal rearrangement of the original work plan without affecting the overall evaluation being on
track. A full list of scheduled and conducted meetings during the data collection stage is provided as an
annex to this report.
The evaluation was conducted with a participatory approach engaging all relevant stakeholders. The
evaluation process followed a phased approach with five key phases i.e., inception, fieldwork, data
processing and analysis, validation & preliminary findings and reporting. Each phase had a series of
activities/tasks (implemented both concurrently and sequentially) and associated deliverables. A detailed
presentation of the process is presented as an annex to this report.
12
Evaluation of the National Plan of Action for Realization of Children’s rights in Turkmenistan for 2018-2022 (NAP) and
UNICEF’s contribution to its design, implementation and monitoring
5. Gender Equality, Equity, and Human Rights Based Approach (HRBA)
This section discusses the extent to which the evaluator finds integration of gender equality, equity and
Human Rights Based Approach (HRBA) in the evaluated interventions- design and implementation of
both the evaluation itself and the evaluated programme.
HRBA in evaluation design and implementation: The whole evaluation was guided by the principles
underlying the Convention on the Rights of the Children. The principle of gender equality, equity and
Human Rights Based Approach was applied in the design of the evaluation. Assessment of the extent
HRBA principle was included in the overall evaluation framework by including principle-specific
questions and sub-questions. The principle of participation was applied to the evaluation design by
involving beneficiaries of policies addressed by the NAP, namely parents and children, seeking their
opinions and views on all areas of the NAP. The principles of gender equality and representing the most
vulnerable guided the evaluation design in terms of data collection, namely FGDs were designed to
represent equally boys and girls, as well as mother and fathers. Most vulnerable groups (children with
disabilities, children victims of violence, migrant or refugee children, children in conflict with the law,
children in residential institutions) were given voice during data collection in three ways:
- Desk research specifically focused on identifying data on the most vulnerable children and
families;
- Key informants representing NAP design and implementation were specifically asked about the
most vulnerable groups of children and families;
- Children with disabilities (parents); children in residential institutions (care leavers) were
represented in the FGDs with children and parents. Child-sensitive language was used in the FGDs
HRBA in NAP design and implementation: In addition to the evaluation questions regarding the main
evaluation criteria (relevance, effectiveness and sustainability), the NAP was assessed with a gender
equality, equity and HRBA lens. These principles were applied in the NAP design and implementation to
further the realization of human rights and ensure that human rights standards and principles guide all
phases of NAP implementation. It focuses on the development of the capacities of ‘duty-bearers’ to meet
their obligations and of ‘rights-holders’ to claim their rights.
The gender equality is also a normative principle to ensure that priorities in the NAP reflect the country’s
commitments to achieving gender equality and that the results contribute to these gender equality goals.
Gender mainstreaming is a key strategy to examine how women and men and boys and girls experience
problems differently, and how they relate to one another and the societal forces that shape power
relationships. The NAP design has benefitted from the available secondary literature. A dedicated gender
assessment and equity gaps were outlined in situational analysis informing the design of the NAP deepen
understanding around gender-specific determinants.
Gender considerations were made across the NAP for instance women and girls were of special focus in
terms of improving health (maternity health, health of women in reproductive age, measures to reduce
adolescent pregnancies) and education (teachers certified in comprehensive gender sensitive and age
appropriate reproductive health education). HRBA was explicitly used in identifying the vulnerable
groups and developing strategies to promote their rights. The design of goals 4 and 5 of the NAP, for
example, was fully informed by children’s rights based approach in identifying the biggest vulnerabilities
for children i.e. disability, violence, conflict with the law, family separation and migrancy. However, the
scale of interventions as they are documented did not affect any nationwide equity unless they are
implemented nation-wide with sufficient coverage.
13
Evaluation of the National Plan of Action for Realization of Children’s rights in Turkmenistan for 2018-2022 (NAP) and
UNICEF’s contribution to its design, implementation and monitoring
6. Evaluation findings
6.1. Relevance
This section looks at the extent to which the NAP was relevantly designed and planned in accordance to
the country needs, priorities and policies. The section ends with preliminary conclusions. The analysis
was based on:
• The relevance to context of the NAP i.e. the extent it is aligned to national and international priorities
and needs
• The relevance of the logical framework of the NAP i.e. the extent to which the NAP was designed in
a way that the logic of intervention articulates the objectives related to child rights and demonstrates
the causal links of the interventions.
In terms of relevance, the evaluator has made the following judgments of the main components of
the NAP relevance: (See Table 4)
Table 3 Assessment of relevance
Relevance criteria Level of Justification
relevance
Relevance to context HIGH The NAP is aligned with priorities targeted by other child-related national strategies
and programmes e.g. on education, early child development, etc. The NAP puts
together all national effort under one comprehensive strategic document. The NAP
is generally aligned with priorities and gaps identified in situational analyses and
recommendations of the international organisations, such as UNICEF and the
Committee on the Rights of the Child. The NAP was not based on detailed and
comprehensive assessment of needs of children and families, however, situational
analysis informed the NAP design in terms of existing gaps and specific vulnerable
groups. Most of these groups of children are covered by the NAP. However, some
groups of children were not explicitly addressed on the level of objectives and
expected outcomes e.g. children victims of sale, child prostitution and child
pornography or other forms of sexual exploitation, children placed in institutions,
children in rural areas, etc., which runs the risk of the plan not fully addressing those
groups. At the same time other groups of children are targeted without clear
justification of their need.
Relevance of the MODERATE The NAP is equipped with a results framework. However, it contains formulations
logical framework of goals and objectives that are insufficiently specific, realistic or measurable.
Expected outcomes for children were not identified. Indicators for measuring
progress of activities are in place but no indicators for measuring progress towards
the objectives and goals were formulated, which limits the government and the
stakeholders in the judgment of how well the designed interventions performed for
children and their families.
Relevance to context
The context of planning of the NAP is that of modernising the care systems in Turkmenistan following
the country’s independence, the ratification of the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child
(UNCRC) in 1991 as well as other international child-rights conventions and protocols. (See Figure 3)
The state introduced a number of national programmes and regulative frameworks relevant to children’s
rights regarding health, education, family upbringing, social support, protection of the child from
economic exploitation. etc. Some of them targeted children specifically (e.g. Law of Turkmenistan on
Promotion and Support to Breastfeeding, 2016; the law on State Guarantees of the Rights of the Child,
2014, National Programme of Turkmenistan on early development and preparation of children to school
for 2011-2015, etc.).
14
Evaluation of the National Plan of Action for Realization of Children’s rights in Turkmenistan for 2018-2022 (NAP) and
UNICEF’s contribution to its design, implementation and monitoring
Other milestones of the pre-NAP context are related to efforts targeting the whole population or whole
sectors but benefit children among other groups. Among them are the Family Code of Turkmenistan,
2012; the Code of Turkmenistan of Social Protection of
Figure 3 Key milestones predefining NAP development
Population 2012; the Programme of President of
Turkmenistan on social and economic development of
the country for 2014-2018; the General Programme of
Supply of clean drinking water in residential areas of
the country, National Action Plan for Ensuring Gender
Equality for the years of 2015-2020, National Action
Plan in the Area of Human Rights for the years of
2016-2020, etc.
In 2015 the UN Committee on the Rights of the Child
presented the Concluding Observations to
Turkmenistan, in which the Committee highlighted the
need for developing a comprehensive data collection
and monitoring system as well as expanding the
support systems for vulnerable groups of children.
Specifically, the Committee recommended the setting
up of a comprehensive child rights national strategy.
The National Action Plan on realization of children’s
rights in Turkmenistan for the years of 2018-2022 was
approved by the Decree of the President of
Turkmenistan of 22.06.2018. The Plan was elaborated
with the consideration of recommendations of the UN
Committee on the Rights of a Child, with the
participation of respective ministries and agencies,
institutions and public organizations of Turkmenistan,
together with the UNICEF Representative Office in
Turkmenistan. This has been the first child-related national strategy which targets all areas of children’s
rights as per CRC as opposed to taking fragmented approach. Furthemore, the NAP brings together the
responsibilities of all relevant stakehoders (agencies, ministries, UN agencies, civil organisations) under
one policy document for children.
The conceptualising of the NAP was based on the recommendations of the UNCRC as well as analyses of
the situation20 conducted by UNICEF with close collaboration with the government of Turkmenistan. The
evaluation did not identify government-led comprehensive needs assessments of children groups and their
families, national programmes’ evaluation reports or impact assessments of legislation or policies which
may have informed the design of the NAP. The Institute of State, Law and Democracy, coordinator of the
NAP implementation, organised a poll among children and young people seeking to prioritise their needs
and wishes in various areas of life. The poll was run in November
2020 i.e. two years after the NAP was designed. The evaluation did
not identify documented re-designing of the NAP based on the results
UNICEF
of these polls or any analysis, conclusions and recommendations
stemming from the poll results. “The most significant thing
about the NAP is that it brought
The overall observation is that the process of planning the NAP has many stakeholders to work
employed a mixed approach to defining goals and objectives. From together.”
the one hand the planning is based on the rights of the children
generally (benefitting all children), and on the other hand a focus is
placed on certain groups in terms of vulnerability.
20 UNICEF in Turkmenistan, Analysis of Situation of Children’s and Women’s Rights in Turkmenistan, Ashgabat, 2019 and
UNICEF, UNFPA, UNDP in Turkmenistan, Situational Analysis on Youth in Turkmenistan, Ashgabat, 2019
15
Evaluation of the National Plan of Action for Realization of Children’s rights in Turkmenistan for 2018-2022 (NAP) and
UNICEF’s contribution to its design, implementation and monitoring
The evaluation finds that the NAP has been generally aligned with priorities highlighed in a number of
national and international child rights policy documents: See Table 5.
Table 4 Relevance to context
Policy Identified needs Group of Alignment Justification
children
Turkmenistan has taken a course All children HIGH The National Action Plan on Children is based on the
towards modernising the child- including principles and provisions of the Constitution of
related systems in the country. In vulnerable Turkmenistan, the Law of Turkmenistan “On State
achieving this goal a number of children Guarantees of the Rights of a Child”, UN Convention
national policies target pursue of on the Rights of a Child and other international
the best interest of the child in agreements in the interests of children, the participant
terms of accessible healthcare of which is Turkmenistan. The key priorities of the
(breastfeeding, access to quality National plan on Children’s rights are guided by the
healthcare, maternal health), access goals and objectives of national policies, programmes
to quality education, social support and plans, such as the National Programme of
to vulnerable children and their Turkmenistan for Socio-economic Development for
s
e ic families, etc. 2011-2030, the new edition of the National
ilo
Programme of the President of Turkmenistan on the
p
la Development of Social and Living Conditions of
n
o
ita Residents of Villages, Communities, Towns and
N
Regional Centres until 2020, the Programme of
President of Turkmenistan on social and economic
development of the country for 2018-2014, the
General Programme of Supply of clean drinking water
in residential areas of the country, the General
Programme of Turkmenistan on Development of
Juvenile Justice, the National Strategy and Action
Plan for 2015–2019 on Maternal, Newborn, Child and
Adolescent Health. The National plan stipulates 6
goal areas which are aligned with the key SDGs
related to children’s well-being.
Improvement of Turkmenistan’s All children HIGH The NAP stipulates the increase the availability and
data collection system on children’s access to data on realization of the rights of the child,
rights disaggregated by, inter alia, especially those related to Sustainable Development
sex, age, national and ethnic origin, goals. In the year of 2017, the first assessment of
geographical location, and availability of basic indicators related to children was
d
lih socioeconomic status, in order to held together with UNICEF. The NAP makes
C
e facilitate analysis on the situation of arrangements to address the data collection and data
h
t fo children at risk and children victims availability issues regarding children’s rights
s th of offences prohibited by the monitoring identified both by CRC and UNICEF21.
g
ir
e
Protocol.
n
h t Full incorporation of measures Children LOW The NAP has made arrangements for harmonization
o
e
(prohibition, reporting, victims of of national legislation with international standards in
e
ttim investigation, victims support and sale, child the field of human rights and the protection of
m prevention) against the sale of prostitution children from all forms of violence and ill-treatment
o
C children, child prostitution and and child as well as plans for preventionive measures. Although
child pornography are not clearly pornography child sale, prostitution and pornograpgy are among
and specifically defined and or other forms the form of violence against children, no explicit
prohibited in the national legislation of sexual plans were identified in the NAP against these
exploitation specific forms of violence.
Absence of professional social and All vulnerable HIGH The NAP has been designed to address the need of
y rtn
u o C
F E C IN U
e m
m a rg o rP
5
1 0 2 tn
e m u c o D
-
1 2 0 2
p
w
r v ‘ e c
r
u
o
s o
o
l p
r
n n
t
k
e
o e ti
e
c
n r n
r
t
a d
i
s
u b
o
u a
w
l
n
e m d
i
s
e c
t
e
h
q o h
r
u f i
v
t
l
h
a s d
i
t
c
e
e r e
e
r e l
c
v
s
y n
a
i .
i
p
c t
n
T o e
a
c
s
c
h
l
t ’
i
u
h e
t
f
d
e
y
r o e
i
n
t
n
r
o
i e
g
s c e h n
s
d i
o
o s ld
c
o
i a
f
l c
i
c d
n
h
h is
c
i
i a
l
l
lu
d
d b
d
r
r i
e
e l
i
i
n
n
n ti
,
g
e w s i th
c
s
s fa
y
e
o
m r
s
n
v
t
c
i
e
i l
e
c
m
i
p
e e s s
t
o
u
. i
r
a
n
i
l
e
i
s
n
s
u
i
t
n
e
p
g
d
p o
a
to
r
n
t
d
p
t o
r
e
o
s
c
v
t
h
a
id
i
b
l
e
l
d
i
r
s
c
e
h
o
n
m
m
a
e
m
t
n
r
u
t
i s
n
o
k
i
f
t y
a
c
-
n
h
b
d
il
a
d
t
s
h
e
p
e
d
r
i
o
r
s
t
o
e
c
c
i
t
a
io
l
n
21 UNICEF in Turkmenistan, Analysis of Situation of Children’s and Women’s Rights in Turkmenistan, Ashgabat, 2019
16
Evaluation of the National Plan of Action for Realization of Children’s rights in Turkmenistan for 2018-2022 (NAP) and
UNICEF’s contribution to its design, implementation and monitoring
protection that could assure
protection and welfare of the child
at all times and at all levels
Insufficient access to quality health All children, HIGH The NAP has been designed to address the need of
and education services, especially specifically higher quality health services for children, specifically
for children with disabilities and children with infants and women in reproductive age. Furthemore,
their families. disabilities the NAP outlines prioroties related to improved
The Situational analysis indicates and young access to quality education, specifically for children
insufficient access to support to children with disabilities.
children with disabilities and their
families.
The Observations of the Committee on the rights of the Child in 2015 and the situational analyses22 on
children and youth informing the development of the NAP
Figure 4 Groups of children covered by the NAP indicated gaps for certain groups of children (children victims
of sexual exploitation, children in rural areas, children in
institutions, etc.). The evaluation finds that on the level of
goals and objectives the NAP prioritises most of these groups.
At the same time, there are groups of children that are not
explicitly addressed by the NAP (e.g. children victims of
sexual exploitation, children placed in institutions), while
other groups appear in the NAP with no documented
justification of needs or at least no data was identified to
demonstrate the need for such prioritization (e.g. HIV-
affected children, migrant children or children in forced
labour). See Figure 4.
Relevance of the logical framework
There is no documented rationale or detailed justification demonstrating how and why the NAP priorities
were selected to contribute to the greater aim or the way they complement each other to produce results
for children or what specific results for children are expected. For example the needs assessment and the
reconstruction of the ToC indicates the need for an enabling environment. At the same time it is not
explicitly described how the “Harmonization of legislation with key international agreements and
conventions related to promotion and protection of Children’s rights”23 is expected to contribute to
specific results for children and what specific changes are expected to happen as a result of the
legislation.
The analysis of the results framework of the NAP finds that there is no overall aim formulated for the
NAP. The evaluator assumes that this may be stemming from the idea that the plan targets all children, as
it is based on the CRC. However, the lack of an overall goal (on strategic level) makes the judgement of
the overall progress more difficult as well as makes the assessment of the extent the objectives and
outputs sufficiently covering the strategic aim less feasible.
The NAP is equipped with a results framework, where each goal area contains objectives and priorities
concerning group of children or certain interventions. Some of the goals seem to be formulated as
interventions rather than changes in the lives of children and their families (e.g. “Harmonization of
legislation with key international agreements and conventions related to promotion and protection of
22 UNICEF in Turkmenistan, Analysis of Situation of Children’s and Women’s Rights in Turkmenistan, Ashgabat, 2019 and
UNICEF, UNFPA, UNDP in Turkmenistan, Situational Analysis on Youth in Turkmenistan, Ashgabat, 2019
23 NAP, Goal 1
17
Evaluation of the National Plan of Action for Realization of Children’s rights in Turkmenistan for 2018-2022 (NAP) and
UNICEF’s contribution to its design, implementation and monitoring
Children’s rights”), while others are formulated as rights (e.g. “All children without exception have a
right to education”).
The goals and objectives in the NAP were formulated as insufficiently measurable and time-bound (e.g.
Improve the quality of secondary education) , or in a way that their achievement is not realistic within the
lifespan of the plan (5 years) such as “All children without exception have a right to be free from
violence, exploitation, ill-treatment in the family…”. 24
Many of the goals and objectives are formulated too generally or broadly (e.g. “Expand existing
information and data on national standards of living standards”, or “Media”). This limits the possibilities
of better understanding the extent to which the interventions have indeed made a difference to the lives of
children and their families and whether the most needy have been actually reached in a good way.
Indicators for measuring results for children were not identified on impact level, goal level and objectives
level. The results framework contains indicators on outputs level only i.e. specific actions rather than
indicators for impact, expected results and objectives.
An operational plan explicitly demonstrating how the results in each goal area will be achieved was not
identified. Data25 indicates that each goal area is allocated to a relevant ministry or agency, which takes
responsibility over the implementation. The overall implementation is managed by an inter-agency
coordination group representing relevant agencies and is chaired by the Minister of Foreign Affairs with
the secretariat at the Institute of State, Law and Democracy.
Box 1: Preliminary conclusions: Relevance
• RELEVANCE 1: The NAP is generally aligned to the strategic priorities of child-rights’ national strategies
as well as strategic priorities identified in UN recommendations. The NAP is the first national policy
document putting together a comprehensive plan towards advancing children’s rights in Turkmenistan.
• RELEVANCE 2: The design of the NAP is moderately relevant to the needs of the children as it is oriented
to all children but some vulnerable groups identified by the preliminary analysis as priority were not covered
by the NAP on the level of formulating objectives. The internal causal links between goals, objectives and
interventions are implicit and the results framework is insufficiently designed to capture outcomes for
children.
6.2. Effectiveness
This section analyses the extent to which the NAP has achieved its goals, objectives and set targets. It
also discusses the overall progress of NAP as well as NAP contribution to SDGs. The description ends
with preliminary conclusions.
6.2.1. Progress towards goals
The section presents an overview of the general assessment on effectiveness and discusses each of the
goals (1-6).
The NAP priorities are organised under six goals areas with 36 objectives under these goals. There is no
overall strategic goal formulated. (See Annex). The quality of the result framework is evaluated as low:
- The NAP was not fully equipped with targets and indicators on the level of objectives and goals (but
for activities only), nor with expected outcomes for children.
- The goals and objectives were not formulated as sufficiently realistic, specific and measurable. Goals
were largely formulated as rights rather than goals.
24 NAP, Goal 5
25 Interviews with implementing agencies
18
Evaluation of the National Plan of Action for Realization of Children’s rights in Turkmenistan for 2018-2022 (NAP) and
UNICEF’s contribution to its design, implementation and monitoring
- Goal 1 (Ensure the implementation of the CRC and its optional protocols […]) and Goal 6 (All
children have a right to participate in the decision-making affecting their life, well-being and
development and express their opinion, which is to be taken into account) are formulated as separate
thematic areas whilst they are actually horizontal and cross-cutting approaches.
- The NAP makes provisions that a mid-term review be performed in 2020. It was conducted in the
form of the Narrative reports and collection of quantitative data by each ministry. The data were
organised along the NAP result-framework but there were sometimes inconsistencies (e.g. targets and
progress not clear enough or missing). The available indicators are on the level of activities only
which decreases the validity of the indicators when applied to objectives and goals. That limits the
possibilities of conducting an analysis of effectiveness per se and measuring the specific progress
towards outcome for children. For the purpose of this evaluation, the analysis covers measurable
achievements that are possible to identify, and analysis of the causal links behind those achievements.
Each goal is evaluated separately and preliminary conclusions on progress are presented in tables under
each goal. Where the result frameworks are incomplete or incoherent, additional outcome indicators were
included in the analysis. For better presentation of the progress, achievements under each goal and
objective were assessed against the extent of achieved targets and colour-coded in the following way:
Sufficient data not identified to assess progress
The trend is not sufficient to achieve progress
Ongoing progress
Target achieved
Since the evaluation is taking place one year before the last implementation period of the NAP, all
conclusions on lack or little progress towards goals are made here in the context of likeliness to be
achieved by the end of NAP lifecycle i.e. by the end of 2022.
Goal 1: Ensure the implementation of the CRC and its optional protocols in Turkmenistan with the
maximum use of available resources and within the framework of international cooperation
Below is a summary of the progress against this goal. See Table 6. Details are presented after the table.
Table 53 Progress towards Goal 1
Goal 1: Ensure the implementation of the CRC and its optional protocols in Turkmenistan with the maximum use of available resources and within the
framework of international cooperation
Objective Indicators as per NAP progress
1.1. Harmonization of legislation with key international agreements and conventions related to promotion and protection of children’s rights
1.1.1.Accession to key international • Optional protocol approved • Discussions in progress
agreements and conventions related to promotion
and protection of children’s rights
1.1.2.Improve and harmonize legislation of • Identify and harmonize with the CRC the legislative acts related
Turkmenistan on children in order to achieve to realization and protection of the rights of the children. • 15 legislative acts adopted by
further consistency with the CRC. • Number of adopted legislative acts related to children, Parliament
harmonized with the CRC as compared to the total number
subject to harmonization. • Not identified
• Procedures and criteria developed.
1.2. Coordination
1.2.1. Strengthen coordination between various • Effective coordination mechanism for monitoring of • Discussions on a central-level body
agencies and stakeholders responsible for observation of children’s rights established responsible for broader child rights
providing rights and services to children by the issues in line with the CRC in progress
end of the implementation period of the NPAC • Coordination mechanism provided with adequate resources for • Not identified
its efficient performance
1.3. Data collection and resources for children
1.3.1. Increase the availability and access to data • Comparative disaggregated data available • In progress- MICS 2019 available;
on realization of the rights of the child, especially SDG reporting available; Sectoral
those related to SDGs, disaggregated by gender, management information systems
age, disability, ethnicity, geographical location in pending
accordance with the Concluding Observations of
the CRC • Statistical compendium available • Yes (not available online)
19
Evaluation of the National Plan of Action for Realization of Children’s rights in Turkmenistan for 2018-2022 (NAP) and
UNICEF’s contribution to its design, implementation and monitoring
1.4. Training on and dissemination of the Convention on the Rights of the Child
1.4.1. Raise awareness on the Convention on the • Ratio of implemented activities to planned activities. • A number of activities implemented
Rights of the Child and Concluding Observations • No of officials and professionals trained on realization of the • 719 training events conducted
rights of the child.
• Level of knowledge among trained officials and professionals • No outcome evaluation identified
about the CRC increased.
1.5. Cooperation
1.5.1. Ensure the involvement of public • List of actions with designated role of public associations • At least 5 organisations26 involved in
associations in promoting and realizing the rights available various activities
enshrined in the CRC and the NPAC, both in • % increase of public associations involved in the monitoring of • Still to be addressed restrictions on
their independent activities and in cooperation children’s rights and NPAC implementation as compared to the the functioning of independent civil
with state bodies. year 2015 society organizations, including those
working on children’s rights
1.6. Independent monitoring
1.6.1. Development and implementation of a • Operational mechanism for independent monitoring of • Ombudsman established and capacity
mechanism for independent monitoring of children’s rights available strengthening in progress to advocate
observance of children's rights, enabling to for strategy and mechanism for
receive, investigate and handle complaints from independent monitoring across all
children, taking into account children's specifics systems
1.7. Intersectoral coordination
1.7.1. Ensure intersectoral coordination in the • National ECD strategy for 2019-2024 adopted • Yes
field of early childhood policy
Assessment of progress on this goal
From ToC perspective, the interventions along this goal were envisaged to contribute to creating an enabling environment for realisation of child rights in
Turkmenistan. Analysis of the main parameters reveals that Turkmenistan has built on previous effort for ensuring an environment for realization of human rights
and child’s rights in the country in the area of human rights protection, gender equality, protection of women’s, children’s and disabled people’s rights, youth policy,
implementation of international conventions in the area of human rights protection. A number of amendments and improvements were made to existing legislation
as well as child-related programmes. Establishing permanent interagency body ensuring that children’s rights are implemented in every sector related to children has
not been achieved during the reviewed period and there are no indications that it is likely to be achieved by the end of the NAP implementation period. Significant
progress was made in terms of data collection, yet there are still gaps in terms of data collection and data accessibility. The environment for public associations to be
able to respond to children’s needs is improving but not yet sufficiently. A significant step in ensuring independent guarding of children’s rights is the establishment
of the Ombudsman27 currently in a GANHRI accreditation process for compliance with Paris Principles.28 UNICEF contributed to strengthening the capacity of the
Ombudsman by conducting joint awareness raising on child rights.
Goal 1 of the NAP is addressing gaps in creating an enabling environment for exercising
children’s rights rather than setting objectives in terms of achieving those rights for children.
This is a crosscutting approach rather than a goal with direct outcomes for children. Below are the
main parameters identified in Goal 1 as important for creating a more enabling environment for
implementing a children’s rights strategy in the country.
Harmonisation of legislation
In 2019 constitutional reforms was launched in Turkmenistan. The main goal of these reforms is
expansion of representation of people in the supreme organs of state power, further democratization of
public and political life, strengthening foundations of constitutional framework, improving democratic
foundations of public administration, enhancing the role of powers of the Medjlis, Halk Maslahaty and
establishing a bicameral Parliamentary system of the law-making body with the consideration of national
achievements and advanced world practice.
The NAP builds on the progress that Turkmenistan had previously made toward creating an enabling
environment for children by enacting new laws on Trafficking in persons Equality of Women, Education
and Youth, and the Law on Child Rights Guarantees. (See Figure 3 in Relevance section). In addition, the
Parliament has adopted several Codes governing child protection, including the Code of Turkmenistan on
Social Protection of the Population and the Family Code, which brought the age of marriage in line with
that of the Convention on the Rights of the Child. The Penal Code, Criminal Procedure Code, and the
Labour Code were also updated so that they would align with recommendations made by treaty bodies.
26 Women’s Union of Turkmenistan, Mahtumkuli Youth Union, National Red Crescent Society, Professional Unions of
Turkmenistan, public association Yenme
27 The Global Alliance of National Human Rights Institutions - GANHRI, through the Sub-Committee on Accreditation (SCA),
is responsible for reviewing and accrediting NHRIs in compliance with the Paris Principles.
28 https://www.tm.undp.org/content/turkmenistan/en/home/presscenter/pressreleases/2021/UNDP-and-APF-assist-the-Office-of-
the-Ombudsperson-in-the-process-of-GANHRI-accreditation.html
20
Evaluation of the National Plan of Action for Realization of Children’s rights in Turkmenistan for 2018-2022 (NAP) and
UNICEF’s contribution to its design, implementation and monitoring
In the evaluation period Turkmenistan has built on previous effort for ensuring an environment for
realization of human rights and child’s rights in the country in the area of human rights protection, gender
equality, protection of women’s, children’s and rights of people with disabilities, youth policy,
implementation of international conventions in the area of human rights protection. A number of
amendments and improvements were made to existing legislation as well as child-related programmes
were adopted, among which:
- Law on the State Guarantees on the Rights of the Child (amended to ensure better harmonization with
international standards)
- Law on Migration – regulates the realisation of migrant and stateless children
- Early Childhood Development Strategy of Turkmenistan 2020-2025
- Law for Psychological Services – introduces the requirement for the presence of legal representative in
case of psychological service provision to children
- endorsement of the National Programme on Health Nutrition of the Population for 2020-2025
- endorsement of the Program for improving the activities of preschool institutions in the field of early
development and pre-primary preparation of children in Turkmenistan for 2020-2025
- endorsement of the National Action Plan to eliminate statelessness in Turkmenistan for 2019–2024
- endorsement of the National Action Plan of Turkmenistan to combat trafficking in human beings for
2020-2022”
- endorsement of the National Action Plan for ensuring gender equality in Turkmenistan for 2021-2025
- endorsement of the Action Plan for the implementation of the “State Programme in the field of state
youth policy of Turkmenistan for 2021-2025”
- Law of Turkmenistan on Breast Feeding Support and Propaganda.
-The National RMNCAH Strategy 2015-2019, 2021-2025
-The National Concept of Introduction of Developmental Paediatrics and Early Intervention, 2015-2020
-MOH Order No 220 on Strengthening of the Infant Young Child Programmes.
-National Nutrition Programme 2015-2019, 2020-2025.
As a follow up to Turkmenistan’s 2019-2024 State Programme on Eliminating Statelessness a new
priority area has been added to the 2021 plan and new partnership with the Ministry of Justice was agreed
in the area of improvement of civil registration system and development of unique IDs, as per the Law on
Civil Registration approved in 2020.
Amendments were introduced across various legislative acts towards improving the realisation of
children’s rights e.g. better access to school for children with disabilities; early retirement for mothers
with eight or more children, state support for people in institutions including children (the Code of
Turkmenistan on Social Protection of the Population); special protection of mothers of infants 0-3
(Criminal Code); improvement of birth registration (Law on Acts of Civil Status), regulating child labour
limitations (Law on the State Guarantee of the Right to Work for Youth).
An important milestone is the introduction of the figure of the Ombudsman in Turkmenistan through the
adoption of the Law of Turkmenistan “On the Ombudsperson” adopted in 2016 and coming into force on
1st January 2017. Although there is no separate Ombudsman for children, the Ombudsman is also
responsible for acting as voice for children.
UNICEF contribution is key in this process in terms of assisting the Parliament not only regarding
adoption of legislation but also research and advice on international best practices as well as education of
MPs of such practices. Furthermore, UNICEF is currently supporting the Government to join the CRC
Optional Protocol on a communications procedure, which allows children to file complaints, appeals and
petitions in situations where their rights have been violated. The Interagency commission on
Turkmenistan international responsibilities in the area of human rights and international humanitarian law
is studying the possibility of approving this Optional Protocol.
Coordination
The implementation of the NAP is being coordinated by an inter-agency group chaired by the Institute of
State, Law and Democracy. This is a positive demonstration of looking at the realisation of children’s
rights in strategic and coordinated terms. At the same time, efforts are still needed to incorporate
coordination mechanisms on more operation level as well as on system level. This means establishing
permanent interagency body ensuring that children’s rights are implemented in every sector related to
children i.e. education, healthcare, social protection and justice. More importantly, mechanisms need to
21
Evaluation of the National Plan of Action for Realization of Children’s rights in Turkmenistan for 2018-2022 (NAP) and
UNICEF’s contribution to its design, implementation and monitoring
be put in place to enable the development and provision of services for children happening not within one
sector alone but is an inter-systemic effort and ensures an integrated character of those services. On a
positive note, in the context of the Ministry of Justice exploring the possibility for a central-level body to
coordinate the work of Commissions on Minors, UNICEF advocates for establishing a central-level body
responsible for broader child rights issues in line with the CRC concluding observation.
Coordination mechanisms should be oriented to three levels: enabling environment (laws and regulation
paving the path for an effective child well-being system), systems (supporting systems towards provision
of integrated services for children and families) and individuals (professionals competences).
Data collection and resources for children
No effective child well-being system can be developed without properly targeting the needs of children
and their families. Policy-making is unlikely to happen without good and accessible data. Prior to the
NAP adoption, in 2017 the first assessment of availability of basic indicators related to children was held
together with UNICEF. The Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) adopted by all UN member states in
2015 constitute the framework of the Sustainable Development Agenda for the period up to 2030 at the
global level. The Government of Turkmenistan (GoT) is committed to advancing the 2030 Agenda being
one of the first countries to nationalise SDGs and establish a mechanism for monitoring their
implementation, having already adapted and adopted 84%29 SDGs into the national plans and strategies
by 2018. Of them, 44 indicators (30%) directly concern the 2030 Agenda’s most vulnerable constituency:
children. In 2019 Turkmenistan conducted the first Voluntary National Review (VNR) on the
achievements towards SDGs. The Review is an important element of the follow-up activities towards
better data gap response and an opportunity to strengthen national policies. UNICEF in Turkmenistan just
recently published an assessment of child-related SDG indicators in Turkmenistan.30
Within the period under review the GoT, assisted by UNICEF, contributed to the Multi Indicator Cluster
Surveys (MICS 6) in 2019. The data were launched in 2020 and became publicly available. Turkmenistan
demonstrates understanding that data should be the core of evidence-based policy-making. However, it
takes time and continuous effort to continue to foster a culture of using data for decision-making by:
- introducing strong monitoring and evaluation results-frameworks on the level of policy, national
strategy, programme and service provision to allow for measuring progress for children and their families;
-digitalising data, including national indicators data (For instance the data collected by the State
Committee of Statistics of Turkmenistan is not available online).
-making data easily accessible to the public, researchers and policy stakeholders.
Training on and dissemination of the Convention on the Rights of the Child
Raising awareness on the rights of the child is important, especially among policy-makers and decision-
makers. Turkmenistan has made efforts towards disseminating the CRC and provide appropriate training
for policy-makers, professionals and children. At the same time it is an objective that goes beyond the
lifespan of the NAP. This is because training and dissemination alone does not bring change if it is not
accompanied by continuous technical support for policy-makers on how to practically translate the
children’s rights into service provision concerning all aspects of a child’s life, including policies in
support to a child’s family. Dissemination of the CRC per se only makes sense if followed up by targeted
advocacy and awareness raising campaigns related to existing social and professional norms in the
country concerning relevant gaps in child welfare e.g. attitudes to children with disabilities (right to
quality education), attitudes of parents or professionals regarding placing children in residential
institutions, including boarding-schools (right to live in the family), etc.
Cooperation
Civil society may of immense support in the full realization of children’s rights in a country. As the NAP
does not specify the measure by which this will be considered successful or the need such cooperation
responds to, the evaluation cannot objectively justify the progress, hence effectiveness.
There are only 12431 public associations in the country. Some of them provide services to children
(Yenme) or youth engagement (Youth Union). However, the spectrum of civil organisations is still
29 COMMITTEE ON THE RIGHTS OF THE CHILD (2020), The combined fifth and sixth Periodic Reports of States Parties
30 UNICEF in Turkmenistan, Updated Assessment of child-related SDG indicators in Turkmenistan, 2021
31 ibid
22
Evaluation of the National Plan of Action for Realization of Children’s rights in Turkmenistan for 2018-2022 (NAP) and
UNICEF’s contribution to its design, implementation and monitoring
insufficient to cover the broad array of areas relevant to children’s rights, including advocacy. To
effectively act as guardians children’s rights, advocacy organisations need a non-restrictive legislative
environment.
According to an analysis32 of the International Centre for Non-profit Law, there are some legal
developments in Turkmenistan that have positive aspects on free association of citizens and forming
public organisations, including:
• The Law on Volunteering, which came into effect on January 20, 2016, and establishes a legal
framework for volunteerism;
• The Law on Combating Human Trafficking, which was adopted on October 15, 2016, and includes
norms for governing public associations’ activities, including cooperation with the state bodies and
administration; and
• The Law on Ombudsman, which entered into force from January 1, 2017, and regulates the
functioning of the new State Institute of the Authorized Human Rights Representative (Ombudsman).
Generally, however, the legal environment public association for in Turkmenistan remains generally
restrictive and insufficiently removing barriers to registration, activities, advocacy work, international
contact, assembly and resources of civil groups. On August 22, 2020, the Mejlis of Turkmenistan adopted
the Law of Turkmenistan “On Introducing Changes and Amendments into the Law of Turkmenistan “On
Public Associations”. Further analysis may be needed to elicit the impact of those amendments and
outlining ways to further improve the environment for public associations to act as a promoter of
children’s rights. Based on KII, one way possibility for improvement could be in terms of easier and
quicker registration.
Independent monitoring
The NAP envisaged the development of a strategy and mechanism for independent monitoring of
observance of children's rights, enabling to receive, investigate and handle complaints from children,
taking into account children's specifics. An overall strategic document arranging such mechanisms was
not identified until now for this evaluation nor indications that such strategy will be developed by the end
of the NAP timeframe.
The Ombudsman establishment is a positive step towards guarding children’s rights. However,
independent monitoring cannot be ensured by one act of strategy development only. Independent
monitoring of children’s rights and complaints mechanisms should be a cross-section on a number of
strategies and policies concerning children. The following are pillars of independent monitoring:
- Data collection for children and easy public access to data;
- Integrating evidence-based results framework in every policy, strategy, programme or action plan
where monitoring and evaluation is based on measurable indicators;
- Strengthening the environment for independent civil groups and public associations to act as monitors
independent of the state;
- Principles of child participation underlie each child-related policy in all areas of children’s life i.e.
education, social protection, healthcare and justice. Child participation is not only a legislative norm,
it is a philosophy of working with children where the opinion of the child is sought in a child-
appropriate way and is taken into consideration.
- Complaints mechanism need to be developed on each level of service provision and in a child-
appropriate way.
Intersectoral coordination
In broader terms intersectoral cooperation incorporates the concepts of partnership, collaboration and
cooperation and aims at networking professionals from different agencies to work together to meet the
needs of a specific target group(s) of children. In specific terms it may address national regulatory
frameworks on child protection that expressly require the horizontal and vertical cooperation between
guardianship authorities, as well as intersectoral cooperation in the field of child protection.
In more specific terms, intersectoral cooperation may be defined on various levels of a system (ministry,
agency, service provider). For instance, on service level it can be described as a process in which several
professional groups, various knowledge and skills bases, as well as coming from different agencies, are
brought together in a network to provide services (case management).
32 https://www.icnl.org/resources/civic-freedom-monitor/turkmenistan
23
Evaluation of the National Plan of Action for Realization of Children’s rights in Turkmenistan for 2018-2022 (NAP) and
UNICEF’s contribution to its design, implementation and monitoring
Although in essence cooperation should be seen as an activity or approach rather than an objective for
children, in the NAP intersectoral cooperation is defined as an objective as well as one that goes beyond
the lifespan of the NAP. As it is not defined specifically and measurable success indicators are missing,
the extent to which such cooperation is existent, is hard to evaluate. The envisaged measures are oriented
to field of early childhood policy only without justifying why it was selected among other possible areas
or what specifically is targeted in terms of intersectoral cooperation in that area.
Due to the nature of early intervention, it can be assumed that this part of the NAP targets the
development of integrated services for young children. The extent to which that integration was achieved
is discussed in a separate evaluation report33. Based on the lessons learnt, next-period NAP should target
principles of intersectorial cooperation to be practically translated into other areas of children’s needs
based on proper needs assessment.
Goal 2: Children in Turkmenistan should have all conditions for physical, mental and social well-
being, including medical aid, protection and improvement of their health, disease prevention, high
level of nutrition, access to safe drinking water and high level of sanitation
Below is a summary of the progress against this goal. See Table 7. Details are presented after the table.
Table 6 Progress towards Goal 2
Goal 2: Children in Turkmenistan should have all conditions for physical, mental and social well-being, including medical aid, protection and improvement
of their health, disease prevention, high level of nutrition, access to safe drinking water and high level of sanitation
SDGs contribution
SDG 1 SDG 2 SDG 3
2.1. Children’s health
Objective Indicators as per NAP progress
2.1.1 Reduce the infant mortality • Decrease of neonatal mortality rate by 15% by 2022 as compared • Increase by 0.81% (by 2020)
rate (children under 1 year of age) to 2015
and the mortality rate of children • Decrease of infant mortality rate by 20% by 2022 as compared to • Decrease by 0.96% (by 2020)
under 5 years of age 2015
• Decrease of mortality rate of children under 5 by 20% by 2022 as • Decrease by 1.02% (by 2020)
compared to 2015
• Exclusive/% breastfeeding of children under 6 months should be • 56.5% as of 201934
not less than 60%
• Indicators from the Mother and Children Health Programme • Evaluation in progress
2.1.2 Ensure that all children have • Immunization coverage of children > 95%, according to National • 98.335
access to free and high-quality calendar of preventive vaccination
healthcare, regardless of their place • No of approved Orders and protocols on early intervention • (target 35)36 2537 orders/protocols
of residence, social status, disability services and for the prevention and treatment of the most common
status or income of their families diseases among children and adolescents
2.2. Maternal health
2.2.1. Strengthen the reproductive, • Decrease of maternal mortality rate to 3,0 per 100 000 live births • Reduced from 4.6 (2018) to 2.4 (2020)38
physical and mental health of by 2022. • (target 20)39 52 (2020)40
women and reduce maternal • No of national protocols, clinic manuals on emergency obstetric • Reduced 37% (2006) to 20.2% (2019)41
mortality care.
• % /Indicator of duration of breastfeeding up to 2 years.
33 Pluriconsult (2020), Evaluation of the Government of Turkmenistan’s Policy on Early Childhood Development (2012-2019)
and UNICEF’s contribution to its design, implementation and monitoring
34 2019 MICS
35 Ministry of health and Medical Industry
36 The target of 35 was not indicated in the NAP but appears in some documented reports
37 Turkmenistan Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Reference document N06/17632-24.02.2021
38 ibid
39 The target of 20 was not indicated in the NAP but appears in some documented reports. Baseline was not identified.
40 ibid
41 MICS 2006, 2019
24
Evaluation of the National Plan of Action for Realization of Children’s rights in Turkmenistan for 2018-2022 (NAP) and
UNICEF’s contribution to its design, implementation and monitoring
2.2.2. Ensure universal access to • % of mothers who received at least 4 antenatal care visits, based • 100%
quality maternal health services, on effective technologies.
regardless of place of residence, • Ratio/% of obstetric facilities providing comprehensive emergency • (target 99%)42, achieved 78-80% (2020)
social status and family income obstetric and neonatal care in accordance with adopted national
protocols.
2.3. HIV and AIDS and Reproductive health
2.3.1.Develop a regulatory • No of cases of HIV-related diseases, including mother-to-child • 0 cases of HIV reported
framework and increase the transmission of HIV. • 100%
capacity of the health system to • Ratio of health facilities carrying out infection control and risk • 80 SOP developed
combat HIV infection assessment according to international standards.
• National legislation aligned with international standards. • Not identified
• New HIV prevention Programme approved by the end 2018 • No new programmes approved
2.4. Nutrition
2.4.1. Reduce the level of anaemia • To reduce Prevalence of anaemia by 20% among children of 6-9 • For children of 6-9 increase by 7.47% i.e. from
among children, pregnant and non- months of age, women of reproductive age, including pregnant 30.8% (2012) to 33.1% (2019);
pregnant women of reproductive women, by 2022 as compared to 2012. For women increase by 5,14% i.e. from 25.3%
age and vitamin A deficiency (2012) to 26.6% (2019)43
among children under 5 years of • To reduce by 20% the proportion of children with vitamin A • Not identified
age. deficiency among children of 6-9 months of age by 2022 as
compared to 2012.
2.4.2. Reduce the rate of • Indicator of exclusive breastfeeding up to 6 months should not be • 56.5% as of 201944
malnutrition and slow growth in less than 60%. • Reduced by 63% i.e. from 19% (2018) to 7%
children under 5 • Reduce the prevalence of stunting in children under 5 years of age (2020)45
by 15% by 2022 compared with 2012
2.5. Water and sanitation
2.5.1. Reduce the diseases caused • Ratio of population using organized water supply services with • Increase from 82% (2010) to 98.2% (2019)46
by poor quality drinking water and safety requirements.
non-observance of sanitary and • Ratio of population using organized sanitary services, including • 99.4% (2019), progress cannot be measured
h ygienic norms and rules tools for washing hands with soap and water, in accordance with (no baseline and target)
safety requirements.
• No of outreach activities for target groups. • From 3367 (2018) to 13592 (2020)47
Assessment of progress on this goal
Turkmenistan made some progress in improving children’s health and contributing to the targets on children’s health. High immunisation rates (achieved with
UNICEF support), access to clean water, reduction of malnutrition – all of this contribute to better chances of life for a children. There is significant progress in
reducing stunting, with the target overachieved but still more than twice higher than the rates considered by WHO-UNICEF as successful. Within the health sector
18% of country etraps provide the early identification services addressing developmental delays in children. Regardless of the achieved progress, more efforts are
required to reduce mortality rates, as they remained insignificantly changed. NAP is underachieving on reduction of anaemia prevalence as levels of anaemia
among children 6-59 and women in reproductive age are increasing. COVID-19 is one of the factors limiting the efforts to understand hidden gaps in malnutrition.
According to WHO database, HIV-related diseases is the third most common cause of death for children aged 1-4 but data is not sufficient to indicate possible
impact of the NAP on this outcome. Data on contribution to unclean water-related diseases is not available, however, Turkmenistan has made good progress in
ensuring access to clean and affordable water across the country and ranks best among neighbouring countries. Regional disparities continue to exist but are
gradually reducing. There are indications that access to quality healthcare may be limited for some groups of children e.g. children in disabilities and children in
remote places.
The analysis of the NAP’s intervention logic (theory of change) suggests that if children have access to
high-quality healthcare, the mortality of children (neonatal mortality48,infant mortality49 and mortality of
children under 550) and mothers is reduced, nutrition and sanitation is improved, then children’s health
will be better ensured. In results framework of the NAP the goal is not defined through outcomes and
indicators of its own, which limits the evaluation of all results for children but there are activity
indicators. In the next phase of planning the NAP will benefit from strengthening the framework by
distinguishing indicators for objectives and activities separately. This will allow for a more precise picture
of how well the activities target the expected outcomes. For example, breastfeeding is a means (among
others) to reduce mortality but is less valid to be used for measuring reduced mortality. Some indicators
do not fully define the objective e.g. “immunization coverage” and “number of orders and protocols on
early intervention services and for the prevention and treatment of the most common diseases among
42 The target was not indicated in the NAP but appears in some documented reports. Baseline was not identified.
43 Source: WHO global database
44 2019 MICS
45 UNICEF in Turkmenistan, Updated Assessment of child-related SDG indicators in Turkmenistan, 2021
46 Turkmenistan Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Reference document N06/17632-24.02.2021
47 Turkmenistan Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Reference document N06/17632-24.02.2021
48 Probability of dying during the first 28 days of life, expressed per 1,000 live births
49 Infant mortality rate (IMR): the probability of dying between birth and exact age 1, expressed per 1,000 live births
50 Under-five mortality rate (U5MR): the probability of dying between birth and exact age 5, expressed per 1,000 live births
25
Evaluation of the National Plan of Action for Realization of Children’s rights in Turkmenistan for 2018-2022 (NAP) and
UNICEF’s contribution to its design, implementation and monitoring
children and adolescents” do not exhaust the objective “Ensure that all children have access to free and
high-quality healthcare[…]”
In measuring progress on Goal 2 findings are presented in the following areas of national priorities:
• Children’s health
• Maternal health
• HIV and AIDS and Reproductive health
• Nutrition
• Water and sanitation
The main findings and conclusions based on them are presented below.
Children’s health
The NAP defines children’s health through reduced mortality rate and ensuring access of all children to
free and high-quality healthcare, regardless of their place of residence, social status, disability status or
income of their families
Mortality is one of the most significant indicator of the health, cultural and material well-being of the
population. The NAP includes three main aspects of child mortality51: neonatal mortality, infant mortality
and under-five mortality. The NAP targets 15% reduction compared to the rates in 2015. Neonatal
mortality has not changed over the reviewed period – it varies between 23.88 in 2018 to 23.53 in 2020.
Against the rate in 2015 it has actually not decreased but remains at the same levels with very slight
variations. Turkmenistan continues to rank higher in neonatal mortality in comparison to other countries
in the region. (See Figure 5)
Figure 5 Neonatal mortality rate
30 22.8523.0323.3423.55 23.8 23.8823.7723.53 In terms of infant mortality the country
25
demonstrates similar trends i.e. the
20
15
13.0812.3511.7711.2810.8410.4610.09
9.79
mortality rate of children below one
10 does not exhibit a visible trend. (See
5 Figure 6) The NAP targets 20%
0 reduction compared to the rates in
2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020
2015.
Central Asia 13.0812.3511.7711.2810.8410.4610.09 9.79
Turkmenistan 22.8523.0323.3423.55 23.8 23.8823.7723.53
The infant mortality has reduced by
Central Asia Turkmenistan 0.76 compared to the beginning of the
NAP and by 0.35 against 2015. See
Figure 6. This represents progress but the trend is insufficient for achieving the target by the end of the
NAP i.e. 2022. The rates of infant deaths in Turkmenistan remains high, being more than twice as much
as the other countries in Central Asia.
Figure 6 Infant mortality rate
40 36.26 36.27 36.45 36.73 36.8 36.96 36.64 36.1 The NAP targets 20% reduction
30 compared to the rates in 2015 in
20 22.23 21.1 20.12 19.26 18.5 17.86 17.25 16.67 terms of the third component of
mortality i.e. mortality of children
10
under age 5. The data indicates that
0
2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 there is a slight decrease (by 0.43
Turkmenistan 36.26 36.27 36.45 36.73 36.8 36.96 36.64 36.1 p.p.) compared to 2015, which
Central Asia 22.23 21.1 20.12 19.26 18.5 17.86 17.25 16.67 represents 1.02% reduction.
However, the rate of under-5
Turkmenistan Central Asia
mortality remains generally
51 The data for the same periods varies across different sources (e.g. World bank, UN, desk research reports, etc.). So for the
purpose of consistency the evaluator has used UN Inter-agency Group for Child Mortality Estimation,
https://childmortality.org/data/Turkmenistan
26
Evaluation of the National Plan of Action for Realization of Children’s rights in Turkmenistan for 2018-2022 (NAP) and
UNICEF’s contribution to its design, implementation and monitoring
unchanged. (See Figure 7) and the trend is not sufficient to achieve the target by the end of this NAP.
Additionally, the trend of Turkmenistan having a lower rate of under-5 mortality rate compared to the
countries in the region has shifted in 2015.
Figure 8 Under-5 mortality rate Figure 7 Main causes of death
50
45.54 44.03 42.19 42.54 42.85 42.83 42.43 41.76
40 41.95 41.96 42.63 41.3 39.98 38.8 37.7 36.63
30
20
10
0
2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020
Turkmenistan 41.95 41.96 42.19 42.54 42.85 42.83 42.43 41.76
Central Asia 45.54 44.03 42.63 41.3 39.98 38.8 37.7 36.63
The main causes of death for children under 1 are the following52:
-neonatal conditions (2216.54 per 100 000 population in 201953),
-congenital anomalies (550.13 per 100 000 population in 2019)
-lower respiratory infections (521.59 per 100 000 population in 2019).
For children under 5 the top three causes of death54 are:
- lower respiratory infections (29.72 per 100 000 population in 2019)
- HIV/AIDS (21.1 per 100 000 population in 2019)
- diarrhoeal diseases (12.45 per 100 000 population in 2019)
Overall, mortality among children in Turkmenistan ranks lowest during the last decade but still remains
high. The data indicates that since the start of the NAP the mortality among children has not been
influenced significantly by the measures. The NAP is still in its last year of implementation but given the
trend so far, the likelihood of the targets been met is estimated as low.
The reasons behind this need to be analysed in more depth. Limited data does not allow for detailed
analysis of disaggregation of mortality by regions but such analysis may shed light on whether access to
health care in some regions is a determinant in this.
Although not directly affecting mortality, breastfeeding is one of many important factors affecting
children’s health. 97% of all maternity hospitals in the
Figure 9 Exclusive breastfeeding of children 0-5 months (%)
country are certified baby-friendly. The NAP targets rates
of exclusive breastfeeding of children 0-5 months not less
than 60%. By 2019 the rate has increased dramatically
56.5
compared to 2006. See Figure 9. The trend is sufficient to
100
ensure reaching the target by the end of the NAP period.
11
50
During the reviewed period the GoT adopted a National
0
Strategy and Action Plan on Maternal, Newborn, Child and
2006 2019
Adolescent Health for 2015-2019 has been adopted
emphasizing the importance of investments made throughout the life cycle of development. These
policies include capacity-building in health care system required for the implementation of an integrated
package of basic measures and services for health care of mothers, new-borns, children and adolescents,
and for strengthening the mechanisms for sustainable financing and rational use of allocated resources.
52 https://www.who.int/data/gho/data/themes/topics
53 Latest available data
54 https://www.who.int/data/gho/data/themes/topics
27
Evaluation of the National Plan of Action for Realization of Children’s rights in Turkmenistan for 2018-2022 (NAP) and
UNICEF’s contribution to its design, implementation and monitoring
The programme is currently undergoing evaluation55, which will contribute to better understanding of
results for children.
The NAP defines that access to healthcare for children through the immunisation coverage and the
orders/protocols on early intervention services and for the prevention and treatment of the most common
diseases among children and adolescents.
The immunisation coverage within the national calendar of preventive vaccination of children has slightly
dropped from 98.7% (in 2018) to 98.3% (2020) but still remains above the targeted minimum of 95%.
Data on the achievement of universal health coverage (UHC), including financial risk protection, access
to quality essential health care services, and access to safe, effective, quality, and affordable essential
medicines and vaccines for all was not identified for Turkmenistan. However, there are indications from
the FGDs that access to quality healthcare may be limited for
some groups of children e.g. children with disabilities and children
in remote areas. The FGDs indicate that general medical Parents of children with disabilities
practitioners are widely available for parents in all velyats – all
parents in FGDs indicated that they have access to a general “My child has issues with hearing. But
medical practitioner.56 On the other hand, access for specialised we don't have a good medical centre.
medical care is perceived by some FGDs parents as difficult, Specifically for children with disabilities
we should go to Ashgabat.”
especially by the parents of children with disabilities. Public
associations build on the existing government medical services by
“We face a lot difficulties when it comes
providing community-based rehabilitation services for children to medical drugs for autistic. They are too
with disabilities, which is a positive step. At the same time their expensive and sometimes we should
capacity is not sufficient to respond to needs of families from all order these drugs from other countries.
The system is organized not well. We
over the country as many of the users come from other cities or
barely find good speech therapist. We get
velayats57. Specifically for children with impaired hearing, the
the general medical help but specifically
MOH, with UNICEF support is currently introducing a newly for autistic kids it's quite hard to get
developed comprehensive Regulation on Establishment of help.”
Audiological Support System.
Affordability is an issue raised by almost half of the parents in the FGDs, particularly when it comes to
ability to purchase medical services and medication. In the context of an increasing number of children
with disabilities58, this gap may potentially open wider for more children.
Out-of-pocket as percentage of Current Health Expenditure (CHE) was estimated at 71% in 2015, 72.72%
in 2017 to reach 76.34%59, which is quite significant especially for vulnerable households that have to
pay. FGDs with parents reveal that COVID-19 may have further exacerbated the dimension of
accessibility and affordability of quality healthcare due to increased burden of the medical establishments
as well as closed borders making it difficult for some parents to seek special medical help in other
countries – for example travel restrictions have prevented planned rehabilitation or surgery for some
children with disabilities.
A positive step in ensuring better access to healthcare is that within the health sector 14% of country
etraps started to provide the early identification services addressing developmental delays in children on
primary healthcare level.
55 Source: Ministry of Healthcare and Medical Industry, Деятельность МЗиМПТ в рамках реализации
Национального плана действий по реализации прав детей в Туркменистане на период 2018 – 2022 годы
56 Family doctors are available with a density of 1 doctor per 1000 person, also the distribution is geographically based. Source:
UNICEF KII
57 Source: Interview with public associations, FGDs with parents
58 Based on share of disability pensioners who are children: 2012-2019: % respectively 10.63, 10.78, 10.89, 10.91, 11.69, 12.95,
13.16 and 13.34. Source: Transmonee
59 WORLD Bank, Source: https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/SH.XPD.OOPC.CH.ZS?locations=TM
28
Evaluation of the National Plan of Action for Realization of Children’s rights in Turkmenistan for 2018-2022 (NAP) and
UNICEF’s contribution to its design, implementation and monitoring
Maternal health
The NAP sees maternal health as a prerequisite for
Figure 10 Maternal mortality
children’s health and defines maternal health through
reduced levels of maternal mortality and improved access to
quality maternal health services. For the reviewed period
the target for maternal mortality has been overachieved by
4.6
significantly reducing it from 4.6 (2018) to 2.4 (2020).60 See
5 3
Figure 10. 2.4
One of the conditions for reduced maternity mortality is
ensuring access to quality maternal health services. The
0
NAP targets 99% of the obstetric facilities providing
2018 target 2020
comprehensive emergency obstetric and neonatal care in Source: GoT
accordance with adopted national protocols. The evaluation
cannot be conclusive about the extent of this factor contributing to lower maternity mortality rates
because there is no baseline. However, by 2020 almost 80% of those facilities are reported to provide
high-quality comprehensive obstetric and neonatal care.
Healthcare has made progress in a number of important areas. Significant recent changes in health policy
include the adoption of the Strategy and Action Plan for Maternal, Newborn, Child and Adolescent
Health (MCHNCH) for 2015-2019, the Concept for the Implementation of Developmental Pediatrics and
Early Intervention in Turkmenistan for 2016-2020 and the Law of Turkmenistan "On promotion and
support of breastfeeding". Efficient strengthening of data access and quality has been achieved as well as
increasing the number of physicians per capita, strengthening funding and using available resources.
Active work is underway to improve the early childhood nutrition program and the Baby-Friendly
Initiative in primary care and obstetric institutions has been introduced everywhere. Compared to the data
of the MICS conducted up to 2015-2016, there were improvements in some indicators: early
breastfeeding (from the first hour after birth) - 73.4% (59.8%); the number of children who are
exclusively breastfed up to 6 months - 59.8% (11%); timely introduction of complementary foods - 82.3%
(41.3%). In accordance with the Order "On feeding infants and young children" (2017) of the MHMI of
Turkmenistan; primary healthcare institutions are certified to introduce the recommendations of the WHO
on breastfeeding. Currently, 65 maternity hospitals and 3 health houses are certified. As part of the
implementation of the Concept for the implementation of developmental pediatrics and early intervention
in Turkmenistan for 2016-2020, with the support of UNICEF, specialists from Ankara University trained
15 trainers in 3 national and pilot etraps to use the electronic application of the International Guidelines
for Monitoring Child Development (RMRR). In the velayat Centers for Maternal and Child Health
(MCH) and homes/health centers, rooms for early child development have been established and 784
specialists have been trained in this field. With the support of specialists from Ankara University, trainers
from Turkmenistan were the first in the world to start using the RMPP electronic application. In the
velayat MCH centers, specialized rooms have been created for screening newborns at risk. Neonatal
screening is carried out at the Scientific and Clinical Center for Maternal and Child Health, which in turn
contributes to the timely diagnosis and treatment of genetic diseases and the reduction of disability.
Among other things, effective work with the media continues. On the program "First 1000 days" of the
radio channel "Char tarapdan" regular performances by healthcare professionals are organized.
HIV and AIDS and Reproductive health
An issue of HIV-infected children in Turkmenistan has not been clearly raised in situational analysis or
other type of analysis justifying the inclusion of such objective in the NAP. Key informants to the
evaluation did not raise HIV infections among children as an issue but pointed out the need of prevention
interventions, which is the reason why the NAP targets HIV/AIDS. GoT reports 0 registered cases on
HIV for the period prior to and during NAP implementation.61
60 Turkmenistan Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Reference document N06/17632-24.02.2021
61 Data cannot be corroborated, as WHO reports on “Number of new HIV infections per 1,000 uninfected population” are not
available for Turkmenistan.
29
Evaluation of the National Plan of Action for Realization of Children’s rights in Turkmenistan for 2018-2022 (NAP) and
UNICEF’s contribution to its design, implementation and monitoring
However, WHO data on child mortality62 reveals that for Turkmenistan HIV-AIDS is among the top three
causes of death for children aged 1-4. There have been 49 reported HIV-related deaths in 2015, 51 deaths
in 2016 and 55 deaths in 201763. This number is slightly increasing over the years but data after 2017 is
not available to indicate whether or not NAP has in any way made a difference. More in-depth research is
needed to demonstrate the actual dimensions of the challenge and what has been the impact of the new
edition of the Law “On Countering Spread of Disease Caused by Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV-
Infection)” (adopted in 2016) as well as the National HIV Programme 2012-2016. UNICEF has provided
technical support to the GoT in developing Standard Operating Procedures (SOP) in managing cases of
sexually transmitted infections (STIs) in general. Introduced into the healthcare practice, the SOPs may
potentially facilitate HIV-infections prevention and adequate response by the health system.
Nutrition
Reduced malnutrition and slow growth in children under 5 (stunting)
Stunting, or chronic malnutrition, is the result of failure
Figure 11 Stunting 2000 - 2019 (%)
to receive adequate nutrition in early life over an
extended period and/or recurrent or chronic illness. The
prevalence of stunting has been reduced to 7.1 (in
2019)64 and compared against 2016 (11.46) this is a
significant progress overachieving the target in the NAP,
28.1
which is set to 15% less than 2012. At the same time it is 18.87
11.46
still above 3% i.e. the rate considered as successful65. 7.1
(See Figure 11)
2000 2006 2016 2019
Prevalence of wasting and overweight were not included
among the objectives nor indicators of the NAP, hence targets were not set. However, the evaluator
considers that these, too, are important signs of levels of nutrition among children and it is recommended
plans follow-up the NAP should include them in child-related outcomes. Therefore, this analysis is also
looking at overweight and wasting. The trend is similar as in stunting i.e. the trend is one of decrease over
the last decades with levels still remaining above the target. Research66 indicates that there are regional
variations in the prevalence of stunting in Turkmenistan e.g. rates are relatively higher in Dashoguz,
Lebap and Mary than the rest of the country. The NAP does not identify specific interventions for the
regions of higher incidence of stunting.
Reduced level of anaemia among children, pregnant and non-pregnant women of reproductive age and
vitamin A deficiency among children under 5 years of age
According to expert analysis by WHO,67 anaemia is associated with poor cognitive and motor
development in children, and work capacity in adults, influencing country economic development.
Among pregnant women, iron deficiency anaemia is also associated with adverse reproductive outcomes
such as preterm delivery, low-birth-weight infants, and decreased iron stores for the baby, which may
lead to impaired development. Failure to reduce anaemia may result in millions of women experiencing
impaired health and quality of life, and may impair children’s development and learning. Anaemia is an
indicator of both poor nutrition and poor health.
62 https://www.who.int/data/gho/data/indicators/indicator-details/GHO/number-of-deaths
63 ibid
64 UNICEF in Turkmenistan, Updated Assessment of child-related SDG indicators in Turkmenistan, 2021
65 WHO-UNICEF rules consider as ‘target met’ the situation where a stunting, wasting or overweight prevalence is <3 per cent.
66 UNICEF in Turkmenistan, Updated Assessment of child-related SDG indicators in Turkmenistan, 2021
67 https://www.who.int/data/gho/data/themes/topics/anaemia_in_women_and_children
30
Evaluation of the National Plan of Action for Realization of Children’s rights in Turkmenistan for 2018-2022 (NAP) and
UNICEF’s contribution to its design, implementation and monitoring
Figure 12 Anemia prevalence (%) The target set in the NAP is to reduce the
30.8 30.9 31 31.2 31.7 32.2 32.7 33.1 prevalence of anaemia among women in
35
30 25.3 25.3 25.3 25.4 25.7 25.9 26.2 26.6 reproductive age and children aged 6-9 months by
25 20% compared to 2012. The available data used
20
for this analysis only refers to children aged 6-59
15
10 months, therefore it will be used to track trends.
5 WHO data68 both on women in reproductive age
0
20122013201420152016201720182019 and children 6-59 months indicates that the levels
children 6-59 of anaemia is not decreasing and has actually been
30.8 30.9 31 31.2 31.7 32.2 32.7 33.1
months
slightly but steadily rising since the comparison
women in
year 2012. (See Figure 12). Turkmenistan has put
reproductive 25.3 25.3 25.3 25.4 25.7 25.9 26.2 26.6
age (15-49) effort in diminishing malnutrition such as
mandatory flour fortification with iron and folic
acid micronutrients since 2006 within a state-financed flour fortification programme. Fortification is the
practice of deliberately increasing the content of an essential vitamins and minerals in food to improve its
nutritional quality. Furthermore, a National Nutrition Programme for 2013-2017, 2019-2025 was adopted.
Flour fortification and Salt Iodization is ensured through state financing.
Further analysis is required to better understand the reasons behind the negative trend of anaemia rates.
UNICEF has plans to support additional micro nutrition research such as development of a Dietary Profile
Study of Mothers and Children that will collect data uncovering the causes of anaemia. However, due to
the COVID-19 pandemic these plans have been delayed. Positively, the endorsement of National
Nutrition Programme for 2020-2025 serves as a strategic document, based on which number of
documents and orders were introduced such as: the National Guidance on the Nutrition of Adolescents
Girls and pregnant women for health workers. This programme is also a basis for UNICEF to provide
support activities.
Water and sanitation
One area where achievement was noted is the access to safe and Figure 12. % of population having
affordable drinking water facilities. Baseline and targets were not access to clean water
defined in the NAP but Turkmenistan has made good progress on
SDG 6 for the last ten years i.e. from 82% of the population having
access to clean and safe water in 2010 to 95% in 2020.69 Regional
disparities have also been reduced. See Figure 13. There are still
places, especially in rural areas such as Dashoguz, where there are
issues with centralised water supply due to the ecological crisis in
the region.
Still, Turkmenistan ranks best among other countries in the region
on this indicator.70 All of the parents and children in the FGDs indicated that they have access to drinking
water and sanitation. Assumptions can be made that this has had a positive impact on children’s health,
however, data on the burden of disease caused by unclean water was not available.
In terms of outcomes for children, the overall conclusion based on the findings so far is that Turkmenistan
has made some progress in improving children’s health and most of the targets on children’s health could
be achieved. High immunisation rates, access to clean water and reduction of stunting and wasting,
contribute to the improvement of child wellbeing. Despite the efforts, the interventions towards child
mortality seem not sufficiently effective. This requires a dive-in into the reasons leading to that challenge.
A special focus needs to be placed on the quality of the healthcare system in terms of accessibility.
68 https://www.who.int/data/gho/data/themes/topics/indicator-groups/indicator-group-details/GHO/sdg-target-2.2-child-
malnutrition
69 ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK, Key INDICATORS For ASIA AND THE PACIFIC, August 2021, Source:
https://www.adb.org/sites/default/files/publication/720461/ki2021.pdf
70 ibid
31
Evaluation of the National Plan of Action for Realization of Children’s rights in Turkmenistan for 2018-2022 (NAP) and
UNICEF’s contribution to its design, implementation and monitoring
Although sufficiently disaggregated data is not available on all health issues among children, gaps can be
expected in terms of regions or vulnerability. For example, stunting is visibly prevalent on some regions
than others as well as prevalence in rural vs. urban areas.
Goal 3: All children without exception have a right to education and comprehensive and full
development of their abilities
Below is a summary of the progress against this goal. See Table 8. Details are presented after the table.
Table 7 Progress towards Goal 3
Goal 3: All children without exception have a right to education and comprehensive and full development of their abilities
SDGs contribution
SDG 4
Objective Indicators as per NAP Roadmap progress
3.1. Education
3.1.1.Ensure the quality of secondary • % of certified schools by 2022 (78 schools) • 78 certified schools (progress
education by introducing international • % of pedagogical personnel trained on implementation of standards for a cannot be validated)71
standards and best practices quality education environment in pedagogic colleges, universities and • Not identified
refresher courses.
• Available reports on school certification and plans for introduction of • Not identified
regulations/normative documents for quality improvement of education
environment • Not adopted
• Document national concept of inclusive education adopted • Not identified72
• % of schools meeting safety standards • Pilot system developed and
• Pilot system of data collection and analysis developed and tested in a pilot tested, 180 trained
velayat professionals
3.2. Development of young children
3.2.1. Ensure that all young children have • State standards introduced in the system of preschool education. • Standards’ introduction in
access to quality and inclusive services for • Preschool education curricula and programmes for professional training progress
preschool education and re-training updated in accordance with state standards • School professionals’ training in
• % of preschool and primary school teachers trained/re-trained on updated progress
programmes • Not identified
• % of children covered by compulsory programme of preschool education
• System of assessment of child’s readiness for school implemented • 46.2%73 to 49.8%74 (target not
• % of preschools providing broad variety of developmental and educational set)
services
• % of children of 5-6 years of age covered by preschool education and • Yes
preschool preparation who demonstrate the competence of readiness for • 100% of kindergartens
school • (no target) Increase from
44.1%75 (2015) 52.4%76 (2019)
3.3. Recreation and cultural life
To expand opportunities for all children to • No of registered children and youth clubs, groups, organizations and out-
participate in inclusive recreation, leisure, of-school institutions at the place of residence engaged in recreational • No change77
art, creativity and in information- activities, entertainment, information, sports areas and promotion of a
educational and sports activities that healthy lifestyle, receive state funding and provide accessible and free
promote the development of a healthy services for all children, including children with disabilities and children
lifestyle from socially disadvantaged families from 2018 to 2022.
• % of children members of children/youth clubs/groups, organizations and • Not identified
who participate in cultural and sports events, disaggregated by disability
and geographic location.
71 It is not feasible to measure progress since there is no baseline. The evaluator cannot validate target and progress by 2020 since
78 certified schools was indicated by some documents as target (Roadmap) while in other 78 schools were referred to as progress
by 2020 (Interview with Ministry of Education; baseline was not identified and Turkmenistan Ministry of Foreign Affairs,
Reference document N06/19206 dated 21.02.2021).
72 Baseline, target and progress cannot be validated, across available document sources data varies to the extent that trends cannot
be assessed
73 MICS 2015
74 MICS 2019
75 MICS 2015
76 MICS 2019
77 Turkmenistan Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Reference document N06/16889 dated 19.02.2021 indicates the following baseline:
under Ministry of culture 567 activity clubs, 80 musical clubs and 12 art clubs functioning across the country. These numbers are
reported to not have changed by 2020.
32
Evaluation of the National Plan of Action for Realization of Children’s rights in Turkmenistan for 2018-2022 (NAP) and
UNICEF’s contribution to its design, implementation and monitoring
3.3.2. Provide wide access to active • Formation of a state order and approval of the state plan for production of • Not identified
entertaining, creative and information- annual entertainment, creative and information-educational programmes
educational programmes for all groups of based on needs of all children.
children, regardless of their social origin or
place of residence.
3.4. Children with Disabilities
3.4.1.Ensure enabling This component is excluded from the analysis in this evaluation because it is • N.a.
conditions for social integration and covered by separate evaluations - the ECD Evaluation, current survey on
realization of the rights of children with people with disabilities and partly by up-coming Evaluation of the Joint
disabilities, including legislative measures, Programme of Social Services.
data on children with disabilities, access to
inclusive social services and support
services, and encouraging the participation
of children with disabilities in public life.
Assessment of progress on this goal
There is progress towards schooling becoming more child-friendly within the period of NAP implementation, mostly in the area of early education for children.
These efforts have produced a notable increase of the children covered by pre-school and pre-primary formats. However, the share of etraps providing early
intervention services to children under 5 years of age is still insufficient i.e. 14% in 2019. During the reviewed period there is a slight increase in primary school
attendance and a slight decrease in the secondary school attendance. The country has started an irreversible process of demonstrating commitment to making
schools more inclusive regardless of the child’s disability status, place of living or gender. This process still needs to be more steered towards adapting flexible
educational format and making them available to the families of young children in a way that meets their individual needs. Data gaps are making the assessment
of academic performance not feasible to compare over the years and against other countries in the region. There is progress among young learners: Early
Childhood Development Index (ECDI) is rising by 5 p.p. to 95.3% in 2019. There is a conductive environment for increasing placement of children with special
educational needs in boarding schools. Social norms among parents combined with still insufficiently inclusive education for children with disabilities foster this
process. As NAP is comprehensively based on all children’s rights, consideration must be made to reducing the misbalance between fulfilling the right of the child
to education and the right to live in its family. This is even more important since the CFS concept means that a child-friendly school thinks of the child as a whole
with all its needs and rights.
The learning content in schools in Turkmenistan are gradually modernizing towards including topics beyond main subjects’ knowledge but also competences in
the area of health and gender. Turkmenistan has achieved significant progress in staff investment to support this development.
Goal 3 in the NAP is linked to SDG 4 and refers to education. The goal is defined as a right rather than a
goal equipped with indicators on goal level. For the purpose of the evaluation the available NAP activity
indicators were used See Table 8. For a richer analysis additional dimensions were also explored.
This area of the NAP works with three key concepts about education: “equal access”, “quality education”
and “inclusiveness”. However, they are not explicitly defined and operationalised in the NAP in terms of
objectives and goal indicators. Therefore, some conceptual consideration should be elaborated here for
the purpose of clarity on the approach to evaluating this goal’s progress.
When reviewing the objectives and the measures stipulated in the results-framework, it looks like access
is prioritised in the context of early childhood development. Quality is not explicitly defined in the NAP
but is operationalised through the concept of child friendly schools (CFS).
The CFS models embrace a concept of quality that goes well beyond pedagogic excellence and
performance outcomes. UNICEF defines quality education as “education that works for every child and
enables all children to achieve their full potential”.78 Since the CFS concept is rights-based, quality
standards should make it possible for all children to access school, survive from grade to grade and
complete the cycle on time; they should also provide an enriched educational experience through which
students can thrive, develop and achieve their full potential.79
In that sense, access is not a separate determinant of the right to education but is component of quality
education. Furthermore, if quality education can be extended to all groups as a matter of routine, then it
may be called fully inclusive.80 In that sense the modern understanding of inclusiveness is not restricted to
physical environment only and not to children with disabilities only, but to every child and the unique
learning that each child has. Inclusiveness is a vertical principle of a quality educational system, rather
than a separate component.
It is in that conceptual framework that the analysis of the progress towards Goal 3 was made here. There
are various frameworks for assessing quality education81. Upon reviewing all of these as well as the
interventions prescribed by the NAP, in the context of data availability and the lack of specific goal
indicators, the evaluator has made use of the following aspects of quality education:
78 Manual, Child Friendly Schools, UNICEF 2009
79 ibid
80 ibid
81 Defining Quality in Education, 2000, United Nations Children’s Fund; European Quality Framework for Early Childhood
Education and Care (2014); Manual, Child Friendly Schools, UNICEF 2009
33
Evaluation of the National Plan of Action for Realization of Children’s rights in Turkmenistan for 2018-2022 (NAP) and
UNICEF’s contribution to its design, implementation and monitoring
- Access
- Outcomes
- Content
- Environment and IT
Access
Access is a prerequisite for ensuring the right of every child to education. A child-friendly school is not
just a child-welcoming school but also a child-seeking school. It works to attract and retain children from
different backgrounds and respects diversity.82
The school system in Turkmenistan has gone though some major changes in the last decade, among
which is the introduction of 12-year compulsory education for children from 6 to 17 years of age. See
Figure 14
Figure 13 Official school ages and school age population
Parents of children with disabilities
“I know UNICEF provided Lebap
Rehabilitation center with equipment
that allows children to play games for
development of their memory, motor
skills, hearing skills, drawing skills. We
don’t have such things here and it is
difficult to ensure them because we have
Source: UNESCO,http://uis.unesco.org/en/country/tm (accessed 2021) much spending on medicine.”
The attendance of children in the compulsory levels of school (primary and secondary) in the country is
high. During the reviewed period there is a slight increase in primary school attendance (from 98.1% in
2016 to 98.25 in 2019)83 and a slight decrease in the secondary school attendance (from 98.4% in 2016 to
97.8% in 2019). See Figure 15.
Figure 15 Participation in education by levels
The Multiple Indicator Cluster Survey
97 95 98 9 .1 8.4 98 9 . 7 2 .8 (MICS 2019) reports out-of-school rates of
100 0.9% for secondary education and 1.3% for
44.1 primary education. It is not possible to
32 52.4
50 analyse the trends over time since this
secondary school
40 40.8 42.8 primary school indicator was not reported in the previous
0 pre-school MICS. Turkmenistan does not report drop-
pre-primary
2006 out rates, however considering such an
2016
2019 attempt in the future would give the system
of education the opportunity to explore the
pre-primary pre-school primary school secondary school
reasons behind the cases of drop-out so that
causal links can be studied and addressed.
The NAP priorities for interventions specifically oriented to improving the access of young children to the
system of education. This logic is relevantly set since participating in quality early childhood education
and care has been shown to be an important factor to prevent early school leaving.84 Furthermore, returns
on investment in early stages of education are the highest of all educational stages, particularly for
children in a disadvantaged situation.85
82 Manual, Child Friendly Schools, UNICEF 2009
83 MICS
84 European Commission (2014), Study on the effective use of early childhood education and care in preventing early school
leaving.
85 The Economics of Human Development and Social Mobility. Annual Reviews of Economics, Vol.6 (2014), 689-733
34
Evaluation of the National Plan of Action for Realization of Children’s rights in Turkmenistan for 2018-2022 (NAP) and
UNICEF’s contribution to its design, implementation and monitoring
With UNICEF support the system of assessment of children’s readiness for school was upgraded towards
international standards.
UNICEF continued supporting Turkmenistan’s efforts to measure and achieve SDG 4 targets. Technical
assistance was focused on strengthening the quality and inclusive early learning with a focus on universal
pre-primary preparation and inclusive education approaches. The GoT’s commitment is recognized by the
recently adopted Early Childhood Development Strategy of Turkmenistan 2020-2025. It builds on
previous important milestones such as National Programme of Turkmenistan for the Early Development
of Child and His Preparation for School 2011–201586.
These efforts have produced a notable increase of the children covered by pre-school and pre-primary
formats. However, the share of etraps providing early intervention services to children under 5 years of
age is still insufficient i.e. 14% in 2019.87
Studies88 indicate significant disparities between urban and rural pre-school children. Turkmenistan still
has a long way to go to achieve full coverage89 and address regional gaps by developing flexible form of
young learners based on their individual needs. However, by considering and adopting a national concept
of inclusiveness the country has started an irreversible process of demonstrating commitment to making
schools more inclusive regardless of the child’s disability status, place of living or gender. This process
still needs to be more steered towards adapting flexible educational format and making them available to
the families of young children in a way that meets their individual needs. This is especially valid for
remote rural areas where disparities are more significant. Positive example is the Saturday parent schools
to cover children who do not attend early learning formats.
Targeting social norms as well as professional norms with regards to children with disabilities is part of
that process, too. Legislative norms need to be practically enforced by supporting school professionals to
develop competences to work with every child based on the child’s individual needs or vulnerability e.g.
child with a disability, migrant child, etc. Parents of children with disabilities sometime face challenges in
ensuring access to mainstream schools for their children.90
Educational centres for young children were piloted with UNICEF support and these need to be further
scaled up. The decision by the Government to develop a full-fledged programme for the nation-wide
improvement of the pre-school education system. Parents in the FGDs indicated the need to develop
flexible community-based forms for young children’s development.
Outcomes
Academic achievement is yet another component of quality education. Literacy in the 21st century is
about constructing and validating knowledge, not just the ability to read and write. In the absence of a
standardized methodology to measure and compare learning outcomes of children, it is a challenge to
make conclusions on this aspect of quality education, especially across different age groups.
Turkmenistan is not a participating country in global literacy measurements such as PISA91, which may
give a perspective on both how school children develop competences forming the main literacy levels to
meet real-life challenges as well as how the country compares against the region or world leaders. MICS
indicators are designed and developed for both national policy development and SDG reporting. MICS
2019 gives data on the percentage of children achieving at least minimum proficiency level in reading and
mathematics e.g. in grades 2/3 minimum proficiency is achieved by 71.3% (reading) and 53.2%
(mathematics). In the absence of previous data on this indicator, however, it is difficult to gauge whether
or not there is progress compared to previous periods, and whether or not NAP has contributed to such
progress.
86 Turkmenistan’s progress in early childhood development have been discussed in more details in a separate evaluation report.
87 UNICEF Country Programme Document 2020
88 UNICEF in Turkmenistan, Updated Assessment of child-related SDG indicators in Turkmenistan, 2021
89 In the context of SDG the target is considered met at or above 95 per cent.
90 KIIs
91 PISA is the OECD's Programme for International Student Assessment. PISA measures 15-year-olds’ ability to use their
reading, mathematics and science knowledge and skills to meet real-life challenges.
35
Evaluation of the National Plan of Action for Realization of Children’s rights in Turkmenistan for 2018-2022 (NAP) and
UNICEF’s contribution to its design, implementation and monitoring
In terms of young learners, Turkmenistan MICS Survey indicates rising of the Early Childhood
Development Index (ECDI) – from 90.5 in 2016 to 95.3 in 2019. Given that data collection has occurred
before the actual publication of the results, it can be assumed that these results were valid prior to the
launch of NAP, hence, possible contribution of the NAP may be visible during the next MICS cycle.
There is no disaggregated data available on the performance of children in specialized educational
environment such as boarding schools. Data from interviews92 indicate that the curriculum for mainstream
schools and boarding schools are not the same but are based on similar educational standards.
Furthermore, the evaluation did not find any significant mismatch between the levels of parents’
satisfaction with the learning outcomes from their children in boarding schools, on the one hand, and
mainstream schools on the other hand. This means that the boarding schools are able to fulfil their
educational task.
However, the social price of that is the fact that most of the children studying in boarding schools are
separated from their families for a long time – most often a week and sometimes for weeks and months.
In early childhood the child’s developmental assessment and identification of his/her future educational
path, is guided by the medicalized and defectology-based approach which often leads to segregation and
institutionalization of children with developmental delays and disabilities.93 Additionally, social norms
among parents combined with still insufficiently inclusive education for children with disabilities further
foster placement of children in boarding schools. As NAP is comprehensively based on all children’s
rights, consideration must be made to reducing the misbalance between fulfilling the right of the child to
education and the right to live in its family. This is even more important since the CFS concept means
that a child-friendly school thinks of the child as a whole with all its needs and rights.
Content
The learning content in schools in Turkmenistan are gradually modernizing towards including topics
beyond main subjects knowledge but also competences in the area of health and gender. Turkmenistan
has achieved significant progress in staff investment to support this development. UNICEF supported the
Ministry of Education in strengthening resilience for climate change adaptation by introducing climate
change, environment and energy (CEE)-related formal curricula in 17 schools in the Akhal and Dashoguz
velayats. The curriculum was approved by the Government for nation-wide implementation but has not
yet been rolled out.
The share of secondary school Basics of Life Skills teachers certified in comprehensive gender sensitive
and age appropriate reproductive health education has increased dramatically over the reviewed period:
from 68% in 2018 to 95% in 2020. A teacher training manual to guide interactive teaching and learning
for five environment-related subjects across primary and secondary education was developed and
introduced in 2019.
In presenting the content to students, teachers have at disposal
various teaching tools and materials. The FGDs both with teachers
FGD, Parents
and parents indicated that the availability of teaching tools varies a
lot across schools. Interactive boards and technology is available in
“Teachers’ knowledge should
some schools, while in others teachers have to invent and print out
modernise. Teachers are aware of the
their own handouts and materials. modern standards, however they are not
equipped with relevant books for that;
Mostly, teachers are trying to find these
In some boarding schools insufficient specialized tools are
books and print it on their own. Despite
preventing children from full access to the learning content e.g.
the teachers’ hard work, this is not how
hearing aids for children with impaired hearing and oftentimes the modernized education should be.”
availability of hearing aids depends on the financial abilities of the
parents.
92 Interviews with Ministry of Education, FGDs with teachers
93 Evaluation of the Government of Turkmenistan’s Policy on Early Childhood Development (2012-2019) and UNICEF’s
contribution to its design, implementation and monitoring, Evaluation Report, Pluriconsult ltd.,17.11.2020
36
Evaluation of the National Plan of Action for Realization of Children’s rights in Turkmenistan for 2018-2022 (NAP) and
UNICEF’s contribution to its design, implementation and monitoring
COVID-19 has inevitably affected schooling, particularly as the period under review has predominantly
been part of the pandemic time. Classes were reduced to 25 minutes over certain periods of time. Parents
from the FGDs shared concerns that this has affected their children’s learning and required additional
support from the families. Teachers in FGDs, too, indicated that due to COVID-19 pandemics they had
limited opportunities to interact with students and to encourage communication among the children.
However, the GoT has managed to prevent discontinuation of school studies at all times.
Environment and IT
Within this intersectoral and holistic framework, CFS models are concerned as much with the learning
content as well as with the school environment. For Turkmenistan, data are available only for one part of
WASH indicator, sanitation, and according to the latest data94, the goal is achieved, as 100% of schools
has single-sex basic sanitation facilities. As part of the COVID-19 response, UNICEF procured personal
hygiene products for targeted schools in provinces and capital Ashgabat. Due to high demand, 60,000
posters on respiratory etiquette and handwashing were re-printed to support hygiene promotion in primary
healthcare facilities and schools all over the country.
Turkmenistan’s schools are 100% provided with electricity. Computers are available for pedagogic
purposes for 99.2%95 of the schools. Data is not available on whether every teacher has access to a
computer or whether internet for pedagogic purposes has become more available against the start of the
NAP, when the rate was 28.2% schools. Improving internet availability in schools may potentially
improve teachers’ access to best practices and teaching materials. At the beginning of December 2019 the
delegation of the UNESCO Institute for Information Technologies in Education (IITE) visited
Turkmenistan for a series of meetings with the Ministry of Education, Academia of Turkmenistan and
UN partner organizations in promotion of ICT competencies for teachers and strengthening knowledge
sharing and dissemination of best practices.96
Data is not available on the extent to which there is adapted infrastructure and materials for students with
disabilities. However, evidence from the field97 indicate that school environments are not sufficiently
adapted to the needs of students with disabilities. Architectural barriers and social norms (children with
disabilities are better provided for by the state at special schools) prevent children with disabilities from
being fully accepted in mainstream schools.
Looking at education comprehensively, prior to the NAP start in 2017 the share of schools that implement
quality and inclusive education standards was 4.2%.98 The target had been set to 5.5%, however, data
trends are not sufficient to assess progress. Generally, the NAP identifies increase of certified schools as a
success measure, where the baseline is missing. Within the reviewed period 78 schools certified as child-
friendly were reported.99
In general, there is progress towards schools becoming more child-friendly within the period of NAP
implementation, mostly in the area of early education for children. In order to extend positive
developments across all educational establishments where schooling is provided to children, next NAP
needs to reformulate the objectives into very specific and realistic, and define specific and measurable
outcomes describing the objective and the goal separately to activities. In the framework of CFS these
changes require more than just transformations within the existent schools themselves. Rather,
transformations need to be targeted in systems such as health (e.g. early detection of disabilities) and
social support (e.g. early identification and referral of vulnerable families with children, including the
most vulnerable: victims of violence, migrant children, children in contact with the law and children
separated from their families).
94 Voluntary National Review of Turkmenistan, 2019
95 Voluntary National Review of Turkmenistan, 2019
96 https://iite.unesco.org/news/iite-visit-to-turkmenistan/
97 KIIs with NGOs
98 2020 UN TURKMENISTAN ANNUAL RESULTS REPORT
99 Interview with Ministry of Education
37
Evaluation of the National Plan of Action for Realization of Children’s rights in Turkmenistan for 2018-2022 (NAP) and
UNICEF’s contribution to its design, implementation and monitoring
Goal 4: All children have a right to decent material living standards and safe environment required
for comprehensive physical, mental, spiritual, moral and social development
Below is a summary of the progress against this goal. See Table 9. Details are presented after the table.
Table 8 Progress towards Goal 4
Goal 4: All children have a right to decent material living standards and safe environment required for comprehensive physical, mental, spiritual, moral
and social development
SDGs contribution
SDG 1
Objective Indicators as per NAP Roadmap progress
4.1. Improved quality of life
4.1. Raise livelihoods for parents and legal • % of real income growth in families with children on an annual basis • Increase100 from 109,1 to 109,5 (in
guardians, especially for women of • Level of income in families with children 2020 against 2018)101
children with disabilities • No/% of children with disabilities living in families where there are • Increase102 from 1795,5 to 2205,5103
no working adults in 2022 as compared to 2018. • Increase 21059 (2018) to 23365
• No of preschool groups (extended care) (2020)104
• Not identified
4.2. Social protection
4.2.1.Expand existing information and data • Assessment made, assessment results are used for efficient planning • Not identified
on national standards of living standards and budgeting.
4.2.2.Provide the necessary level of • Mid-term budget for 2020-2022 includes allocations sufficient for • Not identified
budgetary allocations for universal and social care and support for families with children, especially for
targeted social protection programmes to families and children from vulnerable families.
maintain the living standards of families • Level of purchasing power. • Not identified105
with children, especially vulnerable
families with children
4.2.3.Ensure the necessary volume and • Mechanisms of protection of the child’s rights and support are • Baseline and target not identified;
level of social services to protect and adopted and operating. social payments raised by 10%
support a disadvantaged child106 annually but recipients decrease;
social services provided to 886
• No of children from single-parent or divorced families, receiving children107
benefits and alimonies. • Not identified
• No of children placed in residential care due to material reasons • children in formal care 4485 (2018)
(Infant’s and children’s homes) in 2022 as compared to 2018. increased to 5115 (2019)108
Assessment of progress on this goal
There is no conclusive evidence that NAP interventions have contributed to better employment rates and living standards of families with children. For the most
vulnerable children and their families monetary support is increasing but is still insufficient for all parents, in particular single parents or parents with disabilities.
Support beyond social payments is still scarce and available for 0.07% of the children in need. The NAP’s most significant progress is introducing the concept of
social work and community-based services for families most in need.
Goal 4 of the NAP is formulated as a right rather than a goal with specific and measurable indicators on
goal level, hence limiting measuring progress through the conventional means of evaluation of
effectiveness i.e. based on outcomes, baseline and targets. The goal is equipped with specific and
measurable indicators on the level of activities only. Some formulations for interventions were used on
the level of objectives (e.g. “Expand existing information and data”), rather than being formulated as
100 This indicator does not reflect inflation
101 UNICEF data on NAPC indicators with government input
102 This indicator does not reflect inflation
103 Turkmenistan Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Reference document N06/19858 dated 26.02.2021 Measurement unit was not
specifically indicated but evaluator assumes it is reported in local currency (manats)
104 Turkmenistan Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Reference document N06/19858 dated 26.02.2021
105 Since purchasing power (PP)-specific data was not identified for Turkmenistan, the evaluator attempted to analyse proxy
indicators e.g. available data on Purchasing Power Parity (PPP) (knoema.com). PPP has increased from 0.5 (2000) to 1.6 (2019).
This may be indicative of possible inflation process over the years. The 10% increase of payments by Presidential decrees
annually may be countering such effects. However, it is hard to estimate the extent to which this, or other factors, has contributed
to higher purchasing power of the population and specifically families with children in the country.
106 This area has been excluded from detailed analysis in this evaluation (see p. 16, Scope of evaluation) due to upcoming
evaluation of JP social services in 2022. It is expected to provide in-depth analysis on the volume and level of social services to
protect and support a disadvantaged child
107 By Aug 2021, based on preliminary reporting JP data, Обзор прогресса по реализации совместной программы,
Powerpoint presentation
108 Transmonee
38
Evaluation of the National Plan of Action for Realization of Children’s rights in Turkmenistan for 2018-2022 (NAP) and
UNICEF’s contribution to its design, implementation and monitoring
measurable objectives for children. Next NAP would greatly benefit from a strengthened result
framework that includes indicators on the level of goals and objectives in addition to activities.
The intervention logic behind the theory of change is that ensuring decent living standards and safe
environment for a child is dependent on:
• Good livelihood of the child’s family if the parents are employed and have income to ensure
basic living standard for their children
• Disadvantaged families receive sufficient social payments and enabled to ensure its livelihood
• Disadvantaged families are supported to be better able to take care of the child through provision
of necessary volume and level of social services
There are national programmes focusing specifically at social aspects of country’s development: The
National Socioeconomic Development Programme for the period 2011–2030, the revised National
Presidential Programme on the improvement of social and living conditions in villages, towns, cities and
district centres for the period up to 2020, and the Presidential Programme on socioeconomic development
for the period 2018–2024.
Every year, a Presidential decree is issued whereby pensions, social benefits, scholarships and wages in
all sectors of the economy are raised by 10 percent.109 In 2016, Turkmenistan adopted a Law on
Employment of the Population, which entitles that orphans, single parents, large families, people with
disabilities, and victims of human trafficking and victims of domestic violence to state support.110 It
defines unemployment and stipulates the rights of population for employment and for social protection in
case of unemployment.
Livelihoods and income of families
The NAP is quite relevantly targeting better incomes for the families, particularly those with
vulnerabilities, and this goal is harmonising with the other NAP goals because it demonstrates a
comprehensive approach to fostering the development of the youngest citizens of Turkmenistan. Child
poverty is defined as the lack of public and private material resources to realise rights such as those to
good nutrition, health, water, education and shelter.111 As such it cannot be discussed outside the context
of family poverty.
Family income may be a factor for better outcomes for children along with parental capacity. Income
increase is reported for families with children from 1795,5 manats
(2018) to 2205,5 manats (2020).112 National data on employment of Figure 16 Unemployment rates and
Working poverty rates
families with children was not available for this analysis. However,
estimates113 may be used here to at least capture any trends during
the NAP implementation period. It should be emphasized that
employment rates or income increase should be looked at
simultaneously with other indicators, e.g. working poverty.114 This is
because being in employment alone cannot guarantee that a family
would be able to sufficiently support its children.
Estimates of the International Labour Organisation (ILO) indicate
that the share of employed population living below $1.9 PPP115 is on
a positive trend of decreasing. See Figure 16.
109 UNICEF in Turkmenistan, Analysis of Situation of Children’s and Women’s Rights in Turkmenistan, Ashgabat, 2019
110 UNDP, INDEPENDENT COUNTRY PROGRAMME EVALUATION, 2020
111 UNICEF, Source: https://data.unicef.org/sdgs/goal-1-no-poverty/
112 Turkmenistan Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Reference document N06/19858 dated 26.02.2021
113 International Labour Organisation (ILO) Modelled estimates, Source: https://www.ilo.org
114 There is no national definition of poverty in Turkmenistan. The evaluator has applied SDG 1.2 definition on international
poverty line. It is recommended to work on defining the national measurement of wellbeing or poverty.
115 purchasing power parity (PPPs). This refers to the dollar-a-day international poverty line
39
Evaluation of the National Plan of Action for Realization of Children’s rights in Turkmenistan for 2018-2022 (NAP) and
UNICEF’s contribution to its design, implementation and monitoring
The decreasing trend of the working poverty rates dates long before the NAP design so it cannot be
concluded that NAP interventions have contributed to this process.
Figure 1714 Working hours At the same time there is a negative trend of unemployment rates going up –
lost due to the COVID-19 very slightly until 2018 and more significantly in 2019. This process might be
crisis
due to COVID-19 pandemic situation, as ILO estimates show significantly
increasing impact of COVID-19 on loss of working hours. See Figure 17.
However, data is not disaggregated by family status (children/no children) or
vulnerability to indicate specific contributions of the NAP interventions to the
living standards of families with children, in particular families with children
with disabilities or other disadvantaged families.
Some of the NAP interventions are oriented towards improving the access to
the labour market of women and young people specifically. National
disaggregated employment data are not available, however estimates indicate
that the share of youth not in employment (NEET), education or training is
increasing116 during the NAP implementation period. See Figure 18.
This is an alarming trend and more Figure 18 Share of youth not in employment
detailed analysis are required to identify
the reasons behind this process as well as make a profile of the 21.8
youngsters who most often get trapped in a situation of NEET.117 21.7
21.621.621.621.6 21.621.6
Evidence from the FGDs with parents and KIIs with service 21.521.5
providers demonstrate that most often children with disabilities and
care leavers (children leaving state care institutions) have
difficulties in finding a job. Opportunities for supporting these
groups of children at the entrance of adulthood are still very limited.
Support to disadvantaged families through social payments
Social payments to families with children may be of the following types:
- Pregnancy and child birth state allowance
- Childcare state allowances – paid until the age 3 of the child
- Disability state pension
- Mothers of multiple children (8+) who are given the honorary title Ene mähri (“Mother’s Love”)
receive 30% supplement to their pension or the state childcare allowance, disability state pension
and state social benefits. In addition, now mothers with many children will be able to retire two
years earlier, that is, at 52 years old.118
- Subsidies for natural gas, electricity and water – these subsidies are available for all families and
not just those with children, however, they have been partially removed in 2019119
Social payments to children directly may be of the following types:
- State disability allowance (children with disabilities under 18)
- Pensions for loss of a breadwinner orphans and children deprived of parental care
- Annual one-time cash assistance for the purchase of writing and educational supplies, as well as
material assistance
Amendments to the Code of Turkmenistan on social protection of the population came into force at the
beginning of 2022 introducing annual increase by at least 10% of pensions for loss of a breadwinner of
child orphans, state allowances for childbirth and state allowances for childcare. Purchasing power (PP)-
specific data was not identified for Turkmenistan, however there are available data on Purchasing Power
116 International Labour Organisation (ILO) Modelled estimates, Source: https://www.ilo.org
117 The evaluator has used ILO definition of NEET. The share of youth not in education, employment or training (also known as
“the NEET rate”) conveys the number of young persons not in education, employment or training as a percentage of the total
youth population. It provides a measure of youth who are outside the educational system, not in training and not in employment,
and thus serves as a broader measure of potential youth labour market entrants than youth unemployment (Source:
https://ilostat.ilo.org/resources/concepts-and-definitions/description-youth-neet/)
118 https://turkmenportal.com/en/blog/42956/new-laws-in-support-of-large-families-come-into-force-in-turkmenistan
119 UNDP, INDEPENDENT COUNTRY PROGRAMME EVALUATION, 2020
40
Evaluation of the National Plan of Action for Realization of Children’s rights in Turkmenistan for 2018-2022 (NAP) and
UNICEF’s contribution to its design, implementation and monitoring
Parity (PPP). PPP has increased from 0.5 (2000) to 1.6 (2019).120 This may be indicative of possible
inflation process over the years. The 10% increase of payments by Presidential decrees annually may be
countering such effects. However, it is hard to estimate the extent to which this, or other factors, has
contributed to higher purchasing power of the population and specifically families with children in the
country.
It is difficult give a proper assessment of the effectiveness of the coverage of the state social payments,
specifically for most vulnerable ones. Children in the households that received any type of social transfers
amount to 68.1%121 in 2019. This may include also one-time monetary support payments (for instance for
school supplies). Disaggregated data is not available nor data on previous periods to trace any trends.
Figure 19 Recipients of childcare social benefits
A decreasing trend is observed in the number of
recipients of childcare allowances, which may be a
375,470 378,783 374,250
365,042 361,590 result of a natural demographic process such as
decreasing fertility rate122. See Figure 19.
341,822
It should be noted that these payments only cover
families of children aged 0-3. FGDs with
2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019
parents reveal that generally parents of both young
Source: UNICEF data on Social benefits
children and older children manage relatively well in
terms of financially supporting their children. This is not the case for
Figure 20 Percentage of disability
families where there is either a child or adult with a disability. The pensioners who are children
number of children with disability has increased to 13.34% in 2019
(See Figure 22) as well as the number of children with disabilities in
families with no working adult reaching 23365123 children in 2020, of
them boys being a larger share. See Figure 20.
FGDs with parents indicate that disability is a factor on the family
10.8910.9111.6912.9513.1613.34
income – there are costs for medication, rehabilitation and medical
s
re
e
l
r
a
v
t
i
e
c
d
e s
c
,
o
a
s
n
ts
d
s
v
in
er
c
y
e
o
sp
ft
e
e
c
n
i f
t
i
r
c
a v
se
e
r
l
v
e
i
x
c
p
es
e n
a
s
r
e
e
s
o
a
n
r
l
e
y
a
a
d
v
d
a
i
i
t
l
i
a
o
b
n
l
a
e
l
i
r
n
e h
la
a
r
b
g
i
e
li
r
t a
c
t
i
i
t
o
ie
n
s
- 201420152016
2017 2018 2019
and sometimes abroad e.g. Turkey. This FGDs finding implies that
Source: Transmonee
disability is a major factor for social inclusion for these children.
Figure 21 N of children with disabilities
Often the outcome is that parents are only able to have a proper job if
living in families with no working adults
the child is placed in a specialized school. Visiting a mainstream
school means that a parent should always accompany the child to
move around the school as it is not sufficiently accessible and a child
needs special support within the mainstream education. In FGDs
almost 100% of the parents of children with disabilities indicated that 13205
11976
their children visit a boarding schools, while 2-3 children receive
home schooling (a teacher visits the family’s home). Of the children 9083 10160
receiving their education in a boarding school, almost 50% live there girls boys
2018 2020
and visit their families on the weekends or more rarely.
Source: Ministry of Foreign
Affairs
In the light of the above data and in the context of an increasing
number of children with disabilities (Figure 20) the social support system needs to extend its support
beyond monetary help only but also social support within the community.
Support to disadvantaged families through social services
120 Source: knoema.com
121 Percentage of children under age 18 living in the households that received any type of social transfers in the last 3 months,
Source: MICS 2019
122 Fertility rate for the period 2016-2019 is respectively 2.90, 2.80, 2.70 and 2.50, Source: Transmonee
123 Turkmenistan Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Reference document N06/19858 dated 26.02.2021
41
Evaluation of the National Plan of Action for Realization of Children’s rights in Turkmenistan for 2018-2022 (NAP) and
UNICEF’s contribution to its design, implementation and monitoring
Community-based care is provided mainly to adults in the format of patronage care for elderly people.
The social system in Turkmenistan does not provide specific social services to children except residential
care – special boarding schools (for children with disabilities) and orphanages (for children without
parental care). Social services for children in the community is a new concept.
The most significant change during the NAP implementation has been the introduction of the the modern
concept of social services in the community and introducing the profession of social worker. Social
services in the community were piloted in 2020 within a Joint Programme (JP) involving UNICEF,
UNDP, UNFPA, UNODC and national partners: Ministry of Labour and Social Protection, Ministry of
Health and Medical Industry, Ministry of Education, Ministry of Finance and Economy, Ministry of
Internal Affairs, Parliament, Institute of State, Law, and Democracy. During the NAP implementation
period the programme has piloted a community-based social worker model engaged in identification,
assessment and case management as well as piloting 12 specialised social services to meet specific needs
and support people to live independent lives in their communities. Most of them have a big potential of
reaching out to children i.e. they are oriented to children or to adults whose families may have children.
(A full list of JP piloted services is attached as annex). The JP is curently developing a mechanism for
social contracting, improving a social work curriculum and supporting drafting of legislative amendments
and other institutional framework (standards, service specifications).
Figure 22 Coverage of community-based
As these services are still in pilot phase, their capacity,
services for children
hence coverage is still very low – 2200 individuals served
of which 886 children124. See Figure 22
Following evaluation of their effectiveness and assessment
of their efficiency in 2022, the government will make
decisions about future scale up.
Disaggregregated data is not available to analyse trends in
the number of children living in single-parent families and
receiving some form of state support. Data is available
about pensions paid to people who have lost a breadwinner
(5962 in 2019)125 but that number is only available for 2019 and only refers to pensions paid on occasion
of the death of breadwinner i.e. does not include divorce alimonies.
This part of the analysis looks at possible progress on the NAP indicator related to the number of children
placed in residential care due to material reasons (Infant’s and children’s homes) in 2022 as compared to
2018. There are two homes for children without parental care and five infant homes, where healthy
children stay until the age of three and children with disabilities stay until the age of four. The total
placements in these two types of residential care has remained relatively stable over the last few years but
is starting to increase in 2018 by 11,65%. See Figure 23.
124 By Aug 2021, based on preliminary reporting JP data, Обзор прогресса по реализации совместной программы,
Powerpoint presentation
125 Source: UNICEF data on Social benefits
42
Evaluation of the National Plan of Action for Realization of Children’s rights in Turkmenistan for 2018-2022 (NAP) and
UNICEF’s contribution to its design, implementation and monitoring
Figure 23 Placements in infant homes and child homes
Available data about the children placed in institutions is
not disaggregated by reasons of placement. Interviews with
infant and child homes directors as well as FGDs with care
leavers126 indicate that most of the children have at least one
living parent and there are complex reasons behind children
being placed there, mostly related to socio-economic
20122013201420152016201720182019 difficulties of the families and mostly in single-parent and
Number of multiple-children families. A trend specifically for
children in infant 175 174 151 158 143 111 121 116
homes placements of young children in infant homes cannot be
Number of specified as data varies significantly. 127
children in child
368 368 421 470 457 457 454 526
homes
(orphanages) The targeted state monetary support to families with young
total 543 542 572 628 600 568 575 642 children is important but it alone cannot address the reasons
Source: Transmonee
behind placements of children as they are quite complex.
This means that monetary aid needs to be complemented by comprehensive family-support programmes
in the community and based on families’ individual needs. The focused effort towards early child
development in the country with UNICEF support needs to continue. Additionally, community-based
social service were piloted specifically targeting reintegration of infants placed in infant homes.
Interviews with Infant homes indicate that where such work took place the number of infants reunited
with their biological families is higher.
The effect of the community-based pilot services still remains to be assessed in an prospective evaluation.
It has to be emphasised that the indicator refers to placements where parental rights are transferred to the
state as per the definition of residential care.128 However, excluding some types of resdiential living for
children such as boarding schools runs the risk of missing some significant processes related to the
capacity of the family to take care of their children. In the context of children’s rights, indicators relevant
to residential living should include all places where children reside outside their family home. Evidence
from FGDs with parents of children with disabilities indicate that the disability status of their child affects
their financial ability to look after them. Limited financial abilities and underdeveloped inclusive
education combined with the lack of services for children with dissabilities brings many parents to the
practice of placing their children in boarding schools either because these provide better care for basic
necessities such as clothing and food (i.e. placement due to the financial ability of the household) or are
the only educational alternative for children with special needs (due to disability).
This represents a major factor in family separations for economic reasons masked by educational
purposes. Placements in children institutions are on the increase. The trend of continued placements in
institutions mostly affects children with special educational needs i.e. with some type of disability – they
form the largest share of children placed in institutions and most of the placements ouside the family are
placements in boarding schools. See Figure 24
126 Children leaving care in children’s home
127 Transmonee reports 116 children in infant homes, two Infant homes directors report around 40 children placed in each
(estimates indicate around 200 for all 5 infant homes), while Ministry of Healthcare and Medical Industry reports 404 children in
2018 and 417 children in 2019 (Source: Джоанна Роджерс (2020), Базовый перечень социальных услуг в Туркменистане,
Отчет выполнен для Совместной программы фонда ЦУР с целью развития качественных, инклюзивных социальных
услуг в Туркменистане на местном уровне)
128 Residential care is provided in a non-family-based group setting with paid and/or unpaid staff where some children live and
receive care and are placed by order of a competent authority. Parental rights are transferred to the state in the case of these
children. Definition based on a working definition used by the Data and Analytics Section of, UNICEF New York (2019)
43
Evaluation of the National Plan of Action for Realization of Children’s rights in Turkmenistan for 2018-2022 (NAP) and
UNICEF’s contribution to its design, implementation and monitoring
Figure 24 Share of residential care placements in boarding schools and share of CWD in public residential care
Goal 5: All children without exception have a right to be free from violence, exploitation, ill-
treatment in the family and society and cannot be abandoned without care and guardianship
Below is a summary of the progress against this goal. See Table 10. Details are presented after the table.
Table 9 Progress towards Goal 5
Goal 5: All children without exception have a right to be free from violence, exploitation, ill-treatment in the family and society and cannot be
abandoned without care and guardianship
SDGs contribution
SDG 5 SDG 8 SDG 16
Objective Indicators as per NAP progress
5.1. Prevention of violence, exploitation and abuse
5.1.1 Ensure the harmonization of No of amended and adopted legislation harmonized Within the NAP implementation, 50% of the planned
national legislation with international with international standards in the area of activities towards legislation amendment and adoption were
standards in the field of human rights prevention and combating child abuse as compared implemented129a number of laws were amended and adopted
and the protection of children from all to the total No of legislation to be amended Review of legislation on the best Interests of a child was
forms of violence and ill-treatment conducted as part of CRC National Report development and
provided recommendations for the amendment of a number
of Laws.Review on legislative and normative frameworks for
children in contact with the law undertaken in 2020 by GoT
in partnership with UNICEF. Actionable recommendations
available. Regulation on child justice in process of
strengthening.130
5.1.2 Develop evidence base for Data collection and reports writing UNDP training conducted on data collection for SDG 16.
domestic violence and child abuse MICS 2019 provided data on violent disciplining on children.
Gaps still remain e.g. violence-specific study, regular
reporting monthly/annually on violence and using for
decision-making; evidence base not yet in place or not
available for this assessment.
5.1.3 Increase the effectiveness of • No and % of government officials, law • more than 40000 officers trained in events delivered by
national measures to prevent violence enforcement officers, local self-government either the Ministry of Internal Affairs or in partnership
and child abuse officials with raised awareness on violation and with international trainers
abuse of children
• Ratio of held activities to planned activities.
129 GoT reports on implementation of the NAP
130 Turkmenistan shows commitment to make existing justice system more child-specific e.g. provision of specific rules for
children in conflict with the law, including a distinct chapter on children in the Criminal Code and the Criminal Procedural Code;
separate norms for children in the Criminal Executive Code and the Code of Administrative Offences; and Supreme Court
Resolution of the Plenum of the Supreme Court No. 7 of 2020 entirely devoted to children in conflict with the law. This is
complemented by child-specific orders of further relevant authorities, and most recently by a new law on social services (2021).
Source: Child Frontiers, 2021, Review and Analysis of legislative and normative frameworks concerning children in contact with
the law
44
Evaluation of the National Plan of Action for Realization of Children’s rights in Turkmenistan for 2018-2022 (NAP) and
UNICEF’s contribution to its design, implementation and monitoring
• % of schoolchildren of 10-15 years of age who • 50%131 of planned activities (baseline and target not
received information on abuse prevention identified)
• Not identified
5.2. Children in conflict with the law
5.2.1.Ensure compliance with the • Measures for prevention of juvenile delinquency • One pilot community-based service for youth at risk of
key international principles of juvenile and their re-integration tested in a pilot region, contact with criminal justice (within JP); UNICEF-
justice: the rights of the child, the best their effectiveness assessed and recommended supported programme towards reforming justice for
interests, the right to freely express for dissemination throughout the country. children; A Roadmap for strengthening child justice;
their views and be heard, non- • % of children, risk groups covered by measures introduction of a specialized approach towards children in
discrimination and the priority of for prevention of juvenile delinquency and their contact with the law
preventing the child from entering the re-integration into society. • Not identified
justice system and re-integration
5.3. Child labour
5.3.1.Improve the provision of • Compendium published • Not identified
information to the population, aimed
at issues of protection of the rights of
children, including prohibiting the use
of the worst forms of child labour
5.3.2. Ensuring enabling conditions • No of enterprises, organizations and institutions 19 children132 employed through agencies. Employees are
for labour for persons under 18, in using the labour of persons under 18 in harmful forbidden133 to use child labour in harmful and hazardous
accordance with the legislation and dangerous (especially harmful and conditions. Reports on potential breach of law were not
effective in Turkmenistan especially dangerous) labour conditions identified.
5.4. Refugees, migrants and displaced children
5.4.1.Promote social and • No and % of children from refugee families, • Not identified
psychological rehabilitation and displaced persons and forced migrants who
integration of children from families receive access to services by 2022
of displaced persons, refugees and • No and % of non-registered children from • Not identified
displaced families, refugees and forced migrants
forced migrants.
in 2021 as compared to 2015.
5.5. Alternative care and adoption
5.5.1.Increase the effectiveness of • Review of laws and regulations and practices to • Reviews of legislation specific to child
measures to prevent child prevent child abandonment and their placement abandonment prevention were not identified. However,
abandonment and their placement under the state custody carried out in 2018. prevention of abandonment and placement in formal care
under the state custody (Infant homes, • Actions developed and introduced. can be addressed by development of community-based
• No and % of children under state care support services. Legislative efforts are in place to introduce
orphanages and residential
disaggregated by gender, age, disability and such social services.
institutions) location of institution. • Increase of placements in state care by 6%134 and more
• Reports on the situation with children include than double for children with disabilities where a 13%
disaggregated (by gender, age and disability) increase is recorded135
data about children deprived of parental care and • Data is available but is not always consistent across
placed in the family and institutional form of different sources] disaggregated by type of institution,
arrangement. disability status (but not disability type) age and gender
(with some gaps), but not by reason for placement.
Assessment of progress on this goal
Turkmenistan has made many important commitments for child protection under International Human Rights Law. The concept of coordination for effective
governance of child protection and child justice is present but requires coordination mechanism for oversight of children’s rights to be operationalised,
including by describing the roles and functions of each agency and law enforcement body, as well as their responsibilities for joint working and reporting.
Introducing open and fare reporting of suspected child abuse and response to violence into Turkmenistan’s legislation and improving the data collection
capacity of the system can increase the visibility of the child protection system and the child justice components. In terms of children in contact with the law
Turkmenistan justice system offers a wide range of child-specific rules, and specialized professionals and institutions are available to some degree. The legal
system provides some essential elements of a child justice system in line with international standards. This needs to be built on by shifting the system
orientation from ‘correction’ to ‘resocialization’ and ensue that interventions are based on interdisciplinary assessments which respond to the needs of each
child, including psychological and emotional needs. The capacity of the child protection system and children’s access to justice could be improved by scaling
up existing pilot community-based support services for children, continuing the efforts to introduce social work profession and increasing the number of
social workers, ensuring training and ongoing professional development on case management protocols, including individual assessment and planning for
every child and family in need of support. Positively, some standard operating procedures have been already established and they need to be further expanded
to children-specific vulnerabilities, developing standardised tool for regular administrative data collection and a monitoring and accountability mechanism.
Follow-up progress towards ensuring violence-free environment for children would be easier for the GoT to assess accurately if the NAP logical framework
is strengthened by specifying the objectives orienting them to results for children rather than interventions and equipping goal and objectives with valid and
measurable indicators; revising protocols for collection of regular, standardised administrative data, alongside regular population-based survey data
131Source: Turkmenistan Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Reference document N06/19206 dated 25.02.2021
132 2020, COMMITTEE ON THE RIGHTS OF THE CHILD, CONSIDERATION OF REPORTS SUBMITTED BY STATES
PARTIES UNDER ARTICLE 44 OF THE CONVENTION ON THE RIGHTS OF THE CHILD
133 the Law of Turkmenistan “On guarantees of the right of youth for the right to work”, adopted in 2005
134 Data refers to the period 2017-2019 and to children placed in all types of institutional care (infant homes, homes for children,
boarding schools including Residential Rehabilitation and Education Centres. Total for all institutions: 4836 (2017), 4932 (2018),
5142 (2019) Source: State Statistics Committee of Turkmenistan (2021) (quoted by Elayn M. Sammon, Functional Assessment of
the Child Protection System in Turkmenistan, 2021)
135 ibid
45
Evaluation of the National Plan of Action for Realization of Children’s rights in Turkmenistan for 2018-2022 (NAP) and
UNICEF’s contribution to its design, implementation and monitoring
Analysis along the different levels of interventions required in an effective child protection system indicate that Turkmenistan has made progress mostly in
terms of creating a more enabling environment for family-support programmes: mostly for children in conflict with the law and least for children affected by
violence and abuse as well as those living in alternative care. In terms of refugee, migrant and displaced children, the legislation in Turkmenistan ensures
access to universal basic services available in the country for such children. Stateless children are reported as zero.136 Data was not identified for migrant or
refugee children in the country. Therefore, the assumption is that the mainstream services are prepared to work with such vulnerability. However, neither the
education system nor the available social services report to have worked with such children or families.137
Goal 5 of the NAP is formulated as a right rather than a goal with specific and measurable dimensions,
baseline and targets were not defined in some cases, so measurement through conventional means of
evaluation of effectiveness is challenging. Mostly quantitative data is available. Furthermore, some
interventions were formulated on the level of objectives, rather than being formulated as measurable
objectives and outcomes for children. For instance “Develop evidence base for domestic violence and
child abuse” and “Ensure the harmonization of national legislation with international standards in the
field of human rights and the protection of children from all forms of violence and ill-treatment” are set as
objectives, while they both are actually interventions (activities) towards creating enabling environment.
Goal 5 is about protecting children from all forms of violence and abuse, especially the most vulnerable.
UNICEF defines child protection as the prevention of, and response to, exploitation, abuse, neglect,
harmful practices and violence against children.138 It is embedded in the Convention on the Rights of the
Child and the Sustainable Development Goals. Child Protection is universal: it is for all children
everywhere.
The NAP does not indicate or explain which conceptual frameworks were used in developing high-
quality interventions towards ensuring the right of children to be protected from violence. Because the
child protection system means to serve children coming from diverse circumstances presenting equally
diverse protection needs, it needs a service continuum matched to this diversity. Turkmenistan has only
started to develop the foundations of a quality child protection system. This is why it is important to
always consider that one hallmark of the systems approach to child is the holistic view of children,
families, and communities. The NAP is relevantly takes a comprehensive approach to addressing
vulnerabilities of children and families to ensure that children remain in their families and in their
families they receive proper care.
The GoT has shown commitment to strengthen its enabling environment for implementing children’s
rights, including in the area of child protection. New laws on the treatment of victims of crime and
defining the social work function demonstrate key momentum in this area. The GoT, assisted by
UNICEF, are putting effort into conceptualisation of a more comprehensive child justice system capable
of realizing the full rights for all children who come into contact with the justice system, whether as
victims of violence, witnesses of violence, accused of wrongdoing, or in a civil or administrative
proceeding for issues such as custody, adoption, and violations of their rights.
The NAP ToC envisages that strengthening such a protective system in the country is te selected pathway
of realising children’s right to be free from any form of violence and living in its family under proper
care. The assumption has been that legislative changes, robust data development and strengthening
service provision would contribute to ensuring that right. This is a valid pathway; however, making it
work also requires effective coordination. Line ministries are accountable to the Cabinet of Ministers,
which has overall jurisdiction for governance and coordination. However, coordination for effective
governance of child protection continues to be identified as a challenge by the 2015 report of the UN
Committee on the Rights of the Child. The GoT introduced the concept of a coordination mechanism for
oversight of children’s rights in the NAP although this commitment has yet to be operationalised.
Prevention of violence, exploitation and abuse
136 Interview with Ombudsman Office
137 Джоанна Роджерс (2020), Базовый перечень социальных услуг в Туркменистане; Отчет выполнен для Совместной
программы фонда ЦУР с целью развития качественных, инклюзивных социальных услуг в Туркменистане на местном
уровне
138 UNICEF definition, Source: https://www.unicef.org/documents/child-protection-strategy
46
Evaluation of the National Plan of Action for Realization of Children’s rights in Turkmenistan for 2018-2022 (NAP) and
UNICEF’s contribution to its design, implementation and monitoring
This component of NAP is in line with CRC expectation that countries are to address all forms of violence
while in the care of a parent, guardian or other person.139 The analysis of interventions towards this objective
indicates that this component promotes legislation harmonization to enable protection of children from all
forms of violence and increase effectiveness of violence prevention measures. No specific forms of violence
were flagged except for making special reference to domestic violence and abuse in the context of the need
to develop evidence base.
A recently conducted review on legislation140 lead by GoT and UNICEF indicates that the country has taken
steps towards prohibiting all forms of violence against children141, although the specific forms of violence
criminalised were not analysed in detail. Commendably, specific criminalisation of gender-based violence
against girls is addressed by a National Action Plan on Gender Equality for 2021-2025 as approved by the
Decree of President of Turkmenistan No2007, December 4, 2020. This development opens up opportunities
for creating legislative space for targeting domestic violence and developing comprehensive prevention and
response programmes for children (both boys and girls) experiencing specific forms of violence, including
sexual violence, domestic violence and child abuse. Also, it is very timely because such effort would speed
up the development of the evidence base for domestic violence and child abuse, being one of the priorities
in the NAP and still pending. Currently, data on prevalence of violence is available but there are still gaps
on the specific dimensions, forms of violence, place of occurrence, child population disaggregation, etc.
The increased capacity of the Turkmenistan Statistical Office for data collection142 is instrumental to make
the dimensions of violence against children in the country more visible so that they can be targeted
effectively by strengthening reporting mechanisms as well as response services. Cultural norms in the
society define an environment of tolerance to domestic violence and specifically gender-based violence –
35% of women 15-49 justify a husband beating or hitting his wife.143 This has implications on the children
in the family witnessing violence, thus becoming victims themselves. Parents from the FGDs indicated that
they would never use violence towards their children nor do they have knowledge of teachers of their
children using violence. Yet, data shows that children in Turkmenistan experience high levels of violent
disciplining methods both psychological and physical (68.6% of children aged 1-14).144
Positive developments are that NAP addresses a more gender-tolerant attitudes in schools by training and
certifying secondary school teachers on gender-sensitive educational topics. (discussed in Goal 3)
Teachers and the Inspectorate on Minors Affairs appear to have a strong presence in the community
around the child and working closely with families may be potential to leverage the identification and
reporting capacity in the child protection system. Expanding their functions, upgrading their skills
towards support rather than sanction and building their reporting and referral capacity may be linked with
the newly developing social workers resource on etrap level.
Turkmenistan recently enacted two laws (Law on State Protection of victims, witnesses and other
participants in criminal proceedings (2016) and the Law on Combatting Human Trafficking (2016,
amended 2018)) which provide a wide range of protection measures for victims and witnesses, and
comprehensive assistance and support for victims of human trafficking. Making the measures articulated
in these laws operational in practice requires making them available and accessible for all child victims
(and witnesses), further capacity building of the system, training of professionals, developing child-
specific standard operational procedures and guidance (both methodological documents and case
supervision for workers).
Identification, reporting and referral services are at their onset. SOPs were developed in 2020 for health
workers, social system professionals and police persons acting in case of reported cases of domestic
violence, although they are not specifically for children but for any person victims of violence. Of course,
proper referral would only make sense if there are community-based services to refer to. Comprehensive
139CRC, Article 19: States Parties shall take all appropriate legislative, administrative, social, and educational measures to
protect the child from all forms of physical or mental violence, injury or abuse, neglect or negligent treatment, maltreatment, or
exploitation, including sexual abuse, while in the care of parent(s), legal guardian(s) or any other person who has the care of the
child.
140 Child Frontiers, 2021, Review and Analysis of legislative and normative frameworks concerning children in contact with the
law
140Source: Turkmenistan Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Reference document N06/19206 dated 25.02.2021
141 Law on the State Guarantees on the Rights of the Child, adopted in 2002
142 Contributing to MICS 2015 and MICS 2019
143 Analysis Of Situation Of Children’s And Women’s Rights In Turkmenistan, February 2019
144 MICS 2019
47
Evaluation of the National Plan of Action for Realization of Children’s rights in Turkmenistan for 2018-2022 (NAP) and
UNICEF’s contribution to its design, implementation and monitoring
social support service for prevention of domestic violence against women has been piloted within the JP.
Presumably, it may potentially cover children also since domestic violence response is intrinsically linked
with care for the child of the victim. It is very important that these are further developed and scaled up to
further strengthen the support system of the country e.g. incorporating social work training into
government and university training curricula; using a ‘training of trainers’ approach to ensure
multiplication of results; and moving from ‘pilots’ to model specialized social services with a view to
scaling initiatives.
Children in conflict with the law
It is generally considered that children who break the law do not do so of their own free will, but rather
because of restricted opportunities available for their development. Juveniles from risk groups that could
get in conflict with the law are often victims of abuse and neglect, negligent and poor parenting and
economic difficulties. These children need support while they are still children on primary level of
prevention and as part of basic universal services available to all children e.g. as part of general education
and healthcare.
The concept of children being in conflict with the law is gradually changing in Turkmenistan towards
modernising and becoming more child-friendly. The GoT has placed great attention on juvenile justice in
the context of rule of law and justice sector reforms. Building on that readiness to reform the juvenile
justice system, in 2021, UNICEF and the GoT considered opportunities to extend the approach to a wider
sector of justice for children in Turkmenistan. To advocate for further changes, UNICEF convened a
series of workshops to start the implementation of the Concept’s activities applying the best experiences
of specialized approaches and alternative sanctions of other countries.
The positive outcome is the introduction of a specialized approach towards children in contact with the
law. The NAP most significant change has been initiation of upgrading the existing workforce of the
systems components which are related to child justice i.e. police and judicial system, towards more child-
friendly justice. Commissions of minors are functioning on local level and externally to the Ministry of
Interior (MoI). They are part of the safety net of services targeting prevention of family separation due to
delinquency. In 2021, the Ministry of Interior prepared an Inter-Agency Concept for Establishing
Specialized Procedures for Protecting Child Victims and Witnesses of Crime at the pre-trial stage.
Community-based social services for adolescents at risk of contact with criminal justice (assessment,
family therapy, life skills, and referral) were piloted in 2020 within the JP. Their coverage is still very
low145 so their scaling up is crucial for ensuring linkages of child protection components in the context of
the wider concept of child justice and ensuring better prevention. Commendably, options for scaling up
are currently considered by the GoT with UNICEF strong support. These options should be considered in
conjunction with upgrading and expanding the existing components of a child protection system in
Turkmenistan, specifically by: addressing human resource gaps, insufficient funding and weak inter-
agency coordination.
While the Turkmenistan justice system offers a wide range of child-specific rules and legislative
safeguards, it is limited with the availability of alternatives to deprivation of liberty and does not yet have
specially assigned judges to consider cases involving children in the contact with the law. MoI is keeping
a register of dysfunctional families but targeted social support to such families is not available nor is
needs assessment analysis, including regional trends and risk factors – 59% of the children in correctional
facilities are residents of Lebap and Mary welayats.146
Practices of juvenile diversion and approaches holding youth accountable for their behaviour without
resorting to legal sanctions, court oversight or the threat of confinement are still not fully established.
Foundations for such practices were laid by the 2012-2016 General Juvenile Justice Programme provides
for juvenile justice processes that are more child-friendly.
Detention procedures are becoming more child-friendly e.g.:
-juvenile units have been set up in the police departments to ensure that children are housed
separately from regular police detention places;
- staff recruitment is increasingly considered in child-friendlier terms i.e. Juvenile affairs inspectors
with academic background in education now total at 30%.
145 in Ashgabat and Turkmenabat
146 Ombudsman report 2018
48
Evaluation of the National Plan of Action for Realization of Children’s rights in Turkmenistan for 2018-2022 (NAP) and
UNICEF’s contribution to its design, implementation and monitoring
- the academic curriculum for prospective police officers includes child-rights related topics. More
specialized topics, such as child-friendly interviewing techniques, have been introduced through
UNICEF-supported training, however not part of the regular curriculum yet.
Convicted children are detained in colonies separate from adults and separate for boys and girls. The
number of children in colonies reduced over the years (2017- 85147, 2018- 68148 children, all being boys
and one girl). The reduction of the number of detained children is a positive aspect but in the absence of
community-based prevention social services and effective diversion programmes, the reduction is due to
children reaching the age for leaving the colony as well as gate-keeping control resulting from the
tendency of more lenient sentences regarding minors, not related to deprivation of liberty.
There are interventions to facilitate the social integration of children in colonies back to society:
education is provided and transition to independent living is provided, although their effectiveness is not
analysed and documented. However, children stay in these facilities mostly until the end of their
childhood and the transition programmes do not include reintegration components to facilitate the child’s
shorter stay and returning to the family sooner.
Child labour
In line with the Law of Turkmenistan “On state guarantees of the right of youth for the right to work”,
parents are forbidden to use children below 18 in works related to permanent employment, especially in
works related to absence from studies. Also, employees are forbidden to use the labour of workers below
18 in works with harmful and (or especially hazardous) conditions of labour. Still, it has to be noted that
studies on possible informal use of child labour were not identified.
Due to the legislative changes of minimum recruitment age from 16 to Figure 25 N of children employed
18, the number of children aged 16 engaged in branches of economy of through employment agencies
Turkmenistan has been shrunk to a nullity. The number of children 189
aged under 18 engaged in the branches of economy, made 36 persons,
or 0.005% of the employed in them.149 Of them, 19 children were
employed through employment agencies. See Figure 25. The trend
74
indicates that the objective of eliminating child labour had been 55
achieved before the adoption of NAP. Furthermore, discussions with 20 19
Ministry of Internal Affairs and Prosecutors’ Office did not indicate
that child labour was an issue for Turkmenistan, which might be
2015 2016 2017 2018 2019
Source: CRC
demonstrating that high preventive measures are working and enabling
environment was created to prevent child labour.
Refugees, migrants and displaced children
The legislation in Turkmenistan ensures access of all children from migrant, refugee or displaced families
to universal basic services available in the country.
Specific data on migrant or refugee children in the country was not identified, however, discussions with
Ministry of Internal Affairs and Prosecutors’ Office did not indicate that there are issues with such groups
of children, and, stateless children are reported as zero. Further analysis with robust data on migrant and
refugee children may help identifying the specific vulnerabilities and needs of such children. This will be
useful to the GoT to plan accordingly, develop support services for children coming from migrant or
refugee families, and improve the scope of the existing universal services in a way that support is tailored
to the specific needs of this group of children. Government officials state that such children have access
to mainstream services.150 Therefore, the assumption is that the mainstream services are prepared to work
with such vulnerability. However, neither the education system nor the available social services report to
have worked with such children or families.151 Disaggregated data on the placements in institutions in
147 Irina Urumova (2018), International Consultant, Assessment of the General Programme on the Development of Juvenile
Justice System in Turkmenistan for the Period of 2012-2016
148 Ombudsman report 2018
149 2020, COMMITTEE ON THE RIGHTS OF THE CHILD, CONSIDERATION OF REPORTS SUBMITTED BY STATES
PARTIES UNDER ARTICLE 44 OF THE CONVENTION ON THE RIGHTS OF THE CHILD
150 KIIs
151 Джоанна Роджерс (2020), Базовый перечень социальных услуг в Туркменистане; Отчет выполнен для Совместной
программы фонда ЦУР с целью развития качественных, инклюзивных социальных услуг в Туркменистане на местном
уровне
49
Evaluation of the National Plan of Action for Realization of Children’s rights in Turkmenistan for 2018-2022 (NAP) and
UNICEF’s contribution to its design, implementation and monitoring
terms of their refugee status was not identified. Refugee or migrant children have not been reported by
interviewed residential facilities for children (infant homes, orphanage).
Although migration does not come across as a demonstrated vulnerability risk, it is still reasonable to
keep track and explore possible issues of children affected by migration that may not be very visible. The
recent report of the Ombudsman Office states that 11% of appeals coming from families are related to
impacts of migration. Furthermore, 10% of children are reported to have at least one parent abroad.152
This trend may be indicative of much of the labour migration being informal thus unprotected and
vulnerable children remaining below the radar of the protective system. The evaluation did not identify a
specific research on possible migration flows from or to Turkmenistan from neighbouring source
countries nor on the effects of labour migration on families and children.
It is recommended that the Government determine the situation of migrant families and the protection
needs of their children left behind through a study. The proposed study will enable the policy and
decision-makers to better understand the current situation and support the development of a policy
framework on mitigation of the negative consequences of migration.
Alternative care and adoption
In line with Article 85 of the Family Code of Turkmenistan, raising a child in the family is recognized as
a priority form, which in the best way shall ensure rights and lawful interests of a child. The implication
of this is that universal services (e.g. education, healthcare, ECD) should be designed in a way to enable
families to take care of all children’s needs by themselves.
Figure 26 Children with at least one living The number of children with living parents but separated from them
parent and separated from their family is on the increase. See Figure 26. It is important to address this need
and study the reasons behind it so that the risks are addressed
1.6
properly. Tailored counselling and social support for families
0.9 1.2
experiencing difficulties in caring for their children is still not widely
available within the existing social support system of the country.
0.1 00 00.1
0.1 Possibilities for children separated from their families (and who are
2006 2016 2019 not living with a guardian, close relative, or adopted), are one of the
following types of institutions: 5 infant homes (for healthy infants 0-
both parents alive
3 or infants with disabilities 0-4); 2 children’s homes (orphanages),
living mother
10 boarding-schools and 6 rehabilitation health complexes. All of
living father
Source: MICS them provide long-term care. There are no documented analysis on
the duration of the average stay but mostly children spend there all their childhood (interviewed
management report that main reason for leaving is reaching full age).
The number of adoptions remains relatively stable over the years153 In this context institutions are
increasingly the most commonly available social services for families in need of support, where most
children are children with disabilities and their share is growing. (See Figure 20 and 24). FGDs with
children leaving institutions indicates that the support
provided is mainly related to basic needs and education. There is still no individual planning or case
management towards reintegration with the family in order to ensure quick permanent solution154 for the
child and shortening the duration of placement in the institution.
152 MICS 2019
153 For the period of 2017-2020 the civil registry offices registered the following number of adoptions: 2690 (2017), 2589 (2018),
2659 (2019) and 1180 (first 6 months of 2020), Source: 2020, COMMITTEE ON THE RIGHTS OF THE CHILD,
CONSIDERATION OF REPORTS SUBMITTED BY STATES PARTIES UNDER ARTICLE 44 OF THE CONVENTION ON
THE RIGHTS OF THE CHILD
154 Permanent solutions are reunification with the biological family or adoption.
50
Evaluation of the National Plan of Action for Realization of Children’s rights in Turkmenistan for 2018-2022 (NAP) and
UNICEF’s contribution to its design, implementation and monitoring
Public associations providing social services report to have served 9 983 persons (both adult and children)
and this represents 6% decrease Figure 27 Children placed in institutions
of users compared to 2018 (10
607).155 However, these refer to
4,577 4,781 4,885 5,115
users of all types of
vulnerabilities, not necessarily
parents and not necessarily in 3,716 3,944 4,066 4,208
terms of family separation
prevention.
Comprehensive social support 261
269
service aimed at preventing child 457 457 244 265
454
abandonment and service for 143 526
111
teenage pregnancy is now being 121
2,016 116
piloted with the JP and is hence 2017
2018
with limited coverage, available 2019
for Ashgabat and Turkmenabat. 2,016 2,017 2,018 2,019
N children in infant homes 143 111 121 116
There are emerging
N children in orphanages 457 457 454 526
opportunities for creating models
N children in institutions for
of reintegrating services: physically/mentally disabled 261 269 244 265
reunification programme is N children in boarding schools 3,716 3,944 4,066 4,208
piloted within the JP in the Total 4,577 4,781 4,885 5,115
Source: Transmonee
Infant homes in Mary and
Turkmenabat under UNICEF guidance as well as earlier attempts towards reforming the care model. The
services is still at pilot phase and its effectiveness and efficiency is still under review, however, Mary
Infant home management reported positive results for children i.e. 95% of the children leaving the
institution in 2020 were reintegrated to their biological families.
On the overall, only 0.25%156 of Turkmenistan child population lives in residential institutions. The rate
of children living in residential care institutions is below the regional average157; however, this is above
the global average of 120 children per 100,000 child population. It is not meant to indicate that children
are not having negative experiences in their family but only that negative family experiences for children
do not generally leave to separation of the family. Family separations are on the increase and that means
that gaps are wider for those families who face difficulties in taking good care of their children and there
is a risk of children being separated.
National statistics does not indicate removal from parents by reasons although it is important to discuss
separation reasons to inform further analysis across the determinants (MoRES)158 as evidence of why
children are separated from their families would indicate different bottlenecks, hence analysis would
inform different interventions strategies.
The factors contributing to the unsatisfactory trend of reduction of the number of family separations are
manifold:
• Underdeveloped network of sufficient services in support of biological families, especially for
families with children with disabilities.;
• The lack of reintegration services as well as largely unreformed institutions (with emerging positive
practices in infant homes). The quality of reintegration services is key to reducing family separations.
Quality reintegration services should foster quick family reunions; and
155 Джоанна Роджерс (2020), Базовый перечень социальных услуг в Туркменистане; Отчет выполнен для Совместной
программы фонда ЦУР с целью развития качественных, инклюзивных социальных услуг в Туркменистане на местном
уровне
156 Author’s estimates based on the following data: total population of Turkmenistan (6031000), 33.3% child population (source:
ToR), total number of children in residential care (5115, Transmonee)
157 UNICEF’s estimate is that Central and Eastern Europe and Central Asia was found to have the highest rate worldwide, with
666 children per 100,000 living in residential care, over 5 times the global average of 120 children per 100,000. Source:
https://www.unicef.org/kyrgyzstan/press-releases/least-27-million-children-are-living-residential-care-worldwide-unicef-says
158 The Monitoring Results for Equity System (MoRES) is a conceptual framework for effective planning, programming,
implementation, monitoring and managing for results to achieve desired outcomes for the most disadvantaged children. Central
to the MoRES approach are three key elements: equity refocus, management for results, and bottleneck and barrier analysis.
51
Evaluation of the National Plan of Action for Realization of Children’s rights in Turkmenistan for 2018-2022 (NAP) and
UNICEF’s contribution to its design, implementation and monitoring
• Underdeveloped inclusive education combined with the lack of services for disabled children brings
many parents to the practice of placing their children in boarding schools either because these provide
better care for basic necessities such as clothing and food (i.e. placement due to economic reasons) or
are the only educational alternative for children with special needs (due to disability).
Although social norms159 view family care as best care, boarding schools are not viewed as institutions in
the traditional sense of the term e.g. for children without parents (orphanages). Quality data from
interviews with parents of children with disabilities indicate that most of them are in favour of boarding
schools due to lack of better alternative. Many of them say that the family cannot provide care at the same
quality level as a boarding school, especially when the child has a disability. This fosters a conductive
environment to placing children in educational institutions i.e. boarding schools are seen by the public as
a place with an educational task rather than a residential institution per se. This is a negative trend
because with insufficient support services for families in difficult life situations this process might affect
an increasing number of children but at the same time is easy to overlook as it is masked by educational
purpose reforms.
The analysis above indicates that during the reviewed period the most significant changes in the network
ensuring that children live in a safe and violence-free family environment are:
- efforts towards creating enabling environment: introducing the modern concept of social work and
the profession of social worker; a new Law on Social Services is underway160; considerations are
made with UNICEF and other UN agencies to introduce working arrangements in the legislation for
social contracting. This is a positive step and in the long run would allow the GoT to encourage a
wider array of services along more levels on the continuum of needs and a much wider coverage
nationally. It is crucial that scaling up JP pilot community-based services accelerates.
- ECD programmes which are part of the universal network of prevention of family separations
Internationally, there are various frameworks for planning and assessing whether child protection systems
provide necessary and suitable options for the child161 e.g. continuum of care162 as defined by World
Health Organisation (WHO) as well as UNICEF163; the concept of service quality defined through the
European Common Quality Framework for Social Service of General Interest; the principles of quality
childcare systems that are able to prevent family separation as defined in the “Guidelines for the
Alternative Care of Children”164 or the Intervention pyramid165 for mental health and psychosocial
support among others.
To help the GoT to further plan high quality child protection services, the consultant has applied an
approach to analysis of existing services resting upon an adaptation of the common principles of the
above-mentioned frameworks. The analysis is presented as an annex to this report.
159 FGDs with parents
160 Existing services in the form of social services were regulated only by a separate section of the Code of Turkmenistan on
social protection of the population, and a special Law "On Social Services" was adopted on December 18, 2021.
161 The principles of necessity and suitability are defined as quality principles underlying child protection systems preventing
children from being separated from their families due to some vulnerability. Cantwell, N.; Davidson, J.; Elsley, S.; Milligan,
I.; Quinn, N. (2012). Moving Forward: Implementing the ‘Guidelines for the Alternative Care of Children’. UK:
Centre for Excellence for Looked After Children in Scotland.
162 “Continuum of care” is an applicable tool for assessment of services targeting client populations with a great variety of needs
(http://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/10665/66584/4/WHO_MSD_MSB_00.2d.pdf)
163 Adapting a Systems approach to child protection: key concepts and considerations,
https://www.unicef.org/french/protection/files/Adapting_Systems_approach_to_CP_concepts_and_considerations.docx
164 Cantwell, N.; Davidson, J.; Elsley, S.; Milligan, I.; Quinn, N. (2012). Moving Forward: Implementing the ‘Guidelines for the
Alternative Care of Children’. UK: Centre for Excellence for Looked After Children in Scotland.
165 IASC Guidelines on Mental Health and Psychosocial Support in Emergency Settings
52
Evaluation of the National Plan of Action for Realization of Children’s rights in Turkmenistan for 2018-2022 (NAP) and
UNICEF’s contribution to its design, implementation and monitoring
Goal 6: All children have a right to participate in the decision-making affecting their life, well-being
and development and express their opinion, which is to be taken into account
Below is a summary of the progress against this goal. See Table 11. Details are presented after the table.
Table 10 Progress towards Goal 6
Goal 6: All children have a right to participate in the decision-making affecting their life, well-being and development and express their opinion,
which is to be taken into account
6.1. Capacity building for promotion of participatory approach
6.1.1.Build the capacity of children to No of established organizations, committees, (Target and baseline was not identified)
participate effectively in decision- councils led by children and young people by 2022 The Ministry of Justice has considered a project on the statute
making that affects their well-being as compared to 2018 of the children’s organisation Altyn Nesil by the Central
and development council of the Mahtumkuli Youth organisation of
Turkmenistan.
For the first time, views and ideas were collected from 150
children from all regions of Turkmenistan to provide insights
for the CRC report (in partnership with the ISLD and
UNICEF) in Oct 2020
6.1.2. Build the capacity of • National guidelines ready by 2021. • Ongoing preparatory work on development of national
government officials and • No of government officials and professionals guidelines for increasing children’s access to information
professionals working with children to prepared for participation of children by 2021. e.g. a compendium of international and legal acts regarding
make decisions in the best interests of women’s rights. A leaflet was issues presenting the
children Programme on State Youth Policy of Turkmenistan 2021-
2025. A secondary school textbook update is underway to
publishing on the topic “Foundations of the state and rights
of Turkmenistan”.
• (N or % not identified, target and baseline not identified)
There has been training with the Ombudsman Office staff and
UNICEF on child’s right to access to justice
6.2. Media
6.2.1.Provide age-appropriate No and quality of children and youth media by (Target and baseline was not identified)
information through various media 2022 A radio programme “The first 1000 day’s of a child’s life”
sources available to children and was prepared to go on air - 36 episodes. 15 TV broadcasts
young people. are underway.
Assessment of progress on this goal
The progress towards ensuring the right of participation is difficult to assess accurately in conventional evaluation approaches due to predominantly
qualitative data. There is no overarching policy to encourage children participation. Analysis of the main areas of child participation reveal that Turkmenistan
has put most effort towards the legal protection of the child’s right to participate and least progress in creating space for actual participation. The systems
oriented to the child are at the stage of laying the foundations of an understanding of what child participation is. More effort and time is required to
operationalise such understanding into a sustainable model and a policy across all sectors related to children. For the first time children’s opinions were
sought for policy-making, which is a positive practice. UNICEF has the capacity to advise national systems to develop good practices of child involvement.
The NAP itself does not contain information on identified and assessed needs of children or adults related
to practicing child participation. It implies that this topic is externally motivated, which of course does not
mean it is not significant. A difficulty in evaluating the progress to this goal has been, on the one hand,
the framework which has some indicators but not sufficiently valid to fully describe the goal, and on the
other hand, the still underdeveloped mechanism of collecting monitoring data and other relevant
information on this goal. These may be adjusted for next NAP to describe a more realistic and specific
goal. For instance “Provide age- appropriate information …[in various media]” is set in the NAP as an
objective while it is activity towards an end result. Moreover, measuring progress towards such result
would twist the actual assessment since the media content cannot be attributed to the NAP (the NAP does
not specify which media are within its influence, hence attributable to potential progress).
Goal 6 uses concepts, which are not explicitly defined in the NAP i.e. “participation”. The evaluator
clarifies and defines the concept of participation for the purpose of this analysis and to enable
measurement of progress.
Participation as the informed and voluntary involvement of children, including those from marginalized
groups, children of different ages and different abilities, in every issue that affects them, either directly or
indirectly.166
166 UNICEF definition of child and youth participation, https://www.unicef.org/bulgaria/en/child-and-youth-participation
53
Evaluation of the National Plan of Action for Realization of Children’s rights in Turkmenistan for 2018-2022 (NAP) and
UNICEF’s contribution to its design, implementation and monitoring
The topic of participation is relevantly included in the NAP as it is one of CRC rights. However, it is a
horizontal and cross-cutting principle rather than a goal on its own. The evaluator finds that Goal 6 is very
much linked with Goal 1 (specifically with its dimension of “Harmonization of legislation with key
international agreements and conventions related to promotion and protection of children’s rights”)
because both goals are addressing the creation of an enabling environment of exercising the rights
targeted by Goals 2-5. See Theory of change.
Capacity building for promotion of participatory approach
The theory of change behind NAP is that the limited possibility of children to participate in decision-
making is a bottleneck for realising children’s rights. Furthermore, the pathway to realising every child’s
right goes through creating space for participation (mechanisms, formats and practices) but also building
capacity to promote participatory approaches. This is relevantly formulated as objective 1 under this goal.
In an attempt to unpack the specific dimensions of “capacity for participation”, the evaluator has analysed
them through the following two dimensions underlying the NAP framework of priorities and planned
interventions:
• Capacity of children to participate effectively in decision-making that affects their well-being and
development i.e. empowering children by providing information, awareness and spaces for
participation,
• Capacity of government officials and professionals working with children to make decisions in the
best interests of children - i.e. to protect the right of children to participate (linked to Goal 1) and
promote the child’s right to participate (by informing, training awareness raising, providing tools and
guidelines, etc.).
The analysis below is based on the above priorities of the NAP but for additional depth of the review and
to enable assessment of progress the evaluator has decomposed the objective to allow for measurable
elements were added to fully describe each dimension of the NAP objective.167 See Table 12
Table 11 Evaluation of child participation
Benchmark Assessment Justification
CAPACITY OF GOVERNMENT OFFICIALS AND PROFESSIONALS WORKING WITH CHILDREN
PROTECTING THE RIGHT TO PARTICIPATE168
1 Legal protection for An unequivocal commitment to children’s right to participate in decisions
children and young people’s affecting them is not enshrined in national primary legislation. The Constitution
right to participate in makes reference to participation of citizens in “managing the affairs of the
decision-making is reflected society and state” (Article 45), however, it is not explicitly stated for children.
in the national Constitution Legal reference to the child’s right to express views and for those views to be
and legislation concerning given due weight were not identified in laws directly affecting children.
education, health, social
protection, justice, etc.
2 Explicit inclusion of There is reference to child participation as part of a cross sectorial national
children and young people’s children’s rights strategy (NAP, Goal 6). However, it has to be noted that the
right to participate in dedicated set of objectives needs refinement and there is no established lead
decision-making in a cross responsibility such as a child or youth agency, rather responsibility is allocated
sectorial on the bodies with no specific competence power in terms of children’s rights
national strategy to e.g. State Committee on TV and Radio of Turkmenistan, Ministry of Culture.
implement children’s rights
3 An independent children’s An ombudsperson is established in November 2016 and protected in law with a
rights institution is in place specific mandate to pursue campaigns or address concerns on behalf of
and protected by law children. The ombudsperson is not a stand-alone children’s right institution but
is part of a broader human rights ombudsman office.
167 The suggested elements were adapted from the conceptual framework of the Council of Europe167 for measuring progress in
implementing Article 12 (respect for the views of the child) both as a fundamental right and as a general principle of the UN
Convention on the Rights of the Child (UNCRC) and the NAP priorities in Goal 6 fully correspond to them.
168 Linked with this Goal but also with Goal 1, Objective 1.1.2. Improve and harmonize legislation of Turkmenistan on children
in order to achieve further consistency with the CRC.
54
Evaluation of the National Plan of Action for Realization of Children’s rights in Turkmenistan for 2018-2022 (NAP) and
UNICEF’s contribution to its design, implementation and monitoring
4 Child friendly complaints No complaints or feedback child-friendly169 mechanisms in place in any of the
procedures are in place areas: schools and education settings; care and protection; health; criminal
proceedings; family law proceedings; immigration proceedings. Practice of
filing complaints from children was identified in this evaluation in terms of the
Ombudsman Office. However, the extent to which it is established as a child-
friendly procedure requires additional analyses.
PROMOTING AWARENESS OF THE RIGHT TO PARTICIPATE
5 Children’s right to Competency-based training specifically on children’s right to participation is
participate in decision- not embedded in pre-service training programmes for professionals working
making is embedded in pre- directly with and for children.
service training programmes Juvenile affairs inspectors receive training on children’s rights as part of their
for professionals working academic curriculum, although the effectiveness of their ability to transfer this
with and for children knowledge into practice is yet to be analysed.
There is ongoing preparatory work on development of national guidelines for
increasing children’s access to information.
6 Children are provided with No specific requirements were identified to government departments and those
information about their right delivering key services to children to systematically produce information on
to participate children and young people’s right to participate in decision-making.
Education on children’s rights, including the right to participate, is not a
mandatory component of school curricula.
Ad hoc public education/information initiatives are in place to raise awareness
of children’s right to participate and to association e.g. in 2019, in order to
achieve potential of the Turkmen youth, UN Scientific-Methodical SDG Centre,
Ministry of Finance and Economy of Turkmenistan and Ministry of Foreign
Affairs of Turkmenistan held a competition to present ideas on how they can
promote awareness raising about SDGs on the national level. Young SDG
ambassadors have the right to self-organize, prepare work plans and conduct
awareness raising about the child’s rights. In partnership with the Institute of
State Law and Democracy UNICEF provided technical support for the
development of 5th and 6th National Report to the CRC, which was submitted
by the Government in October 2020. For the first time, views and ideas for the
CRC report were collected from 150 children from all regions of Turkmenistan
online and provided insights on further improvements of child rights protection
and realization in Turkmenistan.
CAPACITY OF CHILDREN TO PARTICIPATE (CREATING SPACES FOR PARTICIPATION170)
7 Children are represented in There are no systematic practices to enable children of all ages and gender to
forums, including through participate in a variety of forums where they can address relevant authorities,
their own organisations, at including government, at school, local, regional and national levelse.g. schools
school, local, regional councils, child/youth councils, children/youth parliaments, children/youth
and national governance forums. As of 2020 there are 8 youth organisations.171 Youth Union of
levels Turkmenistan, with support of UNFPA and Ministry of Education of
Turkmenistan, piloted the Leadership Academy and Innovative Laboratory as a
platform for a broad participation of young people and children in decision-
making process. In partnership with the Institute of State Law and Democracy
UNICEF provided technical support for the development of 5th and 6th
National Report to the CRC, which was submitted by the Government in
October 2020. For the first time, views and ideas for the CRC report were
collected from 150 children from all regions of Turkmenistan online and
provided insights on further improvements of child rights protection and
realization in Turkmenistan.172
8 Child-targeted feedback Children do not have opportunities (e.g. evaluation forms or surveys that are
mechanisms on local services easily accessible to and adapted to children of different ages and backgrounds)
are in place to offer feedback on local public services including education and schools,
169 To be child-friendly, a complaints procedure must include the following elements: It is safe and accessible; Children receive
information and assistance to enable them to lodge and pursue a complaint; Information is made available in age and disability
appropriate formats including leaflets, brochures, posters for schools, and dedicated websites and disseminated
in locations where children are able to find them; Follow up, referral and response mechanisms are well-established and effective
and can demonstrate that changes are implemented in response to legitimate complaints; Feedback to such complaints is
communicated directly to children within a reasonable period in a manner that is adapted to their age and understanding. Source:
Council of Europe (2016), CHILD PARTICIPATION ASSESSMENT TOOL
170 UNICEF (2019) links child participation to a process of power transfer from adults to children, which transforms children
from passive recipients to active, informed agents capable of influencing decisions that affect their lives.
171 COMMITTEE ON THE RIGHTS OF THE CHILD (2020), Consideration of reports submitted by states parties under article
44 of the convention on the rights of the child; The combined fifth and sixth periodic reports of states parties, Annex 2
172 UNICEF Annual report 2020
55
Evaluation of the National Plan of Action for Realization of Children’s rights in Turkmenistan for 2018-2022 (NAP) and
UNICEF’s contribution to its design, implementation and monitoring
alternative care (e.g. children’s homes), child protection services, Family
support and pre-school services. These services are not required to offer such
opportunities.
9 Children are supported to Ideally, children and their representative organisations should be supported with
participate in the monitoring resources to participate in the monitoring of the implementation of children’s
of the UNCRC (including in rights instruments. This should include opportunities for children to participate
CRC shadow reporting) and in shadow-reporting, or to develop their own report. In Turkmenistan no
relevant Council of Europe arrangements are in place to support children’s participation in monitoring the
instruments and conventions implementation of children’s rights instruments
Figure 28 Progress in ensuring child participation To sum up the findings on each of the above aspects of
across child-related sectors child participation below is an overall visualisation of the
extent to which child participation is ensured in policy-
making and policy-implementation as well as how much
child-related systems are ready to ensure child
participation. See Figure 28. It reveals that Turkmenistan
has put most effort towards the legal protection of the
child’s right to participate and least progress is identified
in creating space for actual participation. Any such
progress is not necessarily attributable to the NAP, as
some of the identified practices towards child
participation did not occur as a result or at the time of the
NAP.
Participation cannot be a stand-alone thematic area, it is a
cross-cutting approach to making policies and
delivering services not only to children, but also adults. Participation is a democratic value so child
participation is not possible where the participation of all citizens in general are not sought and
considered at every level of human services provision. Across the other areas of the NAP, the
interventions targeting improvement of service quality did not specify for addressing participation as a
particular aspect of quality.
Media
Media has a role to play in informing children (but also adults i.e. parents and professionals) on why
participation is important and how it is exercised. Although participation is easy to understand at first
glance, its unpacking into practice varies a lot across different cultures, gender, generation gaps, etc. This
is where media can be quite helpful. The NAP under this goal makes arrangements for provision of age-
appropriate information through various media sources. The evaluation did not find extensive reports on
how the forms for participation were messaged to different audiences of children (e.g. age group targeting
or gender targeting). It did find however, that a radio series was developed to explain the main aspects of
CRC in a child-appropriate language. This series in currently undergoing preparation for TV
broadcasting. Until the end of the NAP and in the next planning cycle the potential of technological
devices to promote children’s participation may also be considered. This is especially relevant in the
context of the growing use of internet and internet users. The number of users of Internet mobile and
fixed networks today count more than 2,5 million subscribers. As at June 1, 2020, the number of
subscribers of mobile communication makes more than 5,9 million people with a wide range of access to
3G and 4G networks.173 Recent studies174 find that the digital environment can mobilise different levels
and types of civic participation and e-participation.
In resume, in Turkmenistan the systems oriented to the child are at the stage of laying the foundations of
an understanding of what child participation is. More effort and time is required to operationalise such
understanding into a sustainable model and a policy across all sectors related to children. New ideas such
as this can be widely recognized in follow up policies but when not truly understood they hold potential
173 COMMITTEE ON THE RIGHTS OF THE CHILD (2020), The combined fifth and sixth Periodic Reports of States Parties
174 Hart, 1992; White, 1996; Trilla & Novella, 2001; Tambouris et al., 2007; Guilló & Mancebo-Aracil, 2017; Unesco, 2019
56
Evaluation of the National Plan of Action for Realization of Children’s rights in Turkmenistan for 2018-2022 (NAP) and
UNICEF’s contribution to its design, implementation and monitoring
risks of manipulation and tokenism. Tokenism is defined as an instance in which children are apparently
given a voice, but in fact have little or no choice about the subject or the style of communicating it, and
little or no opportunity to formulate their own opinions.175
In considering further planning of improving opportunities and capacities for participation, it is also
useful to consider child participation in terms of levels of participation.176 (See Annex 11: Levels of
participation)
6.2.2. Overall NAP progress and contribution to SDGs
Figure 29 NAP progress against N of indicators
Overall in effectiveness, the evaluator has reviewed a total of 82
indicators under the priorities within the six goals in the NAP.
See Figure 29.
Within the reviewed period the NAP has already achieved or
overachieved on 17 indicators prior to its ending.
Work is underway on 30 indicators with various extents of
likelihood to be achieved by the end of the NAP.
On 8 of the indicators there is a need of acceleration because
progress is not in place.
On 27 indicators data needs to be further strengthened or
completed in order to indicate progress accurately.
In terms of SDGs it can be concluded that NAP has contributed to most SDGs related to children. Below
is an overview of NAP contribution to child-related SDGs that are:
SDG Contributing NAP goal Contribution of NAP to SDGs
Goal 4:  Proportion of employed population below the international poverty
End poverty in all its forms 4.1. Improved quality of line of US$1.90 (PPP) per day (the working poor) (15+): decrease
everywhere. life from 0.8 (2016) to 0.5 (2021)177
4.2. Social protection  Current introduction of community-based social services in support
of the most vulnerable and building the system capacity and
workforce
End hunger, achieve food Goal 2:  Stunting reduced by 63% i.e. from 19% (2018) to 7% (2020)
security and improved 2.4. Nutrition  Wasting reduced from 4.2 (2016) to 4.1 (2019)
nutrition and promote  Overweight reduced from 5.9 (2016) 3.1 (2019)
sustainable agriculture.
Goal 2:  Decreased under-five mortality by 1.02% (by 2020)
Ensure healthy lives and 2.1. Children’s health  Increased neonatal mortality rate by 0.81% (by 2020)
promote well-being for all at 2.2. Maternal health  Maternal mortality rate reduced from 4.6 (2018) to 2.4 (2020)
all ages. 2.3.HIV/AIDS, and  0 cases of HIV reported
Reproductive health
Ensure inclusive and Goal 3:  in grades 2/3 minimum proficiency is achieved by 71.3% (reading)
equitable quality education 3.1. Education and 53.2% (mathematics)178
and promote lifelong learning 3.2. Development of  Early Childhood Development Index (ECDI) – from 90.5 in 2016
opportunities for all.
young children to 95.3 in 2019
Goal 2:2.5. Water and  100% of schools have access to WASH
sanitation
Goal 5:  There are two providers of services to violence victims. Social
Achieve gender equality and 5.1. Prevention of service for prevention of domestic violence against women piloted
empower all women and girls violence, exploitation within JP (potentially covering children, as domestic violence
and abuse
175 (1992). Children's Participation: From tokenism to citizenship, Innocenti Essay no. 4, Source: https://www.unicef-
irc.org/publications/100-childrens-participation-from-tokenism-to-citizenship.html
176 Hart, Roger. (2008). Stepping back from “The ladder”: Reflections on a model of participatory work with children.
177 ILO
178 In the absence of previous data on this indicator, it is difficult to gauge whether or not there is progress
57
Evaluation of the National Plan of Action for Realization of Children’s rights in Turkmenistan for 2018-2022 (NAP) and
UNICEF’s contribution to its design, implementation and monitoring
response is linked with care for the female victim’s child).
Teachers trained on gender-specific topics
Goal 2:  Progress for the last ten years i.e. from 82% of the population
Ensure availability and 2.5. Water and having access to clean and safe water in 2010 to 95% in 2020.179
sustainable management of sanitation Regional disparities have also been reduced.
water and sanitation for all
Promote sustained, inclusive Goal 5:  Employees are forbidden180 to use child labour in harmful and
and sustainable economic 5.3. Child labour hazardous conditions. Cases of employed children is decreased to
growth, full and productive nullity.
employment and decent work
for all.
Promote peaceful and Goal 5:  Functional assessment of the child protection system. Review on
inclusive societies for 5.1. Prevention of legislative and normative frameworks for children in contact with
sustainable development, violence, exploitation the law undertaken in 2020 by GoT in partnership with UNICEF.
provide access to justice for
and abuse Actionable recommendations available. Regulation on child justice
all and build effective, accountable and
in process of strengthening.181
inclusive institutions at all levels
179 ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK, Key INDICATORS For ASIA AND THE PACIFIC, August 2021, Source:
https://www.adb.org/sites/default/files/publication/720461/ki2021.pdf
180 the Law of Turkmenistan “On guarantees of the right of youth for the right to work”, adopted in 2005
181 Turkmenistan shows commitment to make existing justice system more child-specific e.g. provision of specific rules for
children in conflict with the law, including a distinct chapter on children in the Criminal Code and the Criminal Procedural Code;
separate norms for children in the Criminal Executive Code and the Code of Administrative Offences; and Resolution of the
Plenum of the Supreme Court No. 7 of 2020 entirely devoted to children in conflict with the law. This is complemented by child-
specific orders of further relevant authorities, and most recently by a new law on social services (2021). Source: Child Frontiers,
2021, Review and Analysis of legislative and normative frameworks concerning children in contact with the law
58
Evaluation of the National Plan of Action for Realization of Children’s rights in Turkmenistan for 2018-2022 (NAP) and
UNICEF’s contribution to its design, implementation and monitoring
Box 2: Preliminary conclusions: Effectiveness
• EFFECTIVENESS 1: There has been considerable progress in establishing an enabling environment for
realising children’s rights in Turkmenistan. Turkmenistan has built on previous effort for ensuring an
environment for realization of human rights and child’s rights in the country in the area of human rights
protection, gender equality, protection of women’s, children’s and right of people with disabilities policy,
implementation of international conventions in the area of human rights protection. Establishing permanent
interagency body ensuring that children’s rights are implemented in every sector related to children has not yet
been achieved. Significant progress was made in terms of data collection, yet there are still gaps in terms of
data collection coverage and data accessibility. A significant step in ensuring independent guarding of
children’s rights is the establishment of the Ombudsman currently undergoing GANHRI accreditation.
• EFFECTIVENESS 2: Turkmenistan made some progress in improving children’s health and contributing to
the targets on children’s health. High immunisation rates (achieved with UNICEF support), access to clean
water, reduction of malnutrition – all of this contribute to better chances of life for a children. Regardless of the
achieved progress, more efforts are required to reduce mortality rates, as they remained relatively unchanged
for a number of years now. There is significant progress in reducing stunting, with the target overachieved.
NAP is underachieving on reduction of anaemia prevalence as levels of anaemia among children 6-59 and
women in reproductive age are increasing. Turkmenistan has made good progress in ensuring access to clean
and affordable water across the country and ranks best among neighbouring countries. There are indications
that access to quality healthcare may be limited for some groups of children e.g. children in disabilities and
children in remote places.
• EFFECTIVENESS 3: There is progress towards schooling becoming more child-friendly within the period of
NAP implementation, mostly in the area of early education for children. These efforts have produced a notable
increase of the children covered by pre-school and pre-primary formats but coverage is still insufficient i.e.
14% in 2019. The country has started an irreversible process of demonstrating commitment to making schools
more inclusive. However, there is a conductive environment for increasing placement of children with special
educational needs in boarding schools, which prevents social inclusion being achieved for children with
disabilities. They form the largest share of children placed in institutions and that share is increasing rapidly.
Medical model in planning for the child is still predominant. The learning content in schools in Turkmenistan
are gradually modernizing towards including topics beyond main subjects knowledge but also competences in
the area of health and gender. Turkmenistan has achieved significant progress in staff investment to support
this development.
• EFFECTIVENESS 4: There is no conclusive evidence that NAP interventions have contributed to better
employment rates and living standards of families. For the most vulnerable children and their families support
is still insufficient for all parents, in particular single parents or parents with disabilities. Disability seems to be
a great factor on the family income as well as on the level of social inclusion that can be ensured for the child
(i.e. living with its family and visiting a mainstream school). The most significant change during the NAP
implementation has been the introduction of the modern concept of social services in the community and
introducing the profession of social worker. The coverage of the newly developed and piloted social services is
still low i.e. 0.07% of the children.
• EFFECTIVENESS 5: Turkmenistan has made progress mostly in terms of creating a more enabling
environment for family-support programmes. Only 0.25% of Turkmenistan child population lives in residential
institutions but family separations increase. That means that gaps are wider for those families who face
difficulties in taking good care of their children and there is a risk of children being separated. Main factors are:
Underdeveloped network of family-support services families to address difficult life situations, lack of
reintegration services, and underdeveloped inclusive education combined with the lack of services for disabled
children. The concept of coordination for effective governance of child protection and child justice is present
but requires coordination mechanism for oversight of children’s rights to be operationalised and capacity built.
• EFFECTIVENESS 6: Turkmenistan has put most effort towards the legal protection of the child’s right to
participate and least progress in creating space for actual participation. The systems oriented to the child are at
the stage of developing an understanding of what child participation is. More effort is required to operationalise
such understanding into a sustainable model and a policy across all sectors related to children.
59
Evaluation of the National Plan of Action for Realization of Children’s rights in Turkmenistan for 2018-2022 (NAP) and
UNICEF’s contribution to its design, implementation and monitoring
6.3. Sustainability
This section looks at the extent to which the most significant achievements are likely to sustain after the
current NAP timeframe. The description ends with preliminary conclusions. The section presents an
overview of the general assessment on sustainability in the following areas:
• Sustainability in terms of guarding child’s rights
• Sustainability of child rights monitoring systems
• Universal inclusive services for young children
• Child protection services in the community
In terms of overall sustainability, the evaluator has made the judgments of the main achievements
identified under the Effectiveness section. Cost effectiveness and likelihood of investment of financial
resources is an important part of analysing sustainability. It has to be noted that the ToR asked for
efficiency to be excluded from this evaluation due to unavailability of financial data on government
spending. Therefore, the following analysis on sustainability is limited in terms of judging the likelihood
of the achievements to be sustained in time based on available resources and financial spending plans.
(See Table 13):
Table 4 Assessment of sustainability
Sustainability area Level of Justification
sustainability
Guarding child’s HIGH Human rights legislation has been upgraded. Ombudsman establishment
rights stipulated by law and currently under GANHRI accreditation for
compliance with the Paris principle. To maintain the high potential of
this component and extend the country’s capacity of guarding child’s
rights means that the envisaged coordination mechanism for oversight of
children’s rights be functionally operationalised (either by establishing a
permanent body or reforming existing child protection bodies by
empowering them and increasing their capacity on guarding child’s
rights).
Child rights MODERATE Turkmenistan shows high level of commitment to SDGs in all sectors
monitoring system covered by NAP. UNICEF has contributed significantly through raising
the country’s capacity to collect data on children. The culture to develop
policies and services based on strong detailed specific and measurable
results frameworks according to the principles of strategic planning is
not yet fully in place.
Universal inclusive MODERATE Universal inclusive services for young children are in place but their
services for young scaling up and full coverage depends on much needed human resources
children investment and upgrading the capacity of two key systems: education
and healthcare.
Child protection HIGH Methodological documents package are in place and commitment is high
services in the on part of UNICEF, the GoT and other UN agencies to ensure
community (including conductive legislative environment for wide introduction of modern
child justice) social services in support to children and families in the community,
including child justice. However, scaling up of pilot services in child
protection and access to child justice needs to accelerated in order to
ensure service continuity beyond the JP budget. As of 2022 the state
budget fully funds the first 45 trained social workers. Efforts are put by
all partners to ensure fiscal room for funding social workers covering the
whole country. Out of all 12 specialised community-based services
highest replicability potential exists for the service Personal assistance
for people with disabilities, as it is can be easily replicated by the
territorial social centres and extended to children and families.
60
Evaluation of the National Plan of Action for Realization of Children’s rights in Turkmenistan for 2018-2022 (NAP) and
UNICEF’s contribution to its design, implementation and monitoring
The GoT has shown a commitment to updating its legislative and
regulatory regimes in favour of children’s rights, including in the area of
child protection and child justice. New laws on the treatment of victims
of crime and defining the social work function show important
momentum in this area. To remain on this promising course of action it
requires the conceptualization of a robust child justice system capable of
realizing the full rights for all children who come into contact with the
justice system, whether as victims, witnesses, accused of a crime, or in a
civil or administrative proceeding. To maintain the sustainability
potential of this component, some additional efforts should be put
towards: stronger interagency coordination in the area of child justice,
training and specialisation of system professionals, continuing the work
to introduce social work profession and increasing the number of social
workers, ensuring training and ongoing professional development on
case management protocols, including individual assessment and
planning for every child and family in need of support; introducing
mandatory reporting of suspected child maltreatment and record of
follow up response; continuing the reform in child justice; ensure a
continuum of prevention and response services182
Guarding child’s rights
The establishment of the Ombudsman as an independent guardian of child’s rights, although as part of a
general human rights watch, is a major achievement of Turkmenistan. This achievement is judged as
highly sustainable since its functioning was legally stipulated (Law of Turkmenistan “On the
Ombudsperson”) in 2017. UNICEF contribution to building the capacity of the Ombudsman office in
child’s rights monitoring has been key in this process. Further promotion of child-friendly complaint
mechanisms would further strengthen the position of the Ombudsman as a voice for children’s rights.183
There are indications from the field184 Ombudsman office that resources are sufficiently available for this
establishment to represent the voice of some of the most vulnerable groups of children i.e. the
Ombudsman has performed visits to children’s detention places as well as has acted on complaints of
children with disabilities with relation to their limited access to education. The voice of children would be
stronger in Turkmenistan if a permanent interagency body specifically on children’s rights. This is not
likely to occur within the end of this NAP.
Child rights monitoring system
Policies for children are possible and stronger when there is solid and unbiased data on children. Much
has been achieved by NAP and its partners in terms of ensuring more data availability. UNICEF has
contributed significantly through raising the country’s capacity to collect data on children. Turkmenistan
demonstrates achievements by doing the first ever voluntary national review, and collect data on national
child-related indicators with technical support of UNICEF. These achievements are likely to sustain as the
systems are becoming more aware that policy-making is not possible without solid data indicating the
processes which have to be steered by policy-makers. Turkmenistan shows high level of commitment to
SDGs in all sectors covered by NAP. The sustainability potential of the so far established child’s rights
monitoring components may increase when SDG data reporting coverage becomes even wider (on more
indicators) and the process of digitalizing of national statistical data advances to allow better public
access to information. Most importantly, child’s rights monitoring will be ensured highest level of
sustainability when there is a culture of using data for decision-making by introducing strong monitoring
and evaluation results-frameworks on the level of policy, national strategy, programme and service
182 For detailed guidance towards addressing gaps please refer to the analysis on Availability of child protection interventions
across the three levels of prevention (in the Annex) as well as the specific recommendations in Elayn M. Sammon, Functional
Assessment of the Child Protection System in Turkmenistan, 2021 as well as Child Frontiers, 2021, Review and Analysis of
legislative and normative frameworks concerning children in contact with the law
183 The Annual Work Plan for 2022 signed between the Office of the Ombudsman and UNIVEF in Turkmenistan, an event is
planned on “Technical support for studying the practice of an individual Deputy Ombudsman for Children’s Rights or the
relevant department in foreign countries and promoting the capacity building of the Ombudsman Office in observing the best
interests of the child ". (Source: Office of Ombudsman, Turkmenistan)
184 Interview with Ombudsman Office
61
Evaluation of the National Plan of Action for Realization of Children’s rights in Turkmenistan for 2018-2022 (NAP) and
UNICEF’s contribution to its design, implementation and monitoring
provision to allow for measuring progress for children and their families. Building such management
culture goes beyond the timeframe of the NAP as it requires more efforts and investment in financial and
human resources, and systems’ capacities but it would guarantee that data collection for children in a
scientifically robust manner will be sustained as a valuable practice.
Universal inclusive services for young children
The main achievements of the NAP have been in terms of early child development services. Their
sustainability aspects have been analysed in more details in a separate evaluation report185 . However, for
completeness of this analysis it has to be noted that the likelihood of sustaining ECD interventions
depends on a number of factors. On policy level there is a high level of ownership and commitment. ECD
is one of the key programme priorities in UNICEF Country Programme Document 2021-2025 and this
programme will be implemented in partnership with the Turkmen state. On the other hand, full coverage
and scaling up of ECD services is not realistically expected to happen within the timeframe of this NAP.
Scaling up requires increased investments to go to scale particularly in terms of human resources capacity
development across all sectors, cross-sectoral coordination, data and monitoring systems, and targeted
support to the most vulnerable children, families and communities.186
Partnership is a key enabler: facilitating the mechanisms of delegating services by the state to non-state
providers (e.g. public associations) i.e. social contracting would strongly push the process and ensure
scaling up and sustaining the achievements so far. This requires ensuring effective social contracting
legislation.
Child protection and justice for children
The newly piloted community-based support models within the JP and coordinated by UNICEF
considerably extend the access to services for children and their families as part of a wider population in
need. COVID-19 pandemic restrictions affected the implementation timing of the programme (delay) but
a non-financial extension of the JP in 2022 will enable to complete the programme within the NAP
timeframe. The delay, on the other hand, gave time for the strengthening the advocacy for the programme
and to ensure higher commitment to the JP on part of the government hence higher sustainability
potential.
General community-based support is provided by 45 trained social workers on etrap level in 20 etraps i.e.
little less that 50% of the country covering adults and children. As of beginning of 2022 all 45 social
workers are funded entirely by the state budget, which ensures high level of sustainability of this
component of the JP. UNICEF is committed to advocate for a full scale up in 2023, which is beyond the
timeframe of the current NAP but is very likely to be addressed by the next NAP. This is an important
factor in making etrap social workers the statuary social workers following a case management approach,
thus ensuring that people in need receive proper assessment of their needs and get customised support
based on their needs. The JP is highly committed to support the GoT that by May (when the budgeting for
2023 begins) to create fiscal space for increasing the number of social workers in all etraps i.e. covering
all the country. The JP is highly committed to establishing degree courses in social work in universities as
a way of increasing the workforce. There are indications that this is likely to be completed within the
timeframe of the NAP i.e. curriculum and training syllabus are being developed currently, teachers are
being trained and the first intake in universities is planned to be opened in the spring of 2022 so that first
students can start as early as 2022/2023 academic year. This process is strongly supported by the Ministry
of Education.
The specialised social service models are equipped with a full packages of documents such as guidelines,
procedures, standards, etc. to enable sustaining the service quality over time. UNICEF and together with
the other UN sister agencies put strong effort towards amending the existing Code of Turkmenistan on the
Social Protection of the Population and thus introduce a modern concept of social service and social
worker as a profession, as well as putting together a new Law on Social services. Bylaws are currently
developed and are likely to be in place by the end of the current NAP. Out of all 12 specialised
185 Pluriconsult (2020), Evaluation Of The Government Of Turkmenistan’s Policy On Early Childhood Development (2012-
2019) And UNICEF’s Contribution To Its Design, Implementation And Monitoring
186 UNICEF Turkmenistan Country Programme Document 2020-2025
62
Evaluation of the National Plan of Action for Realization of Children’s rights in Turkmenistan for 2018-2022 (NAP) and
UNICEF’s contribution to its design, implementation and monitoring
community-based services187 highest replicability potential exists for the service Personal assistance for
people with disabilities, as it is can be easily replicated by the territorial social centres and extended to
children and families. There is political will as well as commitment by UN agencies to technically support
the process.
The GoT has shown a commitment to updating its legislative and regulatory regimes in favour of
children’s rights, including in the area of child protection and child justice. New laws on the treatment of
victims of crime and defining the social work function show important momentum in this area. To remain
on this promising course of action it requires the conceptualization of a robust child justice system
capable of realizing the full rights for all children who come into contact with the justice system, whether
as victims, witnesses, accused of a crime, or in a civil or administrative proceeding.
Supporting the GoT towards system level changes in terms of child protection remain high on UNICEF
agenda as the child protection component is introduced in the new Country Programme Document for the
next 5 years. Partnership is a key enabler: facilitating the mechanisms of delegating services by the state
to non-state providers (e.g. public associations) i.e. social contracting would strongly push the process
and ensure scaling up and sustaining the achievements so far. This requires ensuring effective social
contracting legislation.
187 Existing services in the form of social services were regulated only by a separate section of the Code of Turkmenistan on
social protection of the population, and a special Law "On Social Services" was adopted on December 18, 2021.
63
Evaluation of the National Plan of Action for Realization of Children’s rights in Turkmenistan for 2018-2022 (NAP) and
UNICEF’s contribution to its design, implementation and monitoring
Box 3: Preliminary conclusions: Sustainability
• SUSTAINABILITY 1: The NAP ensured high level of sustainability of child’s rights mechanisms
specifically in terms of establishing the Ombudsman’s office. Further promotion of child-friendly complaint
mechanisms would further strengthen the position of the Ombudsman as a voice for children’s rights. To
extend the country’s capacity of guarding child’s rights the envisaged coordination mechanism for oversight
of children’s rights should be operationalised (either by establishing a permanent body or reforming existing
child protection bodies by empowering them and increasing their capacity on guarding child’s rights).
• SUSTAINABILITY 2: Data collection for children is strengthened in a sustainable way with UNICEF and
UN sister agencies. Child’s rights monitoring will be ensured higher level of sustainability when there is a
culture of using data for decision-making by introducing strong monitoring and evaluation results-
frameworks allow for measuring progress for children and their families on the level of policy and in
accordance to the principles of strategic planning.
• SUSTAINABILITY 3: Universal inclusive services for young children are in place but their scaling up and
full coverage depends on much needed human resources investment and upgrading the capacity of two key
systems: education and healthcare.
• SUSTAINABILITY 4: There is a conductive environment for sustaining the achievements in upgrading the
child protection system. General and specialised community-based support have a good replicable potential
and indications are for high level of sustainability. The sustainability potential can be increased by additional
efforts towards: continuing the efforts to introduce social work profession, increasing the number of social
workers, ensuring training and ongoing professional development on case management protocols, including
individual assessment and planning for every child and family in need of support; introducing mandatory
reporting of suspected child maltreatment and record of follow up response; continuing the reform in child
justice; ensure a continuum of prevention and response services.
• SUSTAINABILITY 5: The GoT has shown a commitment to updating its legislative and regulatory regimes
in favour of children’s rights, including child protection and child justice. New laws on the treatment of
victims of crime and defining the social work function show important momentum in this area. To maintain
the sustainability potential it requires some additional efforts should be put towards: stronger interagency
coordination in the area of child justice, training and specialisation of system professionals, continuing the
work to introduce social work profession and increasing the number of social workers, ensuring training and
ongoing professional development on case management protocols (including individual assessment and
planning for every child); introducing mandatory reporting of suspected child maltreatment and record of
follow up response; continuing the reform in child justice; ensure a continuum of prevention and response
services
7. General conclusions and lessons learned
The evaluators have identified the following conclusions per evaluation area, based on the evidence
described in each section on the findings.
Relevance:
In terms of context, the NAP is generally aligned to the strategic priorities of child-rights’ national strategies
as well as strategic priorities identified in UN recommendations. The NAP is the first national policy
document putting together a comprehensive plan towards advancing children’s rights in Turkmenistan. In
terms of relevance of the logical framework, there is moderate alignment between the needs addressed by
the NAP and identified needs. The internal causal links between goals, objectives and interventions are
implicit and the results framework is insufficiently designed to capture outcomes for children. To better
align further efforts with the needs of the children, follow up planning activities may further consider gaps
identified by evidence-based analysis, particularly on vulnerable groups of children e.g. children with
disabilities, children separated from their families, children in rural areas, children victims of violence.
Putting such planning efforts in the mode of detailed and widely consulted theory of change will help next
NAP better gauge the interventions towards specific needs and gaps.
64
Evaluation of the National Plan of Action for Realization of Children’s rights in Turkmenistan for 2018-2022 (NAP) and
UNICEF’s contribution to its design, implementation and monitoring
Effectiveness:
There has been considerable progress in establishing an enabling environment for realising children’s
rights in Turkmenistan as well as independent guarding of children’s rights. However, establishing
permanent interagency body ensuring that children’s rights are implemented in every sector related to
children has not yet been achieved. Significant progress was made in terms of data collection, yet there
are still gaps in terms of data collection coverage and data accessibility. Turkmenistan has made some
progress in improving children’s health and most of the targets on NAP Goal related to Health were
achieved. High immunisation rates, access to clean water, reduction of stunting and wasting indicating on
a well-functioning mechanism for realisation of health related Targets. Regardless of the efforts made,
mortality rates remained at the same lave for some time now and required deeper attention. There are
indications that access to quality healthcare may be limited for some groups of children e.g. children in
disabilities and children in remote places. There is progress towards schooling becoming more child-
friendly, mostly in the area of early education for children. However, there is a conductive environment
for increasing placement of children with special educational needs in boarding schools, which prevents
social inclusion being achieved for children with disabilities. Disability seems to be a great factor on the
family income as well as on the level of social inclusion that can be ensured for the child. A significant
change has been the introduction of the concept of social work and community-based services for families
most in need. Family separations are on the increase and that means that gaps are wider for those families
who face difficulties in taking good care of their children and there is a risk of children being separated.
Main factors are: Underdeveloped network of family-support services families to address difficult life
situations, lack of reintegration services, and underdeveloped inclusive education combined with the lack
of services for disabled children. Turkmenistan has made progress mostly in terms of creating a more
enabling environment for family-support programmes. The capacity of the child protection system and
children’s access to justice could be improved by operationalising the envisaged coordination mechanism
for oversight of children’s rights; scaling up existing pilot community-based support services for children
victims of violence and children in contact with the law, continuing the efforts to introduce social work
profession and increasing the number of social workers, ensuring training and ongoing professional
development on case management protocols, including individual assessment and planning for every
child and family in need of support.
Sustainability
The NAP ensured high level of data collection for children and of child’s rights mechanisms specifically in
terms of establishing the Ombudsman’s office. Further promotion of child-friendly complaint mechanisms
would further strengthen the position of the Ombudsman as a voice for children’s rights. Child’s rights
monitoring can sustain if a culture is further fostered of using data for decision-making by introducing
strong monitoring and evaluation results-frameworks allow for measuring progress for children in
accordance to the principles of strategic planning. There is a conductive environment for sustaining the
achievements in upgrading the child protection system. Universal inclusive services for young children are
in place but their scaling up and full coverage depends on much needed human resources investment and
upgrading the capacity of two key systems: education and healthcare, as well as encouraging social
contracting. To increase the sustainability potential of the progress on children victims of violence and child
justice, efforts need to continue towards: stronger interagency coordination, introduce social work
profession and increasing the number of social workers, ensuring training and ongoing professional
development on case management protocols, including individual assessment and planning for every child
and family in need of support; introducing mandatory reporting of suspected child maltreatment and record
of follow up response; ensure a continuum of prevention and response services.
Lessons learned
It is vital to support child-rights legislation along with developing other enabling factors. Legislation
alone is not a guarantee that these rights will be automatically exercised without also addressing social
norms and professional norms, capacity building of the systems around the child (healthcare, education,
child protection and justice). The GoT and its partners are in good timing to use the momentum and
65
Evaluation of the National Plan of Action for Realization of Children’s rights in Turkmenistan for 2018-2022 (NAP) and
UNICEF’s contribution to its design, implementation and monitoring
accelerate the investment on systems and professional workforce. Looking ahead, further improvement of
legislation needs to be combined with efforts to strengthen the capacity of systems enforcing that
legislation e.g. upgrading management competences, pre-service and in-service training and supervision
of staff as well as continuous monitoring of the results for children and families accordingly.
High quality data is essential for priority setting, monitoring and achieving results. Continuous
monitoring of children’s rights across all areas ensures timely identification and development of
interventions addressing the most urgent bottlenecks. For instance, while child mortality or anaemia
prevalence are decreasing, this is not happening at the speed targeted by the NAP. With little data behind
what the root causes are, next planning efforts would be insufficiently gauged to produce good results for
children.
Children’s needs are complex needs and cannot be addressed by each sector separately or on its own.
As in early child development, where all sectors come together to comprehensively meet the needs of a
child, integrated approach should be fostered when designing new services and, therefore, capacities of all
child-relevant systems need to be addressed simultaneously: education, health, child protection and
justice. For example, improving the access to quality education for children with special needs (which is
the prerogative of the MoE) has to be considered in conjunction with the child’s right to live in its family.
This calls for common planning of responses on behalf of the educational authorities, the authorities
responsible for socially supporting families who place their children in institutions as well as providers of
health and rehabilitation services for children with special needs delivered close in the community of
those children and their families. In designing services for children and their families, integrated nature
should be considered in order to make those services match the complex needs of every child.
Importance of focusing on a limited number of priorities. Achieving strategic and long lasting impact
is challenging if NAP pursues multiple and too broad goals, and is spread too thin. It is possible to
address the bottlenecks systemically and holistically only when a limited number of strategic priority
areas are pursued by NAP and all efforts are focused on them within the limited timeframe of the NAP.
Long-term vision and one strategic goal need to guide and steer a comprehensive strategy such as the
NAP.
Strong partnerships and collaboration are essential to achieving strategic results. In times of
transition, the nature of development challenges faced by Turkmenistan require extensive collaboration
with various partners, collective planning, implementation and monitoring. Such multi-partners
systematic interventions required merging organizational capacity, knowledge and experience. Follow-up
response to the needs of the most vulnerable children and their families need to continue the practice of
cross-agency planning thus ensuring that not one institution is solely responsible for the complex needs of
children and families.
Public associations can be an indispensable partner to the GoT to take over the provision of services to
children and families. This is because they are closer to the communities, can quickly adopt innovate
approaches to serving children and families and are most flexible in terms of organisational capacity as
opposed to government systems and structures. Social contracting legislation may give boost to national-
wide service providers as currently they largely depend on insecure own funding.
Child participation is a clear principle to understand, yet, very difficult to operationalise in the
practice of child-relevant systems. Protecting the right of children to participate through legal
arrangements is not the same as creating space for practical implementation. It is only through systemic
changes promoting child participation and training of professionals that participation can be applied as a
cross-cutting principle of quality care. Further planning may consider integrating the principle of
participation across various levels and areas of service planning. For instance, decision-makers should
particularly operationalise how to ensure participation of children (but also parents, professionals and
other stakeholders) across various child-related areas e.g. when developing community-based social
services, making schools more child-friendly, improving access to specialised healthcare for children with
disabilities, etc.
66
Evaluation of the National Plan of Action for Realization of Children’s rights in Turkmenistan for 2018-2022 (NAP) and
UNICEF’s contribution to its design, implementation and monitoring
8. Recommendations
This section presents a series of recommendations and associated actions drawn from the evaluation
findings and conclusions. The description relates the actions to the findings/preliminary conclusions and
at the same time each one is tagged for in terms of the priority status.188 See Table 14
The evaluator evidenced impressive commitment of both governmental agencies, UNICEF CO staff and
other partners, who showed remarkable dedication in extremely difficult realities of global and national
challenges due to pandemic constraints. The recommendations below were developed in consultations
with UNICEF staff from all sections related to child protection, education, justice for children, child’s
rights monitoring and health and nutrition, as well as government officials in a series of two presentation
events with discussions. Furthermore, the evaluator assisted the process of developing a management
response where recommendations and associated actions were also discussed. In developing the
recommendations, the evaluator reflected the perspective of duty-bearers but it was also aligned with
feedback and recommendations received by children and parents during data collection stage.
The next NAP should leverage the role of the government and partners, and make it more relevant and
effective, thanks to clear priorities setting, a realistic plan, better formulated results and indicators, a close
involvement and participation of multiple partners and national counterparts, a regular monitoring, and
the flexibility to accommodate possible emerging issues. The NAP should reflect a clearer focus and
strategic intent, with a limited number of expected results.
Table 5 Recommendations with priority status
Area of recommendation Priority status
1 Next NAP needs to keep its systemic approach to children’s rights. At the same time, a short-term
vision of change, one overarching strategic goal of the NAP and a detailed Theory of
change should be developed by GoT assisted by UNICEF. It is recommended that the GoT
elaborate a coherent high quality result-framework with SMART objectives. All objectives
need to be specified and formulated with outcomes for children. It is strongly recommended
that the GoT developes measurable and valid indicators on each level of the result-
framework of the next NAP i.e. common strategic aim, goals, objectives, outcomes and
impact for children and families, and not just activities and interventions. The GoT is
advised to invest time and funds into developing baseline data and monitoring it during the
implementation of the NAP. Clear baselines and well-articulated target indicators are
particularly important to help decision makers and government partners to manage the NAP
strategically, knowing where they are, and what objectives they want to reach. ToCs
development should become a truly analytical and participatory exercise engaging multiple
stakeholders.
UNICEF can provide capacity building and technical support to the GoT in elaborating
ToC and defining results framework.
UNICEF core role: Policy dialogue and advice
2 The voice of children would be stronger in Turkmenistan if GoT establishes a permanent Medium-term
interagency body specifically on children’s rights. This could be either established as a
separate body or a specialised structure within existing human rights bodies. This would
require the efforts of GoT and legislative bodies in Turkmenistan i.e. Parliament.
UNICEF is in a position to assist this process by bringing best international practices in
cross-sector coordination mechanisms.
UNICEF core role: Policy dialogue and advice and Horizontal cooperation beyond-borders
3 GoT needs to address healthcare for children in terms of access (for children in remote Medium-term
locations, children with disabilities) and in terms of quality in order to reduce child
mortality and socially significant disease such as caused by anaemia, HIV/AIDS and
malnutrition. Gaps in nutrition require detailed investigation and analysis.
UNICEF is in a position to assist the GoT in research and identifying gaps.
UNICEF core role: Knowledge generation and child’s rights monitoring
188 Priority status: Immediate (1-3 months), Short-to-medium term (3-6 months), Medium to Long term (6-12 months)
67
Evaluation of the National Plan of Action for Realization of Children’s rights in Turkmenistan for 2018-2022 (NAP) and
UNICEF’s contribution to its design, implementation and monitoring
4 Next NAP needs to further address system changes that enable children with disabilities Medium to long-
have better access to specialised healthcare and rehabilitation services close to their term
community. This requires that the GoT designs interventions in a way that meet the needs
of both young children and children at school age. Early childhood development services
need to be further developed and scaled up by the GoT. Rehabilitation services for children
with disabilities at school age, too, need to be designed by MLSPP and MHMI in a way
that meet their educational needs to enable their participation in mainstream school and
prevent their placement in a boarding school away from their families. Any such services
need to be based on the concept of case management, which is currently starting to be
introduced in the country.
UNICEF can raise provide support through modelling and piloting services
UNICEF core role: Modelling and testing innovations
5 In the context of child care reform in Turkmenistan, where most children separated from Short to medium-
their families live in educational institutions, more focus should be placed by the GoT on term
conducting an analysis of the needs of families whose children are placed in boarding
schools. Next NAP should place bigger emphasis on inclusive education for all children i.e.
mainstreaming inclusiveness in the meaning that any mainstream school should be able to
respond to the need of every child, including children with special needs. Social and
professional norms require being addressed through campaigning and promotion of
children’s right to both quality education and remaining in its family. Standards of quality
education need to be elaborated, including mechanisms for participation of children as
quality principle. Data collection for education indicators should be strengthened and
elaborated by the Ministry of Education in a way that covers all aspects of quality
education.
UNICEF should give more voice to the need of the rights of those children and continue its
efforts advocating for inclusive education.
UNICEF core role: Advocacy (the independent voice), Knowledge generation and child
rights monitoring and Capacity development of government and civil society
6 The next NAP needs to extend its emerging good practices in child protection into the next Short-term
period of planning. Building on the models for community-based services for children and
families within JP, in the next NAP the GoT needs to address the need to scale these up and
in a more strategic perspective, expand them along the whole continuum of needs of
children and their families (see Annex 10). The increase of workforce, in number as well as
competence level, needs to remain a priority for the GoT. The efforts of the Parliament
towards ensuring legislative environment for child protection services (including child
justice) need to continue, also in terms of social contracting. Standards of quality need to be
elaborated by the MLSPP, including mechanisms for participation of children as quality
principle. Data collection around child protection indicators should be strengthened.
UNICEF needs to further its efforts to assist the GoT in developing functional regulation
for child protection service system through conceptualising social work and its key
principles i.e. need oriented and quality case management.
UNICEF core role: Policy dialogue and advice, Knowledge generation and child rights
monitoring and Modelling and testing innovations
7 Parliament and the GoT should strengthen the child justice legislative environment in a way Short-term
that ensures that rights of children in contact with the law are protected at all stages. That
includes children in conflict with the law, child victims and witnesses of crime, and
children in civil proceedings. Specifically, bring the legislative and regulatory framework in
line with UNCRC and General Comment 24, and best international practices; shift system
orientation from ‘correction’ to ‘resocialization’ and ensue that interventions are based on
interdisciplinary assessments that respond to the needs of each child, including
psychological and emotional needs. Strengthening interagency coordination in the area of
child justice. Enhancing prevention (comprehensive juvenile delinquency measures based
on assessed risk factors) and response (well-coordinated community-based child support
programmes enhanced with professionally trained workforce and developed on data-based
pillars)
UNICEF is in good position to advise the GoT in conceptualising the possible approaches
to reforming child justice in a way that protects the best interest of the child.
68
Evaluation of the National Plan of Action for Realization of Children’s rights in Turkmenistan for 2018-2022 (NAP) and
UNICEF’s contribution to its design, implementation and monitoring
UNICEF core role: Policy dialogue and advice, Knowledge generation and child rights
monitoring and Modelling and testing innovations
8 Public associations can be an indispensable partner to the GoT to take over the provision of Medium-term
integrated services to children and families to respond to comprehensive needs i.e.
education, social support, health and rehabilitation, justice and general developmental
activities. It is vital that GoT and Parliament address the need to encourage public
associations (including parents groups and grass root organisations) on local level be
involved in provision of services through making legislation more enabling and supporting
them by establishing funding mechanisms.
UNICEF may assist GoT in exploring and sharing best international practices in
community involvement as well as legislative regulations enabling civil organisations get
involved in various activities advancing children’s’ rights in all areas of a child’s living.
UNICEF core role: Convening partnerships and leveraging resources for children and
Horizontal cooperation beyond-borders
69
Evaluation of the National Plan of Action for Realization of Children’s rights in Turkmenistan for 2018-2022 (NAP) and
UNICEF’s contribution to its design, implementation and monitoring
ANNEXES
Annex 1 Evaluation matrix
area Research/evaluation Sub question developed by the Evaluation indicator Source and data collection
questions as per ToR consultant methods
• To what extent is the • Which government’s policies and Number of areas of Desk review of sector documents;
NAP relevant to the partners’ priorities has the NAP NAP fully aligned to national development plans,
governmental policies been aligned to? How? the governmental policies and reports
and priorities and • Which social policy reform child-oriented policies
needs of children in agendas has the NAP been and priorities In-depth interviews with relevant
Turkmenistan, aligned to? How? government ministries/agencies,
particularly of those Parliament and Ombudsman
from vulnerable groups?
In-depth interviews with partners
and donors e.g. UNICEF, UNDP,
NGOs
• Were the needs of • Was there a needs assessment on Needs assessment Desk review of sector documents;
children and young which NAP was based? If yes, done prior to NAP and national development plans,
people and priorities of did it cover all children and did it link to the NAP- policies and reports
NAP identified in take itno account the most yes/no
E developing the vulnerable? In-depth interviews with relevant
C
N intervention • What was the logic of the government ministries/agencies
A (appropriate needs interventions, causal link,
V
E L assessment?) and has assumptions, risk identifications In-depth interviews with partners
E the intervention been and donors e.g. UNICEF, UNDP,
R
properly designed to NGOs
meet the identified
needs and priorities?
Focus group with beneficiaries
• To what extent the NAP • Is there coherence in the Availability of ToC or Desk review of sector documents;
articulated the internal logic of the NAP e.g. programme logic national development plans,
objectives related to are the objectives and outputs description policies and reports
child rights relevant to the needs and the
implementation? strategic aim of the NAP? Do Number of vulnerable In-depth interviews with relevant
the objectives and output groups remaining of government ministries/agencies
sufficiently cover the strategic little or no focus in the
aim? NAP implementation In-depth interviews with partners
• The reconstructed ToC logic and donors e.g. UNICEF, UNDP,
(activities, outputs, outcomes NGOs
and intended impacts) allows
for paying particular attention
to the needs of the most
vulnerable children
• To what extent did • What available data on national SDG indicators for Desk review of sector documents;
S S NAP contribute to the SDG indicators is there to Turkmenistan national development plans,
E
N implementation of indicate possible contribution of policies and reports
E
V SDGs? the NAP to the SDG? Evidence of cross-
I T • To what extent did • What evidence is in place to cutting themes In-depth interviews with relevant
C
E NAP contribute to the support the link between the NAP (gender, children’s government ministries/agencies
F
F implementation of child implementation and possible rights, disability and
E
rights, equity and contribution to the SDGs? accountability) In-depth interviews with partners
gender equality, • Are there groups of children or incorporated in the and donors e.g. UNICEF, UNDP,
aspects? needs that were not identified in project design and NGOs
the NAP? implementation
70
Evaluation of the National Plan of Action for Realization of Children’s rights in Turkmenistan for 2018-2022 (NAP) and
UNICEF’s contribution to its design, implementation and monitoring
• To what extent the NAP • What evidence is there to Evidence of Desk review of sector documents;
goals have been demonstrate progress across achievements against national development plans,
achieved and attained its objectives? proxy indicators along policies and reports
intended results in • How is progress balanced across each goal (due to
general, and by all regions; all groups of children missing targets) In-depth interviews with relevant
intervention component, and families; all children at risk, government ministries/agencies
geographical area, both boys and girls?
category of population • What evidence is there that In-depth interviews with partners
etc.? What were the progress was planned and comes and donors e.g. UNICEF, UNDP,
achievements in terms out of the NAP implementation? NGOs
of improving well-being Were there are other actors
of Turkmenistan aspiring to the same or similar Focus group with beneficiaries
children, both planned objectives?
and unplanned?
• To what extent were the • Are objectives equipped with frequency of Desk review of management
M&E framework and adequate and sufficient output reporting, reports, monitoring database with
processes indicators? development and line agencies/ministries
adequate/credible/reliabl • Is the NAP equipped with output updating of useful
e/accurate to measure and monitoring indicators databases
outputs, outcomes, and separately? In-depth interviews with relevant
progress? Were the • Are there target indicators by Instances where government ministries/agencies
expected results clearly which progress can be measured? monitoring
stated and measurable • How was data collected and by reports/databases for In-depth interviews with relevant
through identifiable whom? management decision professionals
indicators? • How was the data collection used making
to fine-tune implementation in its
disaggregated
course?
beneficiary data has
been collected and
used in decision
making in the
programme- yes/no
• What were the causal • Where there are evidence of Changes in the Desk review of sector documents;
links, progress/lack of progress, what operational context national development plans,
enabling/success were the reasons behind in terms that policies and reports
factors and of different levels: facilitated/hindered
constraints/bottleneck - system capacity – resources, achieving/contribution In-depth interviews with relevant
s related to the management, etc. to project outcomes government ministries/agencies
achievement of - professional capacity – design and goals
results? of services and interventions In-depth interviews with partners
• To what extent have - individuals (professionals but and donors e.g. UNICEF, UNDP,
the relevant systems also beneficiaries) - NGOs
been strengthened? knowledge, skills, social and
professional norms In-depth interviews with relevant
professionals
Focus group with beneficiaries
71
Evaluation of the National Plan of Action for Realization of Children’s rights in Turkmenistan for 2018-2022 (NAP) and
UNICEF’s contribution to its design, implementation and monitoring
• How extensive, • What child-related interventions Involvement of NGOs In-depth interviews with relevant
effective, and efficient is were modelled/piloted? By in NAP planning and government ministries/agencies
the transfer of whom? For which groups of implementation –
intervention approaches children and families? yes/no In-depth interviews with partners
to NGOs and • What evidence is there of their and donors e.g. UNICEF, UNDP,
government actors? effectiveness, efficiency, impact NGOs
What were the and replicability?
coordination
mechanisms, and did
they help? Have IPs
effectively and jointly
identified and addressed
gaps in geographic or
vulnerable/at risk group
coverage?
• To what extent has the • Are there any partnerships Partnership In-depth interviews with relevant
NGO collaboration between NGOs and agreements between government ministries/agencies
promoted good working government/local administration? government and
relationships with the In what areas? NGOs relevant to In-depth interviews with partners
government/ local • Is there any evidence of how NAP goal areas – and donors e.g. UNICEF, UNDP,
administration to these partnerships impact the yes/no NGOs
collaborate on systems’ capacity?
community resilience • What partnerships are likely to Stakeholders consider
issues? continue and why? engagement was
effective yes/no
• What are the barriers to • What is UNICEF approach to Changes in the In-depth interviews with partners
the approach adopted by delivering interventions? In what operational context and donors e.g. UNICEF, UNDP,
UNICEF and its areas? that NGOs
partners in delivering • What difficulties were faced at facilitated/hindered
interventions, and how implementation? achieving/contribution In-depth interviews with local
has UNICEF and to project outcomes administration
partners worked to and goals
identify and address In-depth interviews with relevant
these barriers? Evidence that these government ministries/agencies
changes were analysed
and responded to –
management
responses, planning
documents, new ToCs
– available/not
available
• To what extent are the • What external support is there in In-depth interviews with relevant
NAP achievements place that is likely to phase out or Strategies, actions and government ministries/agencies
sustained after the remain? results of
withdrawal of external • Which achievements of NAP sustainability – In-depth interviews with local
support? represent one-off investment vs. available/not available administration
• To what extent have the continuous investment (financial,
decision-making bodies know-how, technical assistance, Implementing partners In-depth interviews with partners
(government, civil etc.)? state continued and donors e.g. UNICEF, UNDP,
society, development support – yes/no NGOs
Y agencies) and
T
I implementing partners
L
I B undertaken the
A
N necessary decisions and
I
A course of actions to
T
S ensure the sustainability
U
S of the NAP?
72
Evaluation of the National Plan of Action for Realization of Children’s rights in Turkmenistan for 2018-2022 (NAP) and
UNICEF’s contribution to its design, implementation and monitoring
• To what extent did the • What capacity was there in place Partnership agreements with
NAP identify and build across child-related systems to Number of system NGOs
on existing national, improve child welfare? How did components improved
velayat, local capacities? NAP specifically contribute to by NAP In-depth interviews with relevant
To what extent do the improving those capacities? government ministries/agencies
partners have sufficient • How sustainable is that
resources to keep up the improvement? How replicable is Focus group with beneficiaries
benefits produced by the that improvement across the
programme? remaining systems? In-depth interviews with local
administration
In-depth interviews with partners
and donors e.g. UNICEF, UNDP,
NGOs
• For the NAP • Which interventions are still on- Number of In-depth interviews with relevant
interventions that are going or just completed? How interventions/achieve government ministries/agencies
still on-going or just significant to the system are they? ments likely to
completed, did they Of them which are entirely or continue after NAP In-depth interviews with local
include appropriate substantially dependent on expiration (e.g. administration
measures to ensure external support? services established)
sustainability of the In-depth interviews with partners
processes, activities, and donors e.g. UNICEF, UNDP,
stakeholders, outputs, NGOs
outcomes and results
after the withdrawal of
all forms of support
from the external
development agency?
• Are the interventions • Which interventions were Number of Desk review of UNICEF CP
supported by UNICEF supported by UNICEF? interventions
sustainable and • What is the significance of that supported by UNICEF In-depth interviews with relevant
scalable? contribution? (services or government ministries/agencies
• Which core roles of UNICEF programmes) to which
were applied? there is government’s In-depth interviews with local
• What is the capacity of commitment to sustain administration
government and local and scale up
administration for sustaining and In-depth interviews with partners
scaling up? Number of SDG and donors e.g. UNICEF, UNDP,
covered by NAP, NGOs
which UNICEF has
contribution to
73
Evaluation of the National Plan of Action for Realization of Children’s rights in Turkmenistan for 2018-2022 (NAP) and
UNICEF’s contribution to its design, implementation and monitoring
• What were/are and will • How are external factors (e.g. Adopted legislation In-depth interviews with relevant
be the enabling factors global Covid pandemic, political and/or availability of government ministries/agencies
contributing to environment or other realities) regulation contributing
sustainability? likely to affect the to sustainability and In-depth interviews with local
implementation or readjusting of follow up administration
the NAP?
International In-depth interviews with partners
organisations’ and donors e.g. UNICEF, UNDP,
commitment to NGOs
support follow-up
developments – yes/no
Number of
interventions
international
organisations (e.g. UN
agencies) are
committed to sustain
• Are inequities between • What evidence of inequities is Number of most Desk review
best-off and most there? Which groups of children vulnerable groups
marginalized groups and families are most affected? included in Focus group with beneficiaries
likely to increase, • Are such inequities impacted by disaggregated
remain stable, or future NAP interventions quantitative data In-depth interviews with relevant
decrease when support dependent on external support? government ministries/agencies
is withdrawn? Follow-up policies are
oriented to most In-depth interviews with local
vulnerable groups – administration
yes/no
Number of relevant In-depth interviews with partners
policies oriented to and donors e.g. UNICEF, UNDP,
vulnerable groups NGOs
specifically
• Will new NAP be more • How are external factors (e.g. Availability of Desk review
widely replicated or global Covid pandemic, political government policy
adapted? Are [NAP environment or other realities) analysis – yes/no In-depth interviews with relevant
activities] likely to be likely to affect the government ministries/agencies
scaled up? implementation or readjusting of Government views on
the NAP? child-related priorities In-depth interviews with local
• What is the capacity of take into account administration
government and local external factors –
administration for sustaining and yes/no
scaling up?
• Has UNICEF support • What systemic changes can be Government claims In-depth interviews with relevant
enabled systemic level observed that could not have that significant government ministries/agencies
changes ensuring happened without UNICEF? How changes could not
longer-term likely is it that these changes have happened In-depth interviews with partners
sustainability of new endure? without UNICEF and donors e.g. UNICEF, UNDP,
services and NGOs
approaches?
74
Evaluation of the National Plan of Action for Realization of Children’s rights in Turkmenistan for 2018-2022 (NAP) and
UNICEF’s contribution to its design, implementation and monitoring
Annex 2. List of Key informants
KEY INFORMANTS INTERVIEWS
№ Institution/Organisation Position № of Date/time189
participants
CP Specialist and Officer, Social Group 14.10.2021/11 am
protection Specialist, Child Rights interview
1 UNICEF Specialist, Education Specialist, with 13
Health Specialist, ECD Specialist, UNICEF
M&E officer staff
Institute of State, Law and 15.10.2021/ 11 am
2 Programme manager 1
Democracy
Ministry of Labour and Social Manager responsible for the 15.10.2021/ 14 am
3 1
Protection of the Population respective components on NAP
Manager responsible for the 18.10.2021/ 11 am
4 Ministry of Education 1
respective components on NAP
5 Ministry of Health and Medical Chief paediatrician 18.10.2021/ 14 am
1
Industry
6 Manager responsible for the 19.10.2021/ 11 am
Ministry of Internal Affairs components on NAP on juvenile 2
institutions
7 Parliament (Mejlis of Representative involved in child- 19.10.2021/ 14 pm
2
Turkmenistan) related legislative initiatives
8 Manager of the Joint Programme and 15.10.2021/ 10-12
UN Joint Programme 6
JP team (Ashgabag time)
9 National Red Crescent Society of Programme manager 20.10.2021/ 11 am
2
Turkmenistan (NRCST)
10 NGOs Yenme Programme manager 1 20.10.2021/ 14 am
Programme manager on Youth 20.10.2021/ 16 am
11 Y-PEER 1
activities
12 Infant home manager in Ashgabat 2 21.10.2021/ 11 am
Residential institution for children
13 Infant home manager in Mary 1
Balkanabat Children’s home - 21.10.2021/ 14 am
14 Residential institution for children 1
Балканабата
15 Residential institution for children boarding school No 3manager, Lebap 1 21.10.2021/16 am
Teachers of primary and secondary Group 22.10.2021/14 am
level, mixed interview
16 Teachers
with 10-12
teachers
Managers, social workers in big cities Group 22.10.2021/17 am
Local Centres for Social
At least 50% involvement in direct interview
17 Protection and etrap social
service provision, 50% managers, with 10-15
workers
randomly selected persons
Representative who is familiar with 25.10.2021/11 am
the work of UNICEF and has been
18 General Prosecutor’s office 1
involved in either planning or
implementation of the NAP
19 Ombudsman office 1 25.10.2021/14 am
189 Ashgabat time
75
Evaluation of the National Plan of Action for Realization of Children’s rights in Turkmenistan for 2018-2022 (NAP) and UNICEF’s contribution to its design, implementation and monitoring
Annex 3. NAP framework of goals and objective
Goal 1: Ensure the implementation of the CRC and its optional protocols in Turkmenistan with the maximum use of available resources and within the framework of international cooperation
1.1. Harmonization of legislation with key international agreements and conventions related to promotion and protection of children’s rights
1.2.1.Accession to key international • Optional protocol approved
agreements and conventions related to promotion and protection of children’s
rights
1.2.2.Improve and harmonize legislation of • Identify and harmonize with the CRC the legislative acts related to realization and protection of the rights of the children.
Turkmenistan on children in order to achieve further consistency with the CRC. • Number of adopted legislative acts related to children, harmonized with the CRC as compared to the total number subject to harmonization.
Procedures and criteria developed.
1.3. Coordination
1.2.1. Strengthen coordination between various agencies and stakeholders • Effective coordination mechanism for monitoring of observation of children’s rights established
responsible for providing rights and services to children by the end of the • Coordination mechanism provided with adequate resources for its efficient performance
implementation period of the NPAC
1.3. Data collection and resources for children
1.3.1. Increase the availability and access to data on realization of the rights of • Comparative disaggregated data available
the child, especially those related to SDGs, disaggregated by gender, age,
disability, ethnicity, geographical location in accordance with the Concluding • Statistical compendium available
Observations of the CRC
1.4. Training on and dissemination of the Convention on the Rights of the Child
1.4.1. Raise awareness on the Convention on the Rights of the Child and • Ratio of implemented activities to planned activities.
Concluding Observations • No of officials and professionals trained on realization of the rights of the child.
Level of knowledge among trained officials and professionals about the CRC increased.
1.5. Cooperation
1.5.1. Ensure the involvement of public associations in promoting and • List of actions with designated role of public associations available
realizing the rights enshrined in the CRC and the NPAC, both in their % increase of public associations involved in the monitoring of children’s rights and NPAC implementation as compared to the year 2015
independent activities and in cooperation with state bodies.
1.6. Independent monitoring
1.6.1. Development and implementation of a mechanism for independent Operational mechanism for independent monitoring of children’s rights available
monitoring of observance of children's rights, enabling to receive, investigate
and handle complaints from children, taking into account children's specifics
1.7. Intersectoral coordination
1.7.1. Ensure intersectoral coordination in the field of early childhood policy National ECD strategy for 2019-2024 adopted
Goal 2: Children in Turkmenistan should have all conditions for physical, mental and social well-being, including medical aid, protection and improvement of their health, disease prevention, high level of nutrition,
access to safe drinking water and high level of sanitation
76
Evaluation of the National Plan of Action for Realization of Children’s rights in Turkmenistan for 2018-2022 (NAP) and UNICEF’s contribution to its design, implementation and monitoring
2.1. Children’s health
2.1.1 Reduce the infant mortality rate (children under 1 year of age) and the • Decrease of neonatal mortality rate by 15% by 2022 as compared to 2015
mortality rate of children under 5 years of age • Decrease of infant mortality rate by 20% by 2022 as compared to 2015
• Decrease of mortality rate of children under 5 by 20% by 2022 as compared to 2015
• Exclusive/% breastfeeding of children under 6 months should be not less than 60%
• Indicators from the Mother and Children Health Programme
2.1.2 Ensure that all children have access to free and high-quality healthcare, • Immunization coverage of children > 95%, according to National calendar of preventive vaccination
regardless of their place of residence, social status, disability status or income No of approved Orders and protocols on early intervention services and for the prevention and treatment of the most common diseases among
of their families children and adolescents
2.2. Maternal health
2.2.1. Strengthen the reproductive, physical and mental health of women and • Decrease of maternal mortality rate to 3,0 per 100 000 live births by 2022.
reduce maternal mortality • No of national protocols, clinic manuals on emergency obstetric care.
% /Indicator of duration of breastfeeding up to 2 years.
2.2.2. Ensure universal access to quality maternal health services, regardless of • % of mothers who received at least 4 antenatal care visits, based on effective technologies.
place of residence, social status and family income • Ratio/% of obstetric facilities providing comprehensive emergency obstetric and neonatal care in accordance with adopted national protocols.
2.3. HIV and AIDS and Reproductive health
2.3.1.Develop a regulatory framework and increase the capacity of the health • No of cases of HIV-related diseases, including mother-to-child transmission of HIV.
system to combat HIV infection • Ratio of health facilities carrying out infection control and risk assessment according to international standards.
• National legislation aligned with international standards.
• New HIV prevention Programme approved by the end 2018
2.4. Nutrition
2.4.1. Reduce the level of anemia among children, pregnant and non-pregnant • To reduce Prevalence of anemia for 20% among children of 6-9 months of age, women of reproductive age, including pregnant women, by 2022 as
women of reproductive age and vitamin A deficiency among children under 5 compared to 2012.
years of age. • To reduce for 20% Ratio of children with vitamin A deficiency among children of 6-9 months of age by 2022 as compared to 2012.
2.4.2. Reduce the rate of malnutrition and slow growth in children under 5 • Indicator of exclusive breastfeeding up to 6 months should not be less than 60%.
• Reduce the prevalence of stunting in children under 5 years of age by 15% by 2022 compared with 2012
2.6. Water and sanitation
2.5.1. Reduce the diseases caused by poor quality drinking water and non- • Ratio of population using organized water supply services with safety requirements.
o bservance of sanitary and hygienic norms and rules • Ratio of population using organized sanitary services, including tools for washing hands with soap and water, in accordance with safety
requirements.
• No of outreach activities for target groups.
Goal 3: All children without exception have a right to education and comprehensive and full development of their abilities
3.1. Education
3.1.1.Ensure the quality of secondary education by introducing international • % of certified schools by 2022 (78 schools)
standards and best practices • % of pedagogical personnel trained on implementation of standards for a quality education environment in pedagogic colleges, universities and
refresher courses.
• Available reports on school certification and plans for introduction of regulations/normative documents for quality improvement of education
environment
• Document national concept of inclusive education adopted
• % of schools meeting safety standards
Pilot system of data collection and analysis developed and tested in a pilot velayat
77
Evaluation of the National Plan of Action for Realization of Children’s rights in Turkmenistan for 2018-2022 (NAP) and UNICEF’s contribution to its design, implementation and monitoring
3.5. Development of young children
3.2.1.Ensure the quality of secondary education by introducing international • State standards introduced in the system of preschool education.
standards and best practices • Preschool education curricula and programmes for professional training and re-training updated in accordance with state standards
• % of preschool and primary school teachers trained/re-trained on updated programmes
• % of children covered by compulsory programme of preschool education
• System of assessment of child’s readiness for school implemented
• % of preschools providing broad variety of developmental and educational services
% of children of 5-6 years of age covered by preschool education and preschool preparation who demonstrate the competence of readiness for school
3.6. Recreation and cultural life
To expand opportunities for all children to participate in inclusive recreation, • No of registered children and youth clubs, groups, organizations and out-of-school institutions at the place of residence engaged in recreational
leisure, art, creativity and in information-educational and sports activities that activities, entertainment, information, sports areas and promotion of a healthy lifestyle, receive state funding and provide accessible and free
promote the development of a healthy lifestyle services for all children, including children with disabilities and children from socially disadvantaged families from 2018 to 2022.
% of children members of children/youth clubs/groups, organizations and who participate in cultural and sports events, disaggregated by disability
and geographic location.
3.3.2. Provide wide access to active entertaining, creative and information- Formation of a state order and approval of the state plan for production of annual entertainment, creative and information-educational programmes
educational programmes for all groups of children, regardless of their social based on needs of all children.
origin or place of residence.
3.7. Children with Disabilities
3.7.1.Ensure enabling • No of reviewed legislation in accordance with the CRC
conditions for social integration and realization of the rights of children with • Update of legal framework on social services
disabilities, including legislative measures, data on children with disabilities, • Drafting and adoption of a law on state order for social services
access to inclusive social services and support services, and encouraging the • Disaggregated data on children with disabilities presented in annual reports on children.
participation of children with disabilities in public life. • No and % of families with children with disabilities, receiving benefits for disability, children benefits and social support services by 2022 as
compared to 2018 (benefits) and 2019 (support services).
• No and % of children examined for early detection by 2020.
• Strategy tested in a pilot region and assessed for scaling up in the country.
• No and % of children with disabilities studying in secondary schools and preschools by 2022.
• No and % of pedagogical personnel/teachers trained on inclusive education by 2022.
• No and % of schools and preschools equipped by supporting devises for access of children with disabilities by 2022.
• No and % of children with disabilities involved in children events, school committees, children organizations, study groups and clubs by 2022 as
compared to 2019.
• No and % of state facilities and services accessible and safe for children with disabilities by 2020.
• Number of parental community councils or other forms of parent community organizations.
• No of trained professionals providing consultancy services for parents/guardians of children with disabilities
• No of research ECD centres with barrier-free space for children with disabilities by 2022 as compared to 2016.
Goal 4: All children have a right to decent material living standards and safe environment required for comprehensive physical, mental, spiritual, moral and social development
4.1. Improved quality of life
4.1. Raise livelihoods for parents and legal guardians, especially for women of • % of real income growth in families with children on an annual basis
children with disabilities • Level of income in families with children
• No/% of children with disabilities living in families where there are no working adults in 2022 as compared to 2018.
• No of preschool groups (extended care)
78
Evaluation of the National Plan of Action for Realization of Children’s rights in Turkmenistan for 2018-2022 (NAP) and UNICEF’s contribution to its design, implementation and monitoring
4.2. Social protection
4.2.1.Expand existing information and data Assessment made, assessment results are used for efficient planning and budgeting.
on national standards of living standards
4.2.2.Provide the necessary level of • Mid-term budget for 2020-2022 includes allocations sufficient for social care and support for families with children, especially for families and
budgetary allocations for universal and targeted social protection programmes children from vulnerable families.
to maintain the living standards of families with children, especially vulnerable • Level of purchasing power.
families with children
4.2.3.Ensure the necessary volume and • Mechanisms of protection of the child’s rights and support are adopted and operating.
level of social services to protect and support a disadvantaged child • No of children from single-parent or divorced families, receiving benefits and alimonies.
No of children placed in residential care due to material reasons (Infant’s and children’s homes) in 2022 as compared to 2018.
Goal 5: All children without exception have a right to be free from violence, exploitation, ill-treatment in the family and society and cannot be abandoned without care and guardianship
5.1. Prevention of violence, exploitation and abuse
5.1.4 Ensure the harmonization of No of amended and adopted legislation harmonized with international standards in the area of prevention and combating child abuse as compared to the
national legislation with international standards in the field of human rights and total No of legislation to be amended
the protection of children from all forms of violence and ill-treatment
5.1.5 Develop evidence base for Data collection and reports writing
domestic violence and child abuse
5.1.6 Increase the effectiveness of • No and % of government officials, law enforcement officers, local self-government officials with raised awareness on violation and abuse of
national measures to prevent violence and child abuse children
• Ratio of held activities to planned activities.
• % of schoolchildren of 10-15 years of age who received information on abuse prevention
5.6. Children in conflict with the law
5.6.1.Ensure compliance with the • Measures for prevention of juvenile delinquency and their re-integration tested in a pilot region, their effectiveness assessed and recommended for
key international principles of juvenile justice: the rights of the child, the best dissemination throughout the country.
interests, the right to freely express their views and be heard, non-discrimination % of children, risk groups covered by measures for prevention of juvenile delinquency and their re-integration into society.
and the priority of preventing the child from entering the justice system and re-
integration
5.7. Child labour
5.3.1.Improve the provision of information to the population, aimed at issues Compendium published
of protection of the rights of children, including prohibiting the use of the
worst forms of child labour
5.3.2. Ensuring enabling conditions for labour for persons under 18, in No of enterprises, organizations and institutions using the labour of persons under 18 in harmful and dangerous (especially harmful and especially
accordance with the legislation effective in Turkmenistan dangerous) labour conditions
5.8. Refugees, migrants and displaced children
5.8.1.Promote social and • No and % of children from refugee families, displaced persons and forced migrants who receive access to services by 2022
psychological rehabilitation and integration of children from families of No and % of non-registered children from displaced families, refugees and forced migrants in 2021 as compared to 2015.
displaced persons, refugees and forced migrants.
79
Evaluation of the National Plan of Action for Realization of Children’s rights in Turkmenistan for 2018-2022 (NAP) and UNICEF’s contribution to its design, implementation and monitoring
5.9. Alternative care and adoption
5.9.1.Increase the effectiveness of • Review of laws and regulations and practices to prevent child abandonment and their placement under the state custody carried out in 2018.
measures to prevent child abandonment and their placement under the state • Actions developed and introduced.
custody (Infant homes, orphanages and residential institutions) • No and % of children under state care disaggregated by gender, age, disability and location of institution.
• Reports on the situation with children include disaggregated (by gender, age and disability) data about children deprived of parental care and placed
in the family and institutional form of arrangement.
Goal 6: All children have a right to participate in the decision-making affecting their life, well-being and development and express their opinion, which is to be taken into account
6.1. Capacity building for promotion of participatory approach
6.1.1.Build the capacity of children to participate effectively in decision- No of established organizations, committees, councils led by children and young people by 2022 as compared to 2018
making that affects their well-being and development
6.1.2. Build the capacity of government officials and professionals working • National guidelines ready by 2021.
with children to make decisions in the best interests of children • No of government officials and professionals prepared for participation of children by 2021.
6.2. Media
6.2.1.Provide age-appropriate information through various media sources No and quality of children and youth media by 2022
available to children and young people.
80
Evaluation of the National Plan of Action for Realization of Children’s rights in Turkmenistan for 2018-2022 (NAP) and
UNICEF’s contribution to its design, implementation and monitoring
Annex 4. Compliance to UNICEF Ethical Standards Research, Evaluation
Ethical Considerations Description Compliance Measures
Avoidance of Harm Avoiding harm or injury to • The Evaluator took pre-emptive measures for any
participants, both through acts of unforeseen event in the field and respond accordingly to
commission or omission; ensure no any security threats. This applies to respondents as well
harm comes to participants by as data collection team.
virtue of inappropriate, unskilled • The data collection team was briefed on the security
researchers or enumerators. protocols
Informed Consent The voluntary agreement of an • The purpose and scope of the evaluation was duly
individual to participate in an informed to participants.
evidence generating activity based • Verbal informed consent was requested from the
on sufficient knowledge and participants, and they were able to withdraw at any time
understanding regarding it. of the process and consent was taken from participant if
personal information was to be used the participants
were informed of the voluntary nature of their
participation.
Privacy of Participants It refers to the rights of the • The privacy and confidentiality of the participants was
individuals to limit access of others maintained at all time, and findings were summarised to
to aspects of their person that can an appropriate level of aggregation in such evaluation
include their thoughts and reports individual level analysis was not done and
identifying information. Measures participants were also given a clear indication of who
must be taken to ensure would have access to their private data and for what
participants’ privacy during and purpose.
after the data collection process.
Storage of Data Confidential participant • The information and collected data was encrypted or
information or data that is collected password protected, and only authorised person had
must be securely stored, protected, access to the data. The data was only disclosed
and disposed of. according to consent of the participants.
• Furthermore, hard copies such as interview notes, prints
of photographs, or video or audio tapes were to be kept
securely locked away.
• After decided terms and conditions data will be deleted
and destroyed
81
Evaluation of the National Plan of Action for Realization of Children’s rights in Turkmenistan for 2018-2022 (NAP) and
UNICEF’s contribution to its design, implementation and monitoring
Annex 5. Research Ethics Approval
82
Evaluation of the National Plan of Action for Realization of Children’s rights in Turkmenistan for 2018-2022 (NAP) and
UNICEF’s contribution to its design, implementation and monitoring
Annex 6 Data collection tools
In-depth interview guidelines
Key Informant Interview Protocol 1: UN agencies
1. Introduction and warm-up (5 min)
• Greetings and introduction of the moderator
• Explanation about the project and method of work
• Explaining about confidentiality approach and information on audio recording
• Participant introduction
2. Relevance (15-20 min.)
• What is your involvement in the development and implementation of the NAP 2018-2022? Technical
knowledge-wise? Budget-wise?
• Was your organisation involved in NAP planning response for this region?
• How were needs of children and their families assessed in this process? Which needs were most pressing?
What evidence was there for that?
• How is the NAP aligned with your agency’s country programme? Regarding which components and which
groups of beneficiaries?
• Which major child protection risks were you targeting? Which target groups were you targeting? Why?
What analyses were these decisions based on?
• Were there any particular grave violations and other serious protection concerns for children and women that
your planned interventions had to address?
• Did you target any specific most vulnerable groups of children? Which ones? Why?
• How is data collected to monitor children’s rights in the country? Who is responsible?
3. Effectiveness (30-40 min.)
• What legislation and regulation was adopted in the country to safeguard for children’s’ rights? What other
legislation and regulation needs to be in place to ensure safeguarding of children’s rights in this country?
• Was your agency involved in the implementation of the NAP? In which components?
• Were you involved in monitoring the progress of the NAP and specifically in the components where your
agency was involved? How?
• Was your agency’s involvement in NAP affected by Covid situation in any way?
• How did your agency ensure cooperation with the government and other stakeholders?
• What evidence of progress/lack of progress of the child protection system of the country do you see in terms
of different levels:
• system capacity – resources, management, etc.
• professional capacity – design of services and interventions
• individuals (professionals but also beneficiaries) - knowledge, skills, social and professional norms
• Did the Covid situation have any influence on this progress/lack of progress?
83
Evaluation of the National Plan of Action for Realization of Children’s rights in Turkmenistan for 2018-2022 (NAP) and
UNICEF’s contribution to its design, implementation and monitoring
• What do you consider the country’s most significant change in terms of realizing children’s rights in the last
years since 2018 generally for all children? For the most disadvantaged children (probe for specific groups
e.g. children with disabilities, children deprived of parental care, children survivors of violence, children in
contact with the law, migrant children)?
• Are there any groups of children left behind?
• How is child participation approached in the country? Was there any significant progress in encouraging
children to participate in developing child-related policies? What evidence is there for that?
• Did anything change in the existing child protection system here because of UNICEF? (probe for any system
changes in service delivery e.g. new services, improved services, better knowledge of professionals, etc.)
4. Sustainability (10-15 min.)
• Which of the changes we discussed do you think will continue to exist? What capacities should be in place
to sustain those changes?
• Which components of the child protection system have been strengthened? Which components of the system
need capacity building?
• Does your agency plan to continue to invest in supporting the country towards realization of children’s
rights? If yes, how?
• What partnerships are in place that will sustain and continue to support the reforms in the child protection
system?
5. Wrap up (10 min)
• What are the main problems, obstacles?
• Any solutions/recommendations for the follow-up to the NAP for the next planning period?
84
Evaluation of the National Plan of Action for Realization of Children’s rights in Turkmenistan for 2018-2022 (NAP) and
UNICEF’s contribution to its design, implementation and monitoring
Key Informant Interview Protocol 2: national and local authorities
1. Introduction and warm-up (5 min)
• Greetings and introduction of the moderator
• Explanation about the project and method of work
• Explaining about confidentiality approach and information on audio recording
• Participant introduction
2. Relevance (15-20 min.)
• What is your involvement in the development and implementation of the NAP 2018-2022? Technical
knowledge-wise? Budget-wise?
• Was your organisation involved in NAP planning response for this region?
• How were needs of children and their families assessed in this process? Which needs were most pressing?
What evidence was there for that?
• Which major child protection risks were you targeting? Which target groups were you targeting? Why?
What analyses were these decisions based on?
• Were there any particular grave violations and other serious protection concerns for children and women that
your planned interventions had to address?
• Did you target any specific most vulnerable groups of children? Which ones? Why?
• How is data collected to monitor children’s rights in the country? Who is responsible?
3. Effectiveness (40-50 min.)
• What legislation and regulation was adopted in the country to safeguard for children’s’ rights? What other
legislation and regulation needs to be in place to ensure safeguarding of children’s rights in this country?
• Was your agency involved in the implementation of the NAP? In which components?
• Were you involved in monitoring the progress of the NAP and specifically in the components where your
agency was involved? How?
• What evidence of progress/lack of progress of the child protection system of the country do you see in terms
of different levels:
- system capacity – resources, management, etc.
- professional capacity – design of services and interventions
- individuals (professionals but also beneficiaries) - knowledge, skills, social and professional norms
• Did the Covid situation have any influence on this progress/lack of progress?
• What do you consider the country’s most significant change in terms of realizing children’s rights in the last
years since 2018 generally for all children? For the most disadvantaged children (probe for specific groups
e.g. children with disabilities, children deprived of parental care, children survivors of violence, children in
contact with the law, migrant/stateless children)?
• Are there any groups of children left behind?
• How is child participation approached in the country? Was there any significant progress in encouraging
children to participate in developing child-related policies? What evidence is there for that?
• Did anything change in the existing child protection system here because of UNICEF? (probe for any system
changes in service delivery e.g. new services, improved services, better knowledge of professionals, etc.)
85
Evaluation of the National Plan of Action for Realization of Children’s rights in Turkmenistan for 2018-2022 (NAP) and
UNICEF’s contribution to its design, implementation and monitoring
• What are the connections with the other sectors engaged (social, education, judicial system)? Is there
cooperation and communication between them? What does it look like? Is it perceived as satisfactory so that
the ministry can do their job properly?
• What changes in the communication and interaction with other sectors might improve the work of the
ministry?
MINISTRY OF LABOUR AND SOCIAL PROTECTION OF THE POPULATION:
• What information is available about the number of children from disadvantaged groups by 2020 (probe for
specific groups e.g. children with disabilities, children deprived of parental care, children survivors of
violence, children in contact with the law, migrant/stateless children) How is it collected? By whom?
• How is service planning performed by your agency/ministry related to services for the above groups of
children? Who participates? Are other sector representatives involved in planning?
• To your knowledge, what are the main areas of needs for the above groups of children and their families?
Which of those needs are met? Which are not met? Why?
• How is needs assessment for the above groups of children and their families performed? How do children
and families participate in needs assessment process?
• What services are available for the above groups of children?
• What type of support might be relevant for the above groups of children and their families that is not
available or not sufficient at the moment?
• Do all children of the above groups of children have access to the following services:
- pre-school care and education?
- education?
- health care services?
- rehabilitation services?
- outreach support and rehabilitation services?
- recreation and play opportunities?
- cultural and artistic opportunities?
- preparation for employment?
- social welfare services?
- child protection services?
• Who is involved in the planning (incl. assessment of needs) and evaluation of services generally?
• Do children and families get involved in planning/implementation/evaluation of services generally?
• Is there a criteria to define the service quality?
• How are services evaluated in terms of quality and impact?
• What is the severity of the issue of child labour in the country? What up-to-date data is available in support
to this?
MINISTRY OF EDUCATION
• Are there inclusive education arrangements making it possible for all children to follow mainstream
education? (probe for specific groups e.g. children with disabilities, children deprived of parental care,
children survivors of violence, children in contact with the law, migrant/stateless children)
86
Evaluation of the National Plan of Action for Realization of Children’s rights in Turkmenistan for 2018-2022 (NAP) and
UNICEF’s contribution to its design, implementation and monitoring
• Does the state provide trained and qualified specialists within education to integrate children with
disabilities to meet the demand, according to quality standards?
• What quality standards are used to ensure quality education for all children? (probe for specific groups e.g.
children with disabilities, children deprived of parental care, children survivors of violence, children in
contact with the law, migrant/stateless children) How is it measured? What up-to date data is available for
demonstrating quality education for all children in the country?
• What type of support might be relevant for children and their families that is not available or not sufficient
at the moment? (probe for specific groups e.g. children with disabilities, children deprived of parental care,
children survivors of violence, children in contact with the law, migrant/stateless children)
MINISTRY OF THE INTERIOR
• What arrangements are in place for supporting children in contact with the law?
• What data is available for the number of children in contact with the law? Disaggregated data by age,
gender, background, etc.?
• What type of support might be relevant for children in contact with the law and their families that is not
available or not sufficient at the moment?
4. Sustainability (10-15 min.)
• Which of the changes we discussed do you think will continue to exist? What capacities should be in place
to sustain those changes?
• Which components of the child protection system have been strengthened? Which components of the system
need capacity building?
• Does your agency commit to sustain those changes in the country towards realization of children’s rights? If
yes, how?
• What partnerships are in place that will sustain and continue to support the reforms in the child protection
system?
5. Wrap up (10 min)
• What are the main problems, obstacles?
• Any solutions/recommendations for the follow-up to the NAP for the next planning period?
87
Evaluation of the National Plan of Action for Realization of Children’s rights in Turkmenistan for 2018-2022 (NAP) and
UNICEF’s contribution to its design, implementation and monitoring
Key Informant Interview Protocol 3: NGOs and partners
1. Introduction and warm-up (5 min)
• Greetings and introduction of the moderator
• Explanation about the project and method of work
• Explaining about confidentiality approach and information on audio recording
• Participant introduction
2. Relevance (15-20 min.)
• Which major child protection risks were you targeting? Which target groups were you targeting? Why?
What analyses were these decisions based on?
• Were there any particular grave violations and other serious protection concerns for children and women that
your planned interventions had to address?
• Did you target any specific most vulnerable groups of children? Which ones? Why?
• How is data collected to monitor children’s rights in the country? Who is responsible?
3. Effectiveness (30-40 min.)
• What evidence of progress/lack of progress of the child protection system of the country do you see in terms
of different levels:
- system capacity – resources, management, etc.
- professional capacity – design of services and interventions
- individuals (professionals but also beneficiaries) - knowledge, skills, social and professional norms
• Did the Covid situation have any influence on this progress/lack of progress?
• What do you consider the country’s most significant change in terms of realizing children’s rights in the last
years since 2018 generally for all children? For the most disadvantaged children (probe for specific groups
e.g. children with disabilities, children deprived of parental care, children survivors of violence, children in
contact with the law, migrant children)?
• Are there any groups of children left behind?
• How is child participation approached in the country? Was there any significant progress in encouraging
children to participate in developing child-related policies? What evidence is there for that?
• Did anything change in the existing child protection system here because of UNICEF? (probe for any system
changes in service delivery e.g. new services, improved services, better knowledge of professionals, etc.)
4. Sustainability (10-15 min.)
• Which of the changes we discussed do you think will continue to exist? What capacities should be in place
to sustain those changes?
• Which components of the child protection system have been strengthened? Which components of the system
need capacity building?
• Does your agency plan to continue to invest in supporting the country towards realization of children’s
rights? If yes, how?
• What partnerships are in place that will sustain and continue to support the reforms in the child protection
system?
5. Wrap up (10 min)
• What are the main problems, obstacles?
• Any solutions/recommendations for the follow-up to the NAP for the next planning period?
88
Evaluation of the National Plan of Action for Realization of Children’s rights in Turkmenistan for 2018-2022 (NAP) and
UNICEF’s contribution to its design, implementation and monitoring
Key Informant Interview Protocol 4: Group interview with Local Centres for Social Protection workers and
Etrap social workers
1. Introduction and warm-up (5 min)
• Greetings and introduction of the moderator
• Explanation about the project and method of work
• Explaining about confidentiality approach and information on audio recording
• Participant introduction
2. Relevance (15-20 min.)
• Which major child protection risks were you targeting? Which target groups were you targeting? Why?
What analyses were these decisions based on?
• Were there any particular grave violations and other serious protection concerns for children and women that
your planned interventions had to address?
• Did you target any specific most vulnerable groups of children? Which ones? Why?
• How is data collected to monitor children’s rights in the country? Who is responsible?
3. Effectiveness (30-40 min.)
• What services are provided here? What are the aims of the services provided? Who do they target?
• What is the leading principle of the division of work (e.g. by type of clients; by type of service; other)?
• How much of the work is with families vs children? Is there any work done in the home of the clients and
what, with whom? How much of a portion is that, if any? If work in the home of the clients is done, is this a
requirement in the methodology or is it up to the service provider to include this in the service design?
• How is service planning performed by your organisation related to services for children (probe for specific
groups e.g. children with disabilities, children deprived of parental care, children survivors of violence,
children in contact with the law, migrant children)? Who participates? Are other sector representatives
involved in planning?
• To your knowledge, what are the main areas of needs for the above groups of children and their families?
Which of those needs are met? Which are not met? Why?
• How is needs assessment for the above groups of children and their families performed? How do children
and families participate in needs assessment process?
• What services are available for the above groups of children?
• What type of support might be relevant for the above groups of children and their families that is not
available or not sufficient at the moment?
• Do all children of the above groups of children have access to the following services:
- pre-school care and education?
- education?
- health care services?
- rehabilitation services?
- outreach support and rehabilitation services?
- recreation and play opportunities?
89
Evaluation of the National Plan of Action for Realization of Children’s rights in Turkmenistan for 2018-2022 (NAP) and
UNICEF’s contribution to its design, implementation and monitoring
- cultural and artistic opportunities?
- preparation for employment?
- social welfare services?
- child protection services?
• Who is involved in the planning (incl. assessment of needs) and evaluation of services generally?
• Do children and families get involved in planning/implementation/evaluation of services generally?
• Is there a criteria to define the service quality?
• How are services evaluated in terms of quality and impact?
• Did the Covid situation have any influence on this progress/lack of progress?
• What do you consider the country’s most significant change in terms of realizing children’s rights in the last
years since 2018 generally for all children? For the most disadvantaged children (probe for specific groups
e.g. children with disabilities, children deprived of parental care, children survivors of violence, children in
contact with the law, migrant children)?
• Are there any groups of children left behind?
• How is child participation approached in the country? Was there any significant progress in encouraging
children to participate in developing child-related policies? What evidence is there for that?
• Did anything change in the existing child protection system here because of UNICEF? (probe for any system
changes in service delivery e.g. new services, improved services, better knowledge of professionals, etc.)
4. Sustainability (10-15 min.)
• Which of the changes we discussed do you think will continue to exist? What capacities should be in place
to sustain those changes?
• Which components of the child protection system have been strengthened? Which components of the system
need capacity building?
5. Wrap up (10 min)
• What are the main problems, obstacles?
• Any solutions/recommendations for the follow-up to the NAP for the next planning period?
90
Evaluation of the National Plan of Action for Realization of Children’s rights in Turkmenistan for 2018-2022 (NAP) and
UNICEF’s contribution to its design, implementation and monitoring
Focus group discussion guidelines
Key Informant Interview Protocol 5: Focus group discussion with beneficiaries - parents/carers
1. Introduction and warm-up (5 min)
• Greetings and introduction of the moderator
• Explanation about the project and method of work
• Explaining about confidentiality approach and information on audio recording
• Participant introduction
2. Background information
● Tell us something about your families – how many family members? How many children and what age?
● Is every adult in the family employed? Any family members with disabilities?
3. Material well-being
The respondents are asked to describe their main needs as parents
Material conditions and living standards
Let’s talk about how you family lives:
● How would you describe your material living conditions and housing? (probe for living space for every
family member and specifically children having separate space, running water and sanitation, etc.)
● Can you provide for your family? (probe for who is unemployed, is salary enough, what is not sufficiently
provided for)
4. Health and nutrition
Nutrition and health
Let’s talk about health:
• Nutrition is important for health? Do you experience any difficulties in providing good food for your
children? Please describe what is difficult.
• What health issues are there for any of the children?
• How do you solve these issues? Who can you ask for help? Is it difficult to receive medical health when in
need?
• Who do you count on for advice/answer/help?
• What other help do you need when your child is sick?
• What are your main issues and questions as a parents – i.e. in regard to the health? What are the hardest
moments you have?
• In terms of your child’s health, what are your dreams as a parent?
5. Education for children
Let’s talk about education of your children:
• Where do your children/child get their education? At home or some organised place (school, kindergarten,
centre, boarding school, etc.)?
• If at home, what were the reasons for that decision?
• If the child a boarding school how long is he or she staying away from the family (specify period – week,
months?)
• Do you think your child progresses and develops well?
91
Evaluation of the National Plan of Action for Realization of Children’s rights in Turkmenistan for 2018-2022 (NAP) and
UNICEF’s contribution to its design, implementation and monitoring
• Is your child happy there? (if the child visits an organised form of learning)
• What issues or difficulties do you see? What needs to change?
• Sometimes teachers face children’s difficult behaviour. Can you think of such situation which affected your
child – what was the situation, how did the teacher deal with the situation? (probe for any violence or abuse
in school/kindergarten) Do you know of an adult ever hitting your child?
• In terms of your child’s education, what are your dreams as a parent?
6. Social support
Let’s talk about when you experience difficulties in life and parenting becomes difficult:
• Have you ever felt like you no longer can take care of you child and you need help? What was your life
situation at the time and what happened? Who helped you?
• Have you ever felt like you need to leave the child in state care outside your family? (probe for leaving a
child in an institution)
• Sometimes parents face difficulties to deal with their children’s behaviour. Can you think of situations when
you had such difficulties – what was the situation, how did you deal with the situation? (probe for any
violence or abuse in the family – between family members and adult to child violence) Have you ever felt
like hitting your child? What did you think at that moment?
• Has your child ever had any contacts with the law or police? (probe for juvenile delinquency) What was the
situation? Did any of the authorities (police, school, social centres) help your family and you specifically as
a parent in that situation? How did that situation end?
7. Expectations
● What could be supportive for your child in the future? Do you expect some challenges?
● Have you received support from the state? What else would be useful for you and your children as a support
from the state?
● What do you wish for your child for the future?
● What problems/ challenges could your child face in the future? What could help him/her avoid/overcome
them?
92
Evaluation of the National Plan of Action for Realization of Children’s rights in Turkmenistan for 2018-2022 (NAP) and
UNICEF’s contribution to its design, implementation and monitoring
Key Informant Interview Protocol 6: Focus group discussion with beneficiaries – children
1. Introduction and warm-up (5 min)
• Greetings and introduction of the moderator
• Explanation about the project and method of work
• Explaining about confidentiality approach and information on audio recording
• Participant introduction
2. Background information
8. Tell us something about where you live and with whom? (probe for family background e.g. how many
family members? Any parents working away from home? Siblings?)
9. Where do you live? Do you have a room or space of your own? (probe for living space for every family
member and specifically children having separate space, running water and sanitation, etc.)
3. Health and nutrition
• Food is important for health. Do you feel you get enough good food to be healthy?
• Children sometimes get sick, it probably happened to you, too. What happens when you get sick? Who takes
care of you? Do you go to the doctor?
• When you go to the doctor, does the doctor ever ask for your opinion on the things they want to do to you?
• What do you wish could happen differently, when children are sick?
4. Education
Let’s talk about school:
• Where do you go to school? (If the child visits a boarding school how long is he or she staying away from
the family (specify period – week, months?)
• Are you happy there? (probe about how they feel about having friends, about their teachers)
• Do you think you are progressing well? How do you know?
• Do teachers ever want to know about your opinion on any aspect of your life in school? If yes, can you give
examples. Do you feel your opinion is taken into consideration by the adults?
• What do you most like about going to school?
• What do you most dislike about school?
• What issues or difficulties do you see? What needs to change?
5. Social support
• Have you ever experienced a difficult situation in your life, either at school or in your family? What was the
situation? Who do you mostly count on for advice/answer/help?
6. Recreational life
• What do you do in your leisure time and holidays? Is there anything you want to do but you cannot for some
reason?
• What is our favourite activity?
• What is your dream about spending your free time?
7. Expectations
● What could be supportive for you in the future?
● What do you wish for yourself for the future? Dreams?
● What problems/ challenges could you in the future? What could help you avoid/overcome them?
93
Evaluation of the National Plan of Action for Realization of Children’s rights in Turkmenistan for 2018-2022 (NAP) and
UNICEF’s contribution to its design, implementation and monitoring
Key Informant Interview Protocol 7: Focus group discussion with beneficiaries – care leavers
1. Introduction and warm-up (5 min)
• Greetings and introduction of the moderator
• Explanation about the project and method of work
• Explaining about confidentiality approach and information on audio recording
• Participant introduction
2. Background information
• How old are you?
• Tell us something about where you live now and with whom? (probe for family background e.g. how many
family members? Siblings?) Do you have a job or do you study? Do you have any contacts with you family
now?
3. Life in the institution
• When you went to the children’s home how old were you?
• What brought you there?
• How long did you stay?
• Did you have a room of your own?
• During that time did you have any contacts with your family? How often? If you had contacts. How did
these happen – where, for how long, did anyone assist you to have contacts, how was it organised?
• What was life like in the children’s home? What was good about that? What was bad about that?
• Who was the closest person to you during your stay?
• What do you wish could have happened differently?
4. Health and nutrition
• Food is important for health. Did you feel you were getting enough good food to be healthy when you lived
there?
• Children sometimes get sick, it probably happened to you, too. What happened when you get sick? Who
took care of you? Did you go to the doctor?
• When you went to the doctor, did the doctor ever ask for your opinion on the things they want to do to you?
5. Education
• Where did you go to school?
• Were you happy there? (probe about how they feel about having friends, about their teachers)
• Do you think you were progressing well? How do you know?
• What did you most like about school?
• What do you most dislike about school?
• What issues or difficulties did you have? What do you wish could have happened differently?
6. Social support
• Have you ever experienced a difficult situation in your life, while living there? What was the situation? Who
do you mostly count on for advice/answer/help?
• When time came for you to leave the children’s home, how did you prepare for that moment? Did anyone
also help you in that moment? What do you wish could have happened differently?
7. Expectations
● What could be supportive for you in the future?
● What do you wish for yourself for the future? Dreams?
● What problems/ challenges could you in the future? What could help you avoid/overcome them?
94
Evaluation of the National Plan of Action for Realization of Children’s rights in Turkmenistan for 2018-2022 (NAP) and
UNICEF’s contribution to its design, implementation and monitoring
Legal guardian/ legal representative consent form
TO BE TRANSLATED AND PRESENTED IN THE NATIONAL LANGUAGE
LEGAL GUARDIAN/ LEGAL REPRESENTATIVE CONSENT FORM
I (legal guardian/legal representative) ____________________________________________________________
give my consent for the child ______________________________________________________ to participate
in the interview carried out by …………………………………………………………..…………………….
[INSERT NAME OF THE SGD AMBASSADOR] for the purpose of conducting Evaluation of the National
Plan of Action for Realization of Children’s rights in Turkmenistan for 2018-2022 (NAP) and UNICEF’s
contribution to its design, implementation and monitoring.
I hereby confirm that:
1. I have read the information provided through the introductory letter.
2. Details of procedures have been explained to my satisfaction.
3. I agree to audio recording of child’s participation.
4. I understand that:
- The child I represent will not directly benefit from taking part in this evaluation.
- The child is free to withdraw from the interview at any time and is free to decline to answer particular questions.
- While the information gained in this evaluation will be published as explained, the child I represent will not be
identified, and individual information will remain confidential.
5. I understand that the information the child provides in this interview will only be used by the consultant
Dessislava Ilieva for the evaluation purpose. I also understand that the consultant Dessislava Ilieva will transmit
information to UNICEF confidentially and will not copy, store or transmit it for any other purpose than this.
First name: _____________________ Last name: _______________________
Date: __________________________
Contact telephone number: ______________________________________
N.B. This form should be filled and signed in two copies, one to be retained by SDG Ambassador and one by
legal guardian/legal representative
95
Evaluation of the National Plan of Action for Realization of Children’s rights in Turkmenistan for 2018-2022 (NAP) and
UNICEF’s contribution to its design, implementation and monitoring
Introductory letter for parents/legal representative of the child
TO BE TRANSLATED AND PRESENTED IN THE NATIONAL LANGUAGE
[DATE]
Dear Madam / Dear Sir,
Dessislava Ilieva is an international consultant which was selected by UNICEF to conduct an evaluation of the the
National Plan of Action for Realization of Children’s rights in Turkmenistan for 2018-2022 (NAP) and UNICEF’s
contribution to its design, implementation and monitoring (an introductory letter from UNICEF Regional Office
is attached).
The evaluation will assess the results achieved by Turkmenistan in realizing the child’s rights to be safe, healthy,
to receive quality education, to live in a healthy family environment. Another objective of the evaluation is to offer
a better understanding on how results were made possible and which strategies were most effective. The evaluation
will also assess UNICEF’s contribution to these changes. More importantly, this is a learning process for UNICEF
and also for the government.
A young SDG ambassador is collecting data locally from service users (parents and children) by undertaking
interviews and organizing group discussions. The young SDG ambassador will summarize the opinions and
arguments of those participating in the data collection process, translate it to English and send a report to the
international consultant who will analyse the data.
Children will have a voice in this evaluation by participating in interviews and sharing their experiences and their
views. We are interested to discuss with children who are directly experiencing the services offered: family type
services and are approaching the age of exiting the care system (16-17 years old). Therefore, we ask for your
support in facilitating such an interview with children benefiting of care services. We are attaching a short letter
for children explaining the process and their rights. While discussing with children about their participation, please
provide them with this introductory letter.
The interview process
The interview will be carried out in a facilities children are familiar with. If children feel safer to be accompanied
by a trusting adult, they have the right to do so. The discussion will be audio recorded and will last approximately
20-30 minutes.
Privacy and confidentiality
The information will be treated anonymously and verbatim quotes will only be qualified by the respondent’s role.
Documentation and data such as audio recordings, consent forms, interview notes or reporting templates will be
collected the international consultant Dessislava Ilieva, who will retain them for a maximum period of 10 months
from the date of receipt. If requested by UNICEF, interview notes will be forwarded to UNICEF.
If the child you represent is willing to participate in the evaluation and if you are willing for the child to participate,
please complete the ‘Legal Guardian/Legal representatives Informed Consent Form’.
If you have any further questions regarding this evaluation, please do not hesitate to contact me, [NAME OF THE
SDG ambassador].
Respectfully yours,
[NAME OF THE SDG AMBASSADOR]
Telephone
Email
96
Evaluation of the National Plan of Action for Realization of Children’s rights in Turkmenistan for 2018-2022 (NAP) and
UNICEF’s contribution to its design, implementation and monitoring
Introductory letter for the child
TO BE TRANSLATED AND PRESENTED IN THE NATIONAL LANGUAGE
Hello,
My name is [NAME OF SDG AMBASSADOR] and I would like to present to you a study we are carrying out
and you might like to take part.
Children are sometimes in situations when they experience difficult situations in their lives and parents cannot
always take good care of them. In these cases, there are services which aim to provide the care necessary for
children to grow up healthy and safe. These services change overtime.
Our study aims to identify how you feel about these changes. Children are part of this study and will have the
chance to express their views and share their experiences along with the adults taking care of them.
We will make a report with all these opinions and send it to UNICEF, an international organization working for
children’s rights. UNICEF will share with all countries the good things and will work with authorities to improve
services in order to ensure that all children are living either in their family or in a place that makes children feel
like home.
1. We would like to audio record the interview, if you agree. Your name will be kept separately from the
recording, therefore people listening the audio or reading the notes from the interview will not know your
name.
2. If you agree to take part in this study, a person you trust can be present, if you want, during the interview.
3. Your name and other information about you will not be mentioned in our report.
4. The interview will take no more than 20-30 minutes.
5. You can stop the interview at any time without having to give a reason.
6. If there are questions you don’t want to answer you can just leave them out.
7. You can ask me (the interviewer) about anything that is not clear.
If you would like to participate, you have to tell the adult who gave you this letter that you agree to be interviewed.
If you have any further questions regarding this study, please contact me, [NAME OF THE SDG
AMBASSADOR].
Thank you very much,
[NAME OF THE SDG AMBASSADOR]
Telephone
Email
97
Evaluation of the National Plan of Action for Realization of Children’s rights in Turkmenistan for 2018-2022 (NAP) and
UNICEF’s contribution to its design, implementation and monitoring
Annex 7. Evaluation implementation approach
Purpose: Refinement and agreement of the methodology, timeline and structure of final report.
Activities:
• Kick-off meeting with UNICEF
Stage 1 • Initial desk review of secondary information, identifying different sector strategies, partnerships,
available reports, log frames, monitoring reports, etc.;
INCEPTION • Defining frameworks and tools to be used for data collection and analysis;
• Development of interview guides, including case study typologies and a precise methodology with
criteria for assessment;
• Defining a strategy to address ethical concerns throughout the work
Outputs: inception report to include an evaluation matrix, evaluation methodology, work plan, interview
guide and other data collection tools
Purpose: Data collection and analysis
Activities:
Stage 2 • In-depth desk-review
• Recruitment of respondents according to typology agreed with UNICEF
FIELDWORK • Primary data collection from key informants according to the field work schedule and methodology
agreed with UNICEF
Outputs: field work schedule
Purpose: Incorporating preliminary feedback
Stage 3 Activities:
• Primary data analysis and processing
VALIDATION • Summarising preliminary findings
• Consulting preliminary findings with UNICEF
Outputs: PPT and a draft report
Purpose: Reporting and communicating final results of the analysis
Stage 4 Activities:
• Preparation and submission of draft report
REPORTING • Consolidation of feedback by UNICEF
• Submitting a final report
Outputs: final report
98
Evaluation of the National Plan of Action for Realization of Children’s rights in Turkmenistan for 2018-2022 (NAP) and
UNICEF’s contribution to its design, implementation and monitoring
Annex 8. Documents reviewed
1. National Plan of Action for Realization of Children’s Rights in Turkmenistan For 2018 – 2022
2. UNICEF CO Turkmenistan Country programme document, 2015-2020
3. UNICEF CO Turkmenistan Country programme document, 2020-2025
4. Комитет по правам ребенка, Рассмотрение докладов, представленных государствами-
участниками в соответствии со статьей 44 конвенции о правах ребенка; Объединенный
пятый и шестой периодические доклады государств-участников
5. NAPC mid-term review indicators (xls file)
6. Analysis Of Situation Of Children’s And Women’s Rights In Turkmenistan, February 2019
7. UNICEF, UNPA, UNDP in Turkmenistan, Situational Analysis on Youth in Turkmenistan,
8. Ashgabat, 2019
9. COMMITTEE ON THE RIGHTS OF THE CHILD (2020), Consideration of reports submitted by
states parties under article 44 of the convention on the rights of the child; The combined fifth and
sixth periodic reports of states parties
10. Baseline Assessment For Child-Related SDG Indicators In Turkmenistan, Unicef Co
Turkmenistan
11. Pluriconsult (2020), Evaluation Of The Government Of Turkmenistan’s Policy On Early
Childhood Development (2012-2019) And UNICEF’s Contribution To Its Design, Implementation
And Monitoring
12. UNICEF Evaluation Management Response ECD
13. UNICEF in Turkmenistan, Baseline Assessment For Child-Related SDG Indicators In
Turkmenistan, Ashgabat, 2018.
14. UNICEF in Turkmenistan, Updated Assessment of child-related SDG indicators in Turkmenistan,
2021
15. Unicef And Mohmi (2013): A Study To Formulate Recommendations For Developing National
Policies With A View To Preventing Institutionalisation Of Children Aged 0-3 Years
16. Jeroen Huisman, Anna Smolentseva, Isak Froumin: 25 Years of Transformations of Higher
Education Systems in Post-Soviet Countries. Reform and Continuity
17. Methodological Briefs Impact Evaluation No. 2: Theory of Change, Patricia Rogers
18. Manual, Child Friendly Schools, UNICEF 2009
19. UNDP Database on SDG Https://Unstats.Un.Org/Sdgs/Indicators/Database/
20. UN Results Report on Turkmenistan 2020
21. Voluntary National Review of Turkmenistan, 2019
22. Defining Quality in Education, 2000, United Nations Children’s Fund; European Quality
Framework for Early Childhood Education and Care (2014); Manual, Child Friendly Schools,
UNICEF 2009
99
Evaluation of the National Plan of Action for Realization of Children’s rights in Turkmenistan for 2018-2022 (NAP) and
UNICEF’s contribution to its design, implementation and monitoring
23. European Commission (2014), Study on the effective use of early childhood education and care in
preventing early school leaving.
24. The Economics of Human Development and Social Mobility. Annual Reviews of Economics,
Vol.6 (2014), 689-733
25. UNDP, INDEPENDENT COUNTRY PROGRAMME EVALUATION, 2020
26. Обзор прогресса по реализации совместной программы, Powerpoint presentation
27. Джоанна Роджерс (2020), Базовый перечень социальных услуг в Туркменистане, Отчет
выполнен для Совместной программы фонда ЦУР с целью развития качественных,
инклюзивных социальных услуг в Туркменистане на местном уровне
28. Cantwell, N.; Davidson, J.; Elsley, S.; Milligan, I.; Quinn, N. (2012). Moving Forward:
Implementing the ‘Guidelines for the Alternative Care of Children’. UK: Centre for Excellence for
Looked After Children in Scotland
29. Adapting a Systems approach to child protection: key concepts and considerations
30. IASC Guidelines on Mental Health and Psychosocial Support in Emergency Settings
31. Juvenile Justice Reform Commission, UNICEF Montenegro (2007), THE RIGHTS OF
CHILDREN IN CONFLICT WITH THE LAW
32. Ombudsman reports 2018, 2019, 2020
33. Irina Urumova (2018), International Consultant, Assessment of the General Programme on the
Development of Juvenile Justice System in Turkmenistan for the Period of 2012-2016
34. 2006, 2015/2016 and 2019 Turkmenistan MICS
35. Council of Europe (2016), CHILD PARTICIPATION ASSESSMENT TOOL
36. (1992). Children's Participation: From tokenism to citizenship, Innocenti Essay no. 4
37. Hart, Roger. (2008). Stepping back from “The ladder”: Reflections on a model of participatory
work with children
38. CRC, The combined fifth and sixth Periodic Reports of States Parties, 2020
39. Hart, 1992; White, 1996; Trilla & Novella, 2001; Tambouris et al., 2007; Guilló & Mancebo-
Aracil, 2017; Unesco, 2019
40. Hart, Roger, Children's Participation: From tokenism to citizenship, Florence: UNICEF
International Child Development Centre, 1992 <www.unicef-irc.org/publications/100-childrens-
participation-from-tokenism-to-citizenship.html>
41. Official websites of:
42. Ministry of Labour and Social Protection of the Population,
43. Ministry of Education,
44. Ministry of Healthcare and Medical Industry,
45. State Committee of Statistics of Turkmenistan
100
Evaluation of the National Plan of Action for Realization of Children’s rights in Turkmenistan for 2018-2022 (NAP) and
UNICEF’s contribution to its design, implementation and monitoring
Annex 9. List of piloted community-based services
The following list presents the pilot services developed within the UN Joint Programme
N Name of service Relevance to children
1. Personal assistant service to support independent life of adults with Not directly for children but is
official status of disability relevant for children when adults
with disabilities are also parents.
2. Social service to support lonely elderly people Not directly for children
3. Socio-medical services at home for people with chronic illnesses Not directly for children but is
relevant for children when targeted
adults with are also parents.
4. Comprehensive social support service for prevention of domestic Not directly for children but is
violence against women relevant for children when targeted
women are also mothers.
5. Comprehensive social support service aimed at preventing child Directly addressing children
abandonment and service for teenage pregnancy
6. Intensive Family Support Service with children at community level Directly addressing children
7. Reintegration of children from infant homes Directly addressing children
8. Individual psycho-social accompaniment of youth in the process of Directly addressing children
reintegration from residential institutions into the family and
community
9. Family support services for children with disabilities Directly addressing children
10. Social services for parents with addictions (assessment, family Directly addressing children
therapy, parenting skills, referral)
11. Social services for adolescents at risk of contact with criminal justice Directly addressing children
(assessment, family therapy, life skills, referral)
12. Social service for families with children in difficult life situations Directly addressing children
(assessment, family therapy, life skills, referral)
101
Evaluation of the National Plan of Action for Realization of Children’s rights in Turkmenistan for 2018-2022 (NAP) and
UNICEF’s contribution to its design, implementation and monitoring
Annex 10. Availability of child protection interventions across the three levels of prevention
Internationally, there are various frameworks for planning and assessing whether child protection
systems provide necessary and suitable options for the child190 e.g. continuum of care191 as defined by
World Health Organisation (WHO) as well as UNICEF192; the concept of service quality defined
through the European Common Quality Framework for Social Service of General Interest; the
principles of quality childcare systems that are able to prevent family separation as defined in the
“Guidelines for the Alternative Care of Children”193, or the Intervention pyramid194 for mental health
and psychosocial support among others.
An effective child protection system is developed on all three levels of preventing ultimate separation
of the child with its family due to some vulnerability (disability, violence, conflict with the law,
displacement, etc.).
Figure 15 The levels of preventive interventions
80 The three levels of interventions around which a system should be designed around the child and
its family are the following: See Figure 22
PRIMARY LEVEL: At its primary level, prevention is achieved by ensuring the general
population’s access to basic services, social justice and the protection of human rights without
discrimination. Prevention is therefore grounded in a wide range of CRC provisions, from health
care (CRC Article 24) and education (CRC Article 28) to birth registration (CRC Article 7), social
security (CRC Article 25) and non-discrimination (CRC Articles 2, 30). The overall aim is to
enable and empower parents to care for their children so that families can remain together without
negative family experiences for the child.
SECONDARY LEVEL:
This is the ‘safety net’ and is targeted at families who are identified or have declared themselves
as being vulnerable, and for whom, for whatever reason, primary prevention measures have
proved inadequate. The children concerned here include those who are at risk of being
190 The principles of necessity and suitability are defined as quality principles underlying child protection systems preventing
children from being separated from their families due to some vulnerability. Cantwell, N.; Davidson, J.; Elsley, S.;
Milligan, I.; Quinn, N. (2012). Moving Forward: Implementing the ‘Guidelines for the Alternative Care of
Children’. UK: Centre for Excellence for Looked After Children in Scotland.
191 “Continuum of care” is an applicable tool for assessment of services targeting client populations with a great variety of
needs (http://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/10665/66584/4/WHO_MSD_MSB_00.2d.pdf)
192 Adapting a Systems approach to child protection: key concepts and considerations,
https://www.unicef.org/french/protection/files/Adapting_Systems_approach_to_CP_concepts_and_considerations.docx
193 Cantwell, N.; Davidson, J.; Elsley, S.; Milligan, I.; Quinn, N. (2012). Moving Forward: Implementing the ‘Guidelines for
the Alternative Care of Children’. UK: Centre for Excellence for Looked After Children in Scotland.
194 IASC Guidelines on Mental Health and Psychosocial Support in Emergency Settings
102
Evaluation of the National Plan of Action for Realization of Children’s rights in Turkmenistan for 2018-2022 (NAP) and
UNICEF’s contribution to its design, implementation and monitoring
relinquished due to a negative family experience and those whose removal from the parental home
on protection grounds may have to be considered. Measures should be directed towards a)
providing tailored family support for parents experiencing difficulties in caring for their child, and
b) focuses on children for whom the risk of being relinquished or withdrawn from the parental
home is imminent or current These steps include offering counselling and social support to enable
the parents to continue looking after the child themselves.
TERTIARY LEVEL: Actions taken in cases where neither primary nor secondary prevention
have succeeded, making – in this instance – entry into the alternative care system unavoidable.
Efforts at this stage focus on securing conditions that enable a positive re-start and prevent a return
to alternative care. Prevention at this level is aimed at returning a child in alternative care to the
care of his or her parents wherever possible, at an appropriate moment and under appropriate
conditions. Promoting family reintegration implies a professional assessment of the possibilities
for reintegration, and outlines the tasks and responsibilities that need to be assigned and carried
out if the assessment is to take place in the child’s best interests.
81 Below is an analysis of the extent to which prevention of family separation is taking place in
Turkmenistan with particular focus to the vulnerabilities specifically outlined by the NAP.
103
Evaluation of the National Plan of Action for Realization of Children’s rights in Turkmenistan for 2018-2022 (NAP) and UNICEF’s contribution to its design, implementation and monitoring
Availability of interventions in child protection
k
s Primary level Secondary level Tertiary prevention
ir
Partly available Partly available Not available
Children in Turkmenistan experience high Identification, reporting and referral services are at their onset. SOPs were Shelters specifically for children surviving domestic violence are not
levels of violent disciplining methods both developed in 2020 for health workers, social system professionals and available. In case of family separation dues to violence children may
psychological and physical (68.6% of police persons acting in case of reported cases of domestic violence. They potentially be placed in institutions for children without parental care. In the
children aged 1-14).195 Cultural norms in are not specifically for children but for all persons victims of violence. case of such placement, counselling and rehabilitation programmes for the
e the society define an environment of child’s non-violent parent are not available to facilitate quick reunification
s
u
b tolerance to domestic violence and The approach to cases of violence in the family is still largely based on with the family.
a
d specifically gender-based violence – 35% of sanction (parental rights may be removed), rather than support. Psycho- Perpetrator may be removed from the family home for three months and sent
n
a women 15-49 justify a husband beating or social support programmes for victims of violence are missing. to a correctional centre.
e
c hitting his wife.196 There are only two providers of services to violence victims – 2 public
n
e lo NAP addresses a more gender-tolerant associations and 0 governmental organisations.197
iV attitudes in schools by training and Comprehensive social support service for prevention of domestic violence
certifying secondary school teachers on against women has been piloted within the JP. Presumably, it may
gender-sensitive educational topics. The potentially cover children also since domestic violence response is
share of certified teachers has increased intrinsically linked with care for the child of the victim. However, the
dramatically over the reviewed period: from coverage of this service is still low i.e. Ashgabat and Turkmenabat.
68% in 2018 to 95% in 2020.
Available Partly available Available
It is generally considered198 that children Community-based social services for adolescents at risk of contact with Detention procedures are becoming more child-friendly e.g.:
who break the law do not do so of their own criminal justice (assessment, family therapy, life skills, and referral) were -juvenile units have been set up in the police departments to ensure that
w free will, but rather as piloted in 2020. Their coverage is still very low i.e. in Ashgabat and children are housed separately from regular police detention places;
a l
e
a result of restricted opportunities available Turkmenabat. Options for scaling up are currently considered by the GoT - staff recruitment is increasingly considered in child-friendlier terms i.e.
h for their development. with UNICEF strong support. Juvenile affairs inspectors with academic background in education now total
t
h Juveniles from risk groups that could get in at 30%.
tiw
conflict with the law are often victims of Specialized courts or judges are still not available in the country although
tc abuse and neglect, negligent and poor the establishment of “blue rooms”199 is considered in 2022. The NAP most - the academic curriculum for prospective police officers includes child-
ilf
n parenting and economic difficulties. These significant change has been initiation of upgrading the existing workforce rights related topics. More specialized topics, such as child-friendly
o
C children need support while they are still of the systems components which are related to child justice i.e. police and interviewing techniques, have been introduced
children on primary level of prevention and judicial system, towards more child-friendly justice. Commissions of through UNICEF-supported training, however not part of the regular
as part of basic universal services available minors are functioning on local level and externally to the Ministry of curriculum yet.
Interior (MoI). They are part of the safety net of services targeting
195 MICS 2019
196 Analysis Of Situation Of Children’s And Women’s Rights In Turkmenistan, February 2019
197 Джоанна Роджерс (2020), Базовый перечень социальных услуг в Туркменистане; Отчет выполнен для Совместной программы фонда ЦУР с целью развития качественных,
инклюзивных социальных услуг в Туркменистане на местном уровне
198 Juvenile Justice Reform Commission, UNICEF Montenegro (2007), THE RIGHTS OF CHILDREN IN CONFLICT WITH THE LAW
199 child-friendly interrogation room
104
Evaluation of the National Plan of Action for Realization of Children’s rights in Turkmenistan for 2018-2022 (NAP) and UNICEF’s contribution to its design, implementation and monitoring
to all children e.g. as part of general prevention of family separation due to delinquency. However, Judicial proceedings involving juvenile offenders are conducted by regular
education and healthcare. interventions were not identified towards special strengthening the trial courts. Introduction of juvenile courts is not planned, rather juvenile
The concept of children being in conflict capacity of those commissions to make risk assessment, develop cases are allocated to judges that receive regular training in juvenile justice-
with the law is gradually changing in individual planning, provide tailor-made support to both the child and its related topics.
Turkmenistan towards modernising and environment, as well as monitoring the effectiveness of such work. Special Convicted children are detained in colonies separate from adults and
becoming more child-friendly. operational procedures for working with children and their environment separate for boys and girls. The number of children in colonies is reduced
On the level of basic services prevention were not identified. over the years (2017- 85201, 2018- 68202 children, all boys except for one
work is done in schools by educational talks MoI is keeping a register of dysfunctional families but targeted social girl). The reduction of the number of detained children is a positive step but
to children by police officers or Red support to such families is not available nor needs assessment analysis, in the absence of community-based prevention social services and effective
Crescent Society workers promoting healthy including regional trends – 59% of the children in correctional facilities diversion programmes, the reduction is due to children reaching the age for
living. are residents of Lebap and Mary welayats.200 leaving the colony as well as gate-keeping control resulting from the
Practices of juvenile diversion and approaches holding youth accountable tendency of more lenient sentences regarding minors, not related to
for their behaviour without resorting to legal sanctions, court oversight or deprivation of liberty.
the threat of confinement are still not fully established. Foundations for There are interventions to facilitate the social integration of children in
such practices were laid by the 2012-2016 General Juvenile Justice colonies back to society: education is provided and transition to independent
Programme provides for juvenile justice processes that are more child- living is provided, although their effectiveness is not analysed and
friendly. Such processes are slow as they are dependent largely on change documented. However, children stay in these facilities mostly until the end
in professional norms and attitudes. of their childhood and the transition programmes do not include
reintegration components to facilitate the child’s shorter stay and returning
to the family sooner.
d
Available Available Not applicable
lih Due to the legislative changes of minimum In line with the Law of Turkmenistan “On state guarantees of the right of
c
f
recruitment age from 16 to 18, the number youth for the right to work”, parents are forbidden to use children below
o
s
of children aged 16 engaged in branches of 18 in works related to permanent employment, especially in works related
m
economy of Turkmenistan has been shrunk to absence from studies.
r
o
f to a nullity. The number of children aged Employees are forbidden to use the labour of workers below 18 in works
ts
ro
wr u
u
ec
n
o
d
n
e
o
r
m
18
y ,
e
m
ng
a
a
d
g
e
e
3
d
6
i n
p e
th
rs
e
o
b
n
r
s
a
,
n
o
c
r
h
0
e
.
s
0
o
0
f
5 % of
with harmful and (or especially hazardous) conditions of labour.
e h t d o b a l t c h h e il e d m re p n l o w y e e r d e i e n m t p h l e o m y . e 2 d 03 t h O r f o t u h g e h m , 19
n
a
r
employment agencies. See Figure 23. The
u o trend indicates that the objective of
b
a eliminating child labour had been achieved
l
d before the adoption of NAP. Enabling
e
c r environment was created to prevent child
o
F labour.
200 Ombudsman report 2018
201 Irina Urumova (2018), International Consultant, Assessment of the General Programme on the Development of Juvenile Justice System in Turkmenistan for the Period of 2012-2016
202 Ombudsman report 2018
203 2020, COMMITTEE ON THE RIGHTS OF THE CHILD, CONSIDERATION OF REPORTS SUBMITTED BY STATES PARTIES UNDER ARTICLE 44 OF THE CONVENTION ON
THE RIGHTS OF THE CHILD
105
Evaluation of the National Plan of Action for Realization of Children’s rights in Turkmenistan for 2018-2022 (NAP) and UNICEF’s contribution to its design, implementation and monitoring
Available Not available Not available
y c tn The legislation in Turkmenistan ensures In the absence of data it is assumed that support services for children Disaggregated data on the placements in institutions in terms of their refugee
ne
am access of all children from migrant, refugee coming from migrant or refugee families cannot be planned accordingly. status. Refugee or migrant children have not been reported by interviewed
r g im e c a or displaced families to universal basic Government officials state that such children have access to mainstream residential facilities for children (infant homes, orphanage).
,e
g
lp s
id
s
T
e
h
r
e
v
r
i
e
c e
a
s
r
a
e
v a
n
i
o
la b
d
l
a
e
t a
in
o
th
n
e
m
co
ig
u
r
n
a
t
n
ry
t
.
or refugee
s
p
e
r
r
e
v
p
i
a
c
r
e
e
s
d
.2
t
0
o
5 T
w
h
o
e
r
r
k
e f
w
o
i
r
t
e
h
,
s
th
u
e
c h
a s
v
s
u
u
l
m
ne
p
r
t
a
i
b
o
i
n
l i
i
t
s
y .
t h
H
a
o
t
w
th
e
e
v e
m
r,
a i
n
n
e
s
i
t
t
r
h
e
e
a
r
m
th
s
e
e r
e
v
d
i
u
c
c
e
a
s
t i
a
o
r
n
e
u
fe d n children in the country. Stateless children system nor the available social services report to have worked with such
Ra
are reported as zero.204 children or families.206
Partly available Not available Partly available
y In line with Article 85 of the Family Code of Tailored counselling and social support for families experiencing Possibilities for children separated from their families (and who are not living
d
o Turkmenistan, raising a child in the family is difficulties in caring for their children is not available within the existing with a guardian, close relative, or adopted), are one of the following types of
ts
u recognized as a priority form which in the social support system of the country. institutions: 5 infant homes (for healthy infants 0-3 or infants with disabilities
c
e best way shall ensure rights and lawful Currently family separation prevention services are underdeveloped and 0-4); 2 children’s homes (orphanages), 10 boarding-schools and 6
ta
ts interests of a child. The implication of this is children who are left without parental care are subject to referral for care209 rehabilitation health complexes. All of them provide long-term care. There
e that universal services should be designed in to close relatives’ family for adoption, under guardianship (custody). If are no documented analysis on the duration of the average stay but mostly
h
t re a way to enable families to take care of all there is no such possibility, then a child is placed in institutions for orphans children spend there all their childhood (interviewed management report that
d children’s needs: or children left without parental care, to the institutions of social servicing main reason for leaving is reaching full age).
n
u
tn
e
E
st
d
il
u
l
catio
in
n
s u
is
f f
a
ic
c
i
c
e
e
n
s
t
s
ly
ib le t
a
o
b
a
le
ll chi
t
l
o
d ren
e
b
n
u
s
t
u r
i
e
s a
o
n
v
d
e r
o
t
t
h
h
e
e
y
r
e
i
a
n
r
s
s
t
2
it
1
u
0
t i ons. The number of adoptions remains relatively stable T
ed
h
u
e
c a
s
t
u
io
p
n
p
.
o r
T
t
h
p
e
r
r
o
e
v
i
i
s
d e
n
d
o
to
in d
c
i
h
v
i
i
l
d
d
u
r
a
e
l
n
p
i
l
s
a n
m
ni
a
n
in
g
l y
o r
r e
c
l
a
a
s
t
e
e d
m
t
a
o
n a
b
g
a
e
s
m
ic
e n
n
t
e e
to
d
w
s
a
a
r
n
d
d
s
m
e inclusiveness for all children and to avoid This increasing trend is also observed for children separated from their reintegration with the family in order to ensure quick permanent solution for
c
a segregation of children with special families and placed in state care. (See Figure 24). This implies that the the child and shortening the duration of placement in the institution.
lp
d educational needs. Healthcare is available for secondary level of prevention of family separation is not functioning well. Permanent solutions are reunification with the biological family or adoption.
n
a all children but is insufficiently effective to Public associations providing social services report to have served 9 983 There are emerging opportunities for creating models of reintegrating
tn
reduce child mortality and anemia prevalence persons (both adult and children) and this represents 6% decrease of users services: reunification programme is piloted within the JP in the Infant
e
m as well as to fully respond to the health needs compared to 2018 (10 607).211 However, these refer to users of all types of homes in Mary and Turkmenabat under UNICEF guidance as well as earlier
n
o of children with disabilities. Early vulnerabilities, not necessarily parents and not necessarily in terms of attempts towards reforming the care model, also with UNICEF support and
d
n a development services are emerging and are family separation prevention. international organisations. The services is still at pilot phase and its
b
a contributing to better development for young Comprehensive social support service aimed at preventing child effectiveness and efficiency is still under review, however, Mary Infant
d
lih children: the children who are abandonment and service for teenage pregnancy is now being piloted with home management report positive results for children i.e. 95% of the
C the JP and is hence with limited coverage, available for Ashgabat and children leaving the institution in 2020 were reintegrated to their biological
Turkmenabat. families. A model of supporting care leavers to resocialisation from
204 Interview with Ombudsman Office
205 KIIs
206 Джоанна Роджерс (2020), Базовый перечень социальных услуг в Туркменистане; Отчет выполнен для Совместной программы фонда ЦУР с целью развития качественных,
инклюзивных социальных услуг в Туркменистане на местном уровне
209 In accordance with Article 105 of the Family Code of Turkmenistan
210 For the period of 2017-2020 the civil registry offices registered the following number of adoptions: 2690 (2017), 2589 (2018), 2659 (2019) and 1180 (first 6 months of 2020), Source: 2020,
COMMITTEE ON THE RIGHTS OF THE CHILD, CONSIDERATION OF REPORTS SUBMITTED BY STATES PARTIES UNDER ARTICLE 44 OF THE CONVENTION ON THE
RIGHTS OF THE CHILD
211 Джоанна Роджерс (2020), Базовый перечень социальных услуг в Туркменистане; Отчет выполнен для Совместной программы фонда ЦУР с целью развития качественных,
инклюзивных социальных услуг в Туркменистане на местном уровне
106
Evaluation of the National Plan of Action for Realization of Children’s rights in Turkmenistan for 2018-2022 (NAP) and UNICEF’s contribution to its design, implementation and monitoring
developmentally on track has increased from orphanages and other child institutions such as Rehabilitation centres for
90.9% (2016) to 95% (2019)207 children with disabilities and boarding schools are emerging with support
Childcare allowances provided by the state to with UNICEF and other UN agencies.
every child 0-6 are generally sufficient to
ensure the basic needs of children but not so
much for families of children with
disabilities.208
207 2015/2016 and 2019 Turkmenistan MICS
208 FGDs with parents, See section on Goal 4 of the NAP
107
Evaluation of the National Plan of Action for Realization of Children’s rights in Turkmenistan for 2018-2022 (NAP) and
UNICEF’s contribution to its design, implementation and monitoring
Annex 11. Levels of participation
In considering further planning of improving opportunities and capacities for participation, it is helpful
to consider child participation in terms of levels of participation.212
Figure 16 Levels of participation
For the period under review, child participation,
where it occurs, is at the level of informing i.e. still
at the lowest level of the ladder. The ladder of
participation is useful for helping policy-makers in
Turkmenistan think about the follow-up design of
children’s participation policies. It should be noted
that there are many factors affecting the extent to
which children participate other than the design of a
programme. The ability of a child to participate, for
example, varies greatly with his development and
background (cultural, ethnic, disability status, age,
gender, etc.)
Also, it is not necessary that children always
operate on the highest possible rungs of the ladder.
The important principle is that of choice - policies,
programmes and services should be designed in a
way which maximize the opportunity for any child
to choose to participate at the highest level of his
ability.
Picture by Roger A. Hart, Stepping Back from ‘The Ladder’:
Reflections on a model of participatory work with children
212 Hart, Roger. (2008). Stepping back from “The ladder”: Reflections on a model of participatory work with children.
108
Evaluation of the National Plan of Action for Realization of Children’s rights in Turkmenistan for 2018-2022 (NAP) and
UNICEF’s contribution to its design, implementation and monitoring
Annex 12. Terms of Reference
UNICEF Country Office in Turkmenistan
Terms of Reference
International Individual Consultant for Evaluation of the National Plan of Action for
Realization of
Children’s rights in Turkmenistan for 2018-2022 (NAP) and UNICEF’s contribution to its
design, implementation and monitoring
Duration: 5 July 2021 - 3 May 2022 (30 Days)
Location: Out-of-country, in case if lockdown restrictions are reduced, two visits to Turkmenistan to
be planned (Ashgabat city and selected velayats)
Background
The total population of Turkmenistan is estimated at 6.031 million people for 2020213. In 2019,
50.77 percent of the population were women and 33.3% of the population was under 18214. The country
has a high fertility rate among women of reproductive age being 2.79 per woman in 2020215.
The population pyramid has almost a classical conical shape that shows that the hardships of
the 1990 made an impact on the families and negatively affected the birth rates. The birth rate has
substantially increased in the 2000s due to economic growth and government targeted measures for
protection of motherhood and childhood. The dependency ratio (the people outside of the normal 15-64
working age range compared to the population of working age) was 55.2% in 2020216. There are on
average 2 workers who can help support people who are too young or too old to work, which is a healthy
demographic indicator by the international standards.
The most densely populated areas are the southern, eastern, and northeastern oases, with approximately
15.5 % of the population living in the capital of Ashgabat217. Turkmen constitute more than 85% of the
population, with Uzbeks, Russians and others as ethnic minorities.
The current political situation in Turkmenistan remains stable, yet complex. The President serves as
head of state, head of government and commander in chief of the armed forces, who has the power to
appoint and remove members of the Cabinet of Ministers, heads of local authorities, state prosecutors
and judges, make recommendations to the Parliament on the Ombudsman, and take decisions about
holding elections and referendums.
New constitutional law was adopted in September 2020 introducing amendments to the Constitution of
Turkmenistan. In its meeting of 25 September 2020, the People's Council of Turkmenistan adopted the
Constitutional Law of Turkmenistan "On amendments and additions to the Constitution of
Turkmenistan". The Law was adopted at the initiative of the President of Turkmenistan on the
introduction of bicameral system of the Supreme legislative body. According to the amendments, the
People's Council and the Mejlis of Turkmenistan will form the upper and lower chambers of the Milli
Gengesh – the Parliament accordingly, and the powers of both chambers have been defined. Changes to
the Constitution came into force as of 1 January 2021, and elections to Milli Gengesh were held at the
end of March 2021.
213 Turkmenistan Population (2021) - Worldometer (worldometers.info)
214 State Statistics Committee of Turkmenistan, 2020.
215 The United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs,
https://esa.un.org/unpd/wpp/Download/Standard/Population/
216United Nations, Department of Economic and Social Affairs, Population Division (2019). World Population Prospects 2019,
Online Edition. Rev. 1.
https://population.un.org/wpp/Download/Standard/Population/
217 The State Statistics Committee of Turkmenistan, Statistical Yearbooks of Turkmenistan 2020
109
Evaluation of the National Plan of Action for Realization of Children’s rights in Turkmenistan for 2018-2022 (NAP) and
UNICEF’s contribution to its design, implementation and monitoring
In August 2020 the Mejlis of Turkmenistan considered and approved amendments to a number of
national laws, that include laws in the areas of International Humanitarian Aid in an Emergency
Situation, Social Protection, Insurance, Air Control, On the Protection of Citizens' Health, On Education,
on Insurance, on State Pension Insurance, on Certification, on Privatization, on implementation of
Budget Code, on Veterinary, laws on ratification of the UN conventions in the areas of transport and
many other laws, as well as amendments to the Labour code and Tax Code.
There were not officially registered cases of COVID in Turkmenistan until current time. However, the
Covid-19 pandemic is set to slowdown the growth of Turkmenistan’s economy in 2020. Turkmenistan’s
overall economic prospects remained positive in 2020 and 2021, however even through the Gross
Domestic Product (GDP) growth rate forecasted by the Government was 6.3% in 2019, the actual growth
for 2019 was 5.4% 218. Turkmenistan right at the beginning of the pandemic took all necessary measures
(e.g. closing borders and imposing travel restrictions, etc.) to prevent the penetration of COVID-19 to
the country, taken as early as February 2020. These measures allowed to avoid internal lockdowns and
keep the economy functioning until July when partial lockdown was introduced primarily affecting the
services sector (retail trade, catering, culture, sports and leisure, etc.). Meanwhile, due to its high
dependance on hydrocarbon exports and import of goods and components, the economy of
Turkmenistan found itself exposed to external shocks triggered by the pandemic, such as the global oil
price collapse and supply chain disruptions. The Economic Intelligence Unit’s projections are further
cautious forecasting the economy of Turkmenistan to contract by 1.1% in 2020 due to the pandemic and
low global energy prices.
As of 27 October 2020, Turkmenistan has not reported to WHO any cases of COVID-19 in the country.
The declared strategy of Turkmenistan has been to prevent the importation and spread of COVID-19 in
the country. Among the fundamental organizational actions was the creation of the Emergency Anti-
Epidemic Commission for COVID-19 (EAEC) to combat dangerous infectious diseases, which included
members of the government, heads of ministries, departments, and local executive bodies, and which
operates under the Cabinet of Ministers to lead national actions under the leadership of the Deputy Prime
Minister responsible for health, with an operational headquarters located at the MoHMI.
Several plans associated with this strategy have been approved:
In January 2020, a Decree of the President of Turkmenistan approved the Comprehensive Plan of
Measures to Prevent the Importation of COVID -19 into Turkmenistan
A Preparedness and Response Plan for Acute Infectious Disease/Country Preparedness and Response
Plan (CPRP) was developed with the support of WHO/UN and approved by Turkmenistan (22 May
2020).
Immediate Socio-Economic Response Plan to acute infectious disease pandemic in Turkmenistan was
developed with the UN support and approved by the Government (3 July 2020).
Turkmenistan has consistently declared its aim to be a socially oriented economy, and to protect the
welfare of the population, by maintaining a system of subsidies and social benefits, and through public
investment in the health, education sectors and social infrastructure projects. Prices for staples such as
bread, electricity, gasoline, and water are low even by regional standards; primary and secondary
education is free; and health care for those who are insured are reimbursed for 50 percent; housing for
public sector employees (estimated at 25 percent219 of the labour force) and public transport are heavily
subsidized220. However, owing to the lack of up-to-date information and unavailability of recent
household survey data, it is unclear to what extent Turkmenistan’s economic growth is reflected in
higher incomes, and better living standards, especially in rural communities221.
218 Statistical Year Book, 2020
219 State Statistics Committee, 2017
220 World Bank Country Engagement Note for 2016-2017
http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/371591467987825776/pdf/99556-CRN-P151985-Box393225B-OUO-9-R2015-
0199.pdf World Bank Country Engagement Note for 2016-2017
http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/371591467987825776/pdf/99556-CRN-P151985-Box393225B-OUO-9-R2015-
0199.pdf World Bank Country Engagement Note for 2016-2017
http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/371591467987825776/pdf/99556-CRN-P151985-Box393225B-OUO-9-R2015-
0199.pdf
221 Trends in living standards are inferred from data on average wages and household income and expenditure, State Statistics
Committee, 2016.
110
Evaluation of the National Plan of Action for Realization of Children’s rights in Turkmenistan for 2018-2022 (NAP) and
UNICEF’s contribution to its design, implementation and monitoring
With all the necessary measures, in 2020 Turkmenistan has drafted and submitted its Fifth and Sixth
joint reports with the information on implementation of Concluding Observations to the CRC. The
National Action Plan (NAP) on Children’s rights was adopted in 2015 and has been instrumental in
implementing the majority of the recommendations. The Plan identifies key areas of the state social
policy in the interests of children based on the principles of the UN Convention on the Rights of the
Child, to which Turkmenistan is a party. All goals and objectives included in the NAP on Children’s
rights are aimed at the realization of rights and social safeguards for children, implementation of which
requires an integrated approach, coordination and cooperation of state bodies and public associations.
The aim, objectives, policies and indicators set forth in the NAP on Children’s rights, represent an
integrated ‘roadmap’ aiming at the implementation of the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child by
Turkmenistan. The NAP’s actions encompass all fields of political, social, economic, cultural and civil
rights of children based on the current situation and needs of the children in the country.
Theory of Change (ToC) for the NAP was not clearly stipulated in the NAP, but is overall described as
a long-term vision of change by 2030, in relation to national governance effectively working for children
in Turkmenistan, consisting of projects that national development frameworks with child-focused
commitments and measurable targets, explicitly focusing on the rights of all children to health,
education, protection and participation, (including the most disadvantaged and/or children at risk of
being ‘left behind’), with appropriate financial resources allocated and accountabilities of duty-bearers
clearly assigned. For this vision to materialise by 2030, the political commitment of national
stakeholders and their capacity need to be significantly enhanced implying (i) a child-centred re-
allocation of domestic financial resources; (ii) weaving child rights imperatives into national planning
and accountability frameworks and (iii) upgrading national data collection and dissemination systems,
to pinpoint and address particular vulnerabilities.
NAP was developed with consideration of the UNICEF programmatic priorities and include all the areas
of the UNICEF Strategic Plan and Country programme Development (CPD). The CPD 2021-2025 was
developed for addressing the main priorities and challenges identified during implementation of the
NAP.
The National plan on Children’s rights identifies the key areas of the state social policy in the
interests of children based on the principles of the Convention of the Rights of the Child, to which
Turkmenistan is a party. All goals and objectives included in the National plan on Children’s rights are
aimed at realization of rights and social safeguards for children, implementation of which requires an
integrated approach, coordination and cooperation of state bodies and public associations.
The key priorities of the National plan on Children’s rights are guided by the goals and objectives
of national policies, programmes and plans, such as the National Programme of Turkmenistan for Socio-
economic Development for 2011-2030, the new edition of the National Programme of the President of
Turkmenistan on the Development of Social and Living Conditions of Residents of Villages,
Communities, Towns and Regional Centres until 2020, the Programme of President of Turkmenistan on
social and economic development of the country for 2018-2014, the General Programme of Supply of
clean drinking water in residential areas of the country, the General Programme of Turkmenistan on
Development of Juvenile Justice, the National Strategy and Action Plan for 2015–2019 on Maternal,
Newborn, Child and Adolescent Health. The National plan on Children’s rights is divided into
corresponding topical sections which include activities for implementing the following key areas of the
state policy in the interests of children and implementation of the SDGs:
1. Ensure realization of general measures for implementation of the UN Convention of the Rights
of the Child (CRC) (hereinafter referred to as the Convention of the Rights of the Child) in
Turkmenistan;
2. Ensure the rights of the child for life and survival, in particular through strengthening maternal
and child health and promotion of a healthy life style;
3. Ensure the rights of the child for education and development, so all children were able to fully
realize their potential, in particular, through quality education and social protection provided to them;
4. Improve living conditions and ensure economic well-being for children and families, including
issues of protection in emergency, while focusing on disaster risk reduction through strengthening the
actions on preparedness to emergency and response;
5. Protect the rights of all children for the life free from violation, exploitation, cruel and negligent
treatment, in particular, through enhancing the efficiency of the system of services for protection and
111
Evaluation of the National Plan of Action for Realization of Children’s rights in Turkmenistan for 2018-2022 (NAP) and
UNICEF’s contribution to its design, implementation and monitoring
support of vulnerable children and through implementation of measures aimed at prevention of placing
children without parental care in orphanages and children’s homes;
6. Ensure the rights of children for freedom of expression on all issues related to their interests and
rights to actively participate in social, cultural, economic and public life.
Each of these topical issues prioritizes allocation of resources (even though, the potential eetsimates
were not included in the document), services and programmes to the most vulnerable groups of children,
so all children would be able to develop their potential regardless of the place of their residence, income,
family environment or any other factor. This is why the National plan on Children’s rights has a special
focus on ensuring the rights of disadvantaged children, such as the children with disability, migrant
children, stateless children, low-income children, children without parental care and children in the
conflict with the law.
Evaluation Rationale and Purpose
The Object of the Evaluation
The evaluation will have both summative and formative dimensions. It will provide recommendations
for improvements of the effectiveness, scale up and sustainability of Government’s work in the area of
child rights and UNICEF’s support.
Objects of the evaluation are:
- National Plan of Action for Realization of Children’s rights in Turkmenistan for 2018-2022
(NAP), with a Road Map for Its implementation and Indicator’s Framework
- UNICEF’s contribution to the design, implementation and monitoring of the NAP
- Impact of COVID-19 global pandemic on the full implementation of NAP
- Contribution of the NAP into the implementation of SDGs
Specific aspects of the evaluation and its scope will be revisited/defined during the inception phase. It
is envisioned, that 10 SDG Ambassadors (2 in each region) will accompany the evaluation processes as
part of UNICEF’s overall vision of youth inclusion and professional development. The youth will be
expected to provide their insights and observations to contribute to informing the data analysis exercises.
A role of youth in the evaluation process will need to be further specified in the scope of evaluation.
The Key stakeholders:
Table 1: Key stakeholders and their contribution towards the NAP
Stakeholders Contribution towards the activities of the NAP
UNICEF Country Office Technical assistance to the NAP, sharing of best practices,
support in improvement of future interventions, support in
M&E
Institute of State, Law and Main coordinating body on implementation of the NAP,
Democracy (ISLD) Sectary of the Inter-ministerial Commission on implementation
of the the human rights obligations and humanitarian law
Interministerial Commission on Develop strategic orientations on the NAP implementation and
implementation of the the human ensure monitoring and implementation of the NAP
rights obligations and
humanitarian law
Office of Ombudsmen Supported with the implementation of a number of Goals of the
NAP and ensured efficient monitoring of child rights
Mejlis (Parliament) Legislative body and main coordinator for implementation of
the Goal 1 of the NAP, main partner in ensuring engagement of
children and youth in monitoring and policy planning
112
Evaluation of the National Plan of Action for Realization of Children’s rights in Turkmenistan for 2018-2022 (NAP) and
UNICEF’s contribution to its design, implementation and monitoring
Municipalities (Hakimliks), Line Introduce corrective actions, to use the best available practices,
Ministries to bridge the inequality gaps and to allocate enough funds.
Accelerate reform implementation towards national SDG
targets.
Partner NGOs and other Support with community engagement for the implementation
Civil Society Organisations fo NAP Activities
(Youth and Women Union)
Donors and other Support with additional funding and cost-sharing through the
Development partners NAP implementation
Scope
Period to be covered: 2018 to date.
Time and Geographical coverage: The evaluation will cover the period of 2018 to 2020. The
evaluation’s geographic focus will be national. Focused assessment may be needed in selected areas to
assess UNICEF contribution which will be further discussed and finalised during the inception stage. 2
SDG Ambassadors per velayat (region) will support with the coverage of the local level aspects where
this will be required.
Programmatic coverage:: The focus on the evaluation are all the six Goal areas of the NAP, with the
exclusion of the activities covered in ECD Evaluation and up-coming Evaluation of the Joint Programme
of Social Services.
Taking into account, that ECD Evaluation and the up-coming Joint Programme on Social Services
Evaluation are covered across Nap Goal Areas, details on the excluded activities will be discussed with
the Consultant at the Inception phase to clearly stipulate the scope. After this, the Consultant will prepare
a mapping of all respective activities/projects covering relevance, effectiveness, and sustainability of
achieved results.
Stakeholders engagement: While all stakeholders are important, special emphasis will be placed on
ensuring that children (both boys and girls) who are direct beneficiaries of the interventions are heard,
enabled to communicate their priorities and needs, and participate in the evaluation process. Other
stakeholders whose participation will be important to assess the relevance, effectiveness and
sustainability of the programme include parents (both mothers and fathers). Central government, local
community leaders, municipality management and Implementing Partners will also be consulted in
assessing the relevance, effectiveness and sustainability of the NAP implementation.
Young SDG Ambassadors will be involved to cover visits into to the velayats to have interviews with
local representatives in partnership with the Consultant, who will be supporting them on-line. The final
list of sites/ institutions as well as respondents will be defined with the consultant.
If COVID related restrictions will remain, all interventions will be conducted on-line and since Young
SDG Ambassadors are representatives of youth in each velayat, this will help to provide on-site
information and support with logistics. Children will be invited to provide insights through Ministry of
Education and on-line communication with them.
Young SDG ambassadors – are socially active people, leaders of their local communities. Each of them
is advocating for one Global Goal among their peers, disseminate the information on sustainable
development among youth, develop a platform for the collaboration at the national and regional levels
to build new partnerships for SDGs.
The population group(s) covered under NAP: boys and girls, adolescents and youth, parents.
The specific activities for the consultancy:
113
Evaluation of the National Plan of Action for Realization of Children’s rights in Turkmenistan for 2018-2022 (NAP) and
UNICEF’s contribution to its design, implementation and monitoring
1. Review background information on the implementation of the NAP, CRC Report, National
Statistics, Global Statistics and analytical documents developed by UNICEF within the period
of the NPAC implementation, MICS 2019, Evaluations of national programmes and other
policy document for 2018-2021 period, including an analysis of gender-responsiveness of the
state programmes and policies.
2. Reconstruct the Theory of Change (ToC) based on the UNICEF CPD 2016-2020 and potentially
taking into account CPD 2020-2025
3. Test theory of change to examine pathways to NAP outcomes.
4. Conduct equity- and rights-based analysis from systems-point of view and with focus of the
main principle of “leaving no one behind” (evaluation data should be disaggregated by sex,
ethnicity, age and other categories). Particular emphasis should be given to issues of equity,
such as the degree to current institutional arrangements of the government, the mandates, other.
5. Analyze if (and how) UNICEF have contributed to the achievement of NAP related to equity
and inclusion at national and sub-national levels.
6. Evaluate progress in terms of : a) the initiatives and actions that have been implemented through
the NAP; b) how initiatives and actions align with the National Action Plan’s aims and priority
areas; c) the results and outcomes arising as a consequence of actions undertaken under the
National Action Plan
7. Evaluate the relevance and appropriateness of the national strategies and activities implemented
in the goal areas of the NAP;
8. Investigate the progress on CRC Recommendations implementation vs implemented activities
from NAP;
9. Investigate the level of inter-sectoral coordination (health, education, economic and social) in
terms of planning, resource management and implementation
10. Evaluate the efficiency and challenges in the coverage of the most vulnerable groups of children;
11. In order to assess the relevance, effectiveness and sustainability for children, the consultants
will undertake discussions with direct beneficiaries and indirect contributors to the Agenda 2030
and implementation of child rights: children (including children with disabilities), parents,
NGOs, private sector. The suggested evaluation questions will be clustered around NPAC goals.
Based on the findings, the evaluators will document lessons learned and best practices, and draw
strategic and operational recommendations.
12. Together with various stakeholders, document important lessons learned and best practices and
propose priority areas for strengthening the new NPAC.
13. Train 10 Young SDG Ambassadors to support with focus group discussions and reaching to
velayat level
14. Propose the structure and format for the Focus groups and awareness raising with children and
their parents on main aspects of NAP and CRC for building their capacity to use National
programmes for the full realization of their rights (with coordination by Young SDG
Ambassadors).
15. Review all UNICEF programmatic contribution during the period of 2018 to date;
16. Prepare a stakeholder mapping, identifying the roles and relevance of different stakeholders
17. Conduct on-line or country mission (depending on the restrictions due to COVID-19) interview
with various stakeholders to document important lessons learned and best practices;
18. Suggest strategic and operational recommendations that can be used by Government of
Turkmenistan and UNICEF in the ongoing and future activities to improve child rights
implementation and achieve expected outcomes.
19. Validate the results of the evaluation through consultations with stakeholders
20. Support with drafting the Management Response Plan and agreeing on a follow-up steps for its
implementation with UNICEF staff and Government Stakeholders
114
Evaluation of the National Plan of Action for Realization of Children’s rights in Turkmenistan for 2018-2022 (NAP) and
UNICEF’s contribution to its design, implementation and monitoring
Budget: 10,500 USD.
Location: online, covering Ashgabat city and 5 velayats: Ahal, Balkan, Dashoguz, Lebap and Mary.
Rationale and intended use:
Rationale: The timing of the evaluation is critical as the new Country Programme of Cooperation with
the UN and UNICEF was signed in 2020,current NAP will be completed in 2022 and the development
of a new NAP 2023-2025 will be started this year. Thus, the evaluation will help to shape the
programming and policymaking in child-rights, including main elements of cooperation with UNICEF.
The evaluation’s findings will also inform the update of the Situation Analyses on children and women,
the reporting of the country to Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (CRPD) and CRC
Committee in 2022 and and potentially SDG-related progress reports or other situation analyses.
The NAP evaluation aims to assess the relevance, effectiveness and sustainability of the NAP
implementation, to analyse remaining bottlenecks and barriers that hamper the realization of child’s
rights, to identify the key lessons learned, to inform UNICEF country office in Turkmenistan on
innovations and transformed engagement in these areas and to develop recommendations for the
development of a new NAP on children’s rights.
Purpose: The main purpose of the evaluation is to generate substantive evidence-based knowledge
by identifying good practices and lessons learned from the implementation of NAP. The results of this
evaluation will be highly useful to enable any adjustment/redirection necessary for the planning and
implementation of support under the current UNCIEF CPD 2021-2025 and will provide a basis for the
development of the new NAP 2023-2028.
The evaluation findings and recommendations will contribute to strengthening UNICEF contribution to
the realization of child rights and protection of children’s access to quality services.
Objective:
The key objective of this evaluation is to explore progress in the implementation of the priority
areas, that constitute the program of work under the National Action Plan and identify the main
successes, challenges and lessons arising from the implementation of the NAP.
In terms of accountability, the evaluation will independently assess overall progress towards
intended outcomes, and, where possible, seek indications of possible effects on the most vulnerable
groups of children (incl. children living in the rural area, children with disabilities, children in conflict
with the law, etc.). Indicative analysis of UNICEF’s added value to the implementation of the NAP will
be highly welcome.
In terms of organizational learning, the evaluation will identify and document good practices
and lessons learned from the implementation of the NAP, inform decision-making on scaling up the
different approaches adopted during the implementation and review existing strategies.
The knowledge generated by the evaluation will be used by:
- UNICEF Turkmenistan for further expanding and improving its programmatic activities in this
field;
- ISLD and Line Ministries for planning and implementation purposes of the relevant state
programmes;
- Municipalities, NGOs and other stakeholders for improving their activities.
The evaluation will meet the information needs of its intended users as indicated in the Table 1 below.
Table 2: Overview of evaluation Users and Uses
115
Evaluation of the National Plan of Action for Realization of Children’s rights in Turkmenistan for 2018-2022 (NAP) and
UNICEF’s contribution to its design, implementation and monitoring
Users Uses
UNICEF Country Office Improve the programme strategic notes, tailor strategic approaches
depending on the changing context.
Document lessons learnt and best practices that can inform
development of a new NAP.
All sections UNICEF Incorporate best practice and draw on lessons learned (i) to improve the
Country Office, performance of future interventions in the field of child rights; (ii) to
Monitoring & improve planning/programming of the future interventions; (iii) to
Evaluation unit strengthen the ME component and ensure strong evidence-based
approach in planning and strategizing
ISLD and Take decisions and develop strategic orientations on the NAP
Interministerrial implementation and development of the new NAP, including the
Commission allocation of human, material and financial resources based on the
evidence generated by the evaluation.
Use best practice lessons to accelerate child rights agenda
implementation towards national SDG targets.
Municipalities Adjust and optimize the NAP implementation mechanisms on local
(Hakimliks) level based on the lessons learned from the evaluation.
Adjust monitoring approaches to enhance quality program delivery.
Improve budget allocation and effective budget usage procedures,
harmonization of actions with all actors to minimize expenses and
avoid leaving gaps or overlapping in covering critical needs
Use best practice lessons to accelerate reform implementation towards
national SDG targets.
Partner NGOs and other Build on the evidence generated by the evaluation to improve
Civil Society performance in the implementation of NAP interventions. Strengthen
Organisations capacity where it is lacking.
Donors and other Influence the future design and scale-up of child-rights agenda
Development partners
Secondary audiences: MPs need to be informed in order to introduce necessary legislative changes.
International, academic, private and civil society organizations including UN agencies and educators
should use the results of the Evaluation to gain more knowledge and to improve their advocacy and
practical actions in introduction and implementation of the child rights programmes.
Advocacy and dissemination plan
Although the results of the evaluation will not be known until its completion, UNICEF together with the
team of evaluators will work together to prepare an initial dissemination plan to help focus the project
and identify key audiences.
To provide an overview of the critical considerations, following is a preliminary list of some of the key
elements that will be included in the dissemination and advocacy plan.
- Project overview
- Dissemination goals
- Target audiences
- Key messages
- Sources/messengers
- Dissemination activities, tools, timing, and responsibilities
116
Evaluation of the National Plan of Action for Realization of Children’s rights in Turkmenistan for 2018-2022 (NAP) and
UNICEF’s contribution to its design, implementation and monitoring
The Evaluation Report will be presented to the key national stakeholders at local and national levels,
to NGOs, children and their parents. The Evaluation Report will be made available on the CO website
and evaluation reports database. The visualization materials will be developed and used as an
advocacy tool. Additionally, the Report will be shared among bilateral and development partners.
Suggested evaluation questions
The evaluation will employ relevant internationally agreed OECD-DAC evaluation criteria of relevance,
effectiveness, and sustainability.
For the purpose of this evaluation the following criteria were used:
Relevance: to what extent is the NAP relevant to the governmental policies and priorities and
needs of children in Turkmenistan, particularly of those from vulnerable groups?
Effectiveness: is the NAP achieving its objectives? to what extent is the NAP contributing to the child
right implementation at the national and local levels?
Sustainability: to what extent are the results of the NAP likely to sustain after the programme period?
Due to the nature of work with the Government, limited time frame for the Evaluation, Funding, online
communication and data limitations, inclusion of coherence, efficiency and impact is not possible. For
example, assessment of partnership dynamics will be fragmented, and complexity assessment is
difficult.
Access to the information on financial, human and material resources allocated to the NAP by the
Government is not sufficient to assess if they were adequate to meet the intended outcomes of the NAP
and could be limited only on UNICEF contribution, while this is not what Government will welcome.
With the same reasons, assessment of impact is difficult, especially taking into account, that NAP is still
in the process of implemntation and will not provide a broad picture on the extent to which NAP
contributed to the expansion of child rights, particularly to those from vulnerable groups.
The evaluation will answer the following (preliminary) evaluation questions. These questions will be
further elaborated and finalized during the inception phase.
RELEVANCE - to what extent is the NAP relevant to the governmental policies and priorities
and needs of children in Turkmenistan, particularly of those from vulnerable groups?
▪ Were the needs of children and young people and priorities of NAP identified in developing the
intervention (appropriate needs assessment?) and has the intervention been properly designed to
meet the identified needs and priorities?
▪ To what extent the NAP articulated the objectives related to child rights implementation?
▪ To what extend NAP contributed to the implementation of SDGs?
▪ To what extend NAP contributed to the implementation of child rights, equity and gender equality,
aspects?
EFFECTIVENESS - is the NAP achieving its objectives? to what extent is the NAP contributing to the
child right implementation at the national and local levels?
▪ To what extent the NAP goals have been achieved and attained its intended results in general, and
by intervention component, geographical area, category of population etc.? What were the
achievements in terms of improving well-being of Turkmenistan children, both planned and
unplanned?
117
Evaluation of the National Plan of Action for Realization of Children’s rights in Turkmenistan for 2018-2022 (NAP) and
UNICEF’s contribution to its design, implementation and monitoring
▪ To what extent were the M&E framework and processes adequate/credible/reliable/accurate to
measure outputs, outcomes, and progress? Were the expected results clearly stated and measurable
through identifiable indicators?
▪ What were the causal links, enabling/success factors and constraints/bottlenecks related to the
achievement of results?
▪ What lasting changes – attributable to programming — can be identified in the lives of individuals,
families, communities and the broader environment?
▪ How extensive, effective, and efficient is the transfer of intervention approaches to NGOs and
government actors? What were the coordination mechanisms, and did they help? Have IPs
effectively and jointly identified and addressed gaps in geographic or vulnerable/at risk group
coverage?
▪ To what extent has the NGO collaboration promoted good working relationships with the
government/ local administration to collaborate on community resilience issues?
▪ What are the barriers to the approach adopted by UNICEF and its partners in delivering
interventions, and how has UNICEF and partners worked to identify and address these barriers?
SUSTAINABILITY: to what extent are the results of the NAP likely to sustain after the programme
period?
▪ To what extent did the NAP identify and build on existing national, velayat, local capacities? To
what extent do the partners have sufficient resources to keep up the benefits produced by the
programme?
▪ To what extent are the NAP achievements sustained after the withdrawal of external support?
▪ To what extent have the decision-making bodies (government, civil society, development agencies)
and implementing partners undertaken the necessary decisions and course of actions to ensure the
sustainability of the NAP? To what extent have the relevant systems been strengthened?
▪ For the NAP interventions that are still on-going or just completed, did they include appropriate
measures to ensure sustainability of the processes, activities, stakeholders, outputs, outcomes and
results after the withdrawal of all forms of support from the external development agency?
▪ Are the interventions supported by UNICEF sustainable and scalable?
▪ What were/are and will be the enabling factors contributing to sustainability?
▪ Are inequities between best-off and most marginalized groups likely to increase, remain stable, or
decrease when support is withdrawn?
▪ Will new NAP be more widely replicated or adapted? Are they likely to be scaled up?
▪ To what degree did participating organizations change their policies or practices to improve HR &
GE fulfillment (e.g. new services, greater responsiveness, resource reallocation, improved quality
etc.)?
▪ Has UNICEF support enabled systemic level changes ensuring longer-term sustainability of new
services and approaches?
118
Evaluation of the National Plan of Action for Realization of Children’s rights in Turkmenistan for 2018-2022 (NAP) and
UNICEF’s contribution to its design, implementation and monitoring
Methodology
The evaluation will have a theory-based evaluation design and apply a mixed methods approach.
Relevant data should be collected from programme beneficiaries and key implementation stakeholders
and partners (implementing NGOs, partners, the central and local authorities, Interministerial
commission on human rights, ISLD, UNICEF, etc.). Methodological rigor will be given significant
consideration in the assessment of proposals. Bidders are welcome to indicate preferred methodologies,
and succinctly relate these to the objectives of the evaluation and its questions. While the evaluation
methodological approach will be finalized at the inception phase, initial advice on the
comprehensiveness of the evaluation approach is expected at the proposal stage.
Given the complexity of the environments in which the UNICEF programme is being implemented a
relevant perspective should inform evaluation approaches and methodologies, rather than simple linear
causal models. The theory of change should be articulated in a way that shows UNICEF’s contribution
to a NAP system strengthening through a range of programme approaches.
The evaluation will be conducted according to UNEG Norms and Standards for Evaluation. It will
integrate human rights, gender and equity in accordance with the relevant UNEG guidelines and will be
conducted in accordance with the UNEG Code of Conduct and Ethical Guidelines for Evaluation.
In order to deliver this assignment, one international consultant will develop an evaluation design, to
undertake interviews and analysis, as well as train Young SDG Ambassadors to support the Team in
this process from the regional perspective. The international + SDG Ambassadors will work jointly
under guidance of the UNICEF CO and in close cooperation with both Ministries and other partners.
Taking into account, that Young SDG Ambassadors will be involved, ethical training will be provided
to them and ensure that while meetings with children or other stakeholders all the ethical aspects were
followed. If focus groups or interviews with children and/or parents will be planned and approved,
confidentiality and consent will be taken into account.
Yong SDG Ambassadors will be provided with the clear instructions on what is expected form them and
will be explained what children should reasonably expect in terms of privacy and confidentiality when
they participate in interviews and focus groups.
Considering, that in Turkmenistan there were no COVID registered cases, face-to-face meetings of
national consultant and SDG Ambassadors with potential respondents are possible. However, the
requirement is to follow a 2-meter distance, have protective tools (masks, gloves, sanitizers) and limited
number of people, depending on the room size.
The Evaluation Consultant should clearly identify any potential ethical issues and approaches, as
well as the processes for ethical review and oversight of the evaluation process in their proposal. Criteria
for Ethical Review Checklist will be discussed at the inception phase and clearly described in the
Inception Report. Taking into account, that participation of children and parents, are subject to
Government approval, this could be clarified, only when Consultants will start their Inception Phase and
propose intended meetings and focus groups. In this regards, Ethical Review approval might be required
for those interventions, that will include children as respondents (Focus groups, Interviews with children
or parents).
Consultants are expected to submit a work plan of assignment and to confirm the evaluation
methodology and tools with the CRM Specialist within the framework of the Inception report
development, after careful evaluability assessment and review of available data and information.
In gathering data and views from stakeholders, the consultant will ensure that it considers all the
stakeholders (decision makers, programme personnel, beneficiaries, etc.) with potentially diverse views
119
Evaluation of the National Plan of Action for Realization of Children’s rights in Turkmenistan for 2018-2022 (NAP) and
UNICEF’s contribution to its design, implementation and monitoring
to ensure the evaluation findings are as impartial and representative as possible. The approach followed
from the outset of the evaluation will be as participative as possible. Stakeholders will participate in the
evaluation through interviews, discussions, consultations, providing comments on draft documents and
developing management responses to the recommendations of the evaluation.
The guiding questions for the evaluation against defined evaluation criteria will be further elaborated
through evaluation matrix and used as a basis for development of the main data collection instruments
(based on online tools for use during face-to-face meetings) such as interviews, focus groups and
observations that should be selected considering COVID-19 related restrictions.
Data collection at two points are expected:
• Desk review of reference materials, including monitoring reports and other sources providing
secondary data, project documentation, official and administrative statistics, regulatory
framework and other related documents. Evaluations relevant to the NAP, both UNICEF and
non-UNICEF, and other similar resources should also be sampled for review and analysis. This
is important to understand other initiatives undergoing in human right area and the role of
UNICEF’s in this process. The evaluation is expected to generate clear outcome descriptions
and comparators, and to harvest secondary data and apply some level of analysis at the national
and velayat levels. All these materials will be prepared by UNICEF. If the volume is too large,
the bidders are welcome to suggest approach to select the most appropriate. Detailed List of
Documents presented in Annex 2.
• Data collection with/from respondents (virtually); data collection will be conducted in the
selected sites/ institutions as well as respondents to obtain primary data from programme
implementers, beneficiaries and other stakeholders, and to verify the results observed during the
document review. Target groups including the families having children, community authorities
and decision makers, services providers, concerned UNICEF staff and other relevant
stakeholders in settlements and at the national and local levels will be identified during the
inception stage. All data collection methods and tools shall be proposed suitable to the virtual
mode. While evaluation bidders are expected to offer a gender, cultural and linguistic sensitive
approach that will include field-based data collection and/or validation of findings from
document analyses and survey findings, we propose that two types of analyses be given due
consideration
Data analysis must measure the extent to which the NAP is contributing to the implementation of child
rights in Turkmenistan and to what extend NAP contributed to the implementation of SDGs. The
analysis will cover findings according to determined evaluation criteria, yet, should also demonstrate
statistical validity between variables such as socio-economic and political issues and any other
assumptions and risks that can potentially have effect on changing the course of the expected results.
Key evaluation stages to be conducted virtually by International Consultant, with some support
of SDG Ambassadors:
During the Planning phase the Consultant should start with a review of UNICEF and its partners’
relevant internal documents, including but not limited to project documents, quarterly reports submitted
by partners to UNICEF, sitreps, partners’ own internal evaluation reports, and policy notes, assessments,
reviews etc related to NAP.
During the Inception phase Consultant should elaborate Inception Report which should outline detailed
scope, evaluation framework; methodology; sampling, field visit timing or involvement of Young SDG
Ambassadors as part of the Team, train them to ensure national and local coverage and modality
120
Evaluation of the National Plan of Action for Realization of Children’s rights in Turkmenistan for 2018-2022 (NAP) and
UNICEF’s contribution to its design, implementation and monitoring
(considering the risks related to COVID-19), data collection methods, timeline for activities and
submission of deliverables, dissemination plan etc. The Inception phase will be used as an evaluability
phase and the Consultant should collect and review all available evidence. The Consultant also should
assess reliability of data with focus on disaggregated data for evidence generation to be in line with
“leave no one behind” approach, so that evaluation data is disaggregated by sex, ethnicity, age
and other categories, where possible. The Consultant should use a qualitative, participatory approach,
with stakeholders involved in all aspects of the evaluation and is therefore a shift away from
conventional quantitative, expert driven evaluation methods toward a qualitative participant driven
approach (with focus on the most significant effects on the lives of the beneficiaries).
During the Fact-finding phase (field work) the Consultant will be responsible for collecting data in the
field with minimum involvement of partners or UNICEF’s staff, but through the Young SDG
Ambassadors, as a representative of a Team on the ground. However, UNICEF will facilitate the data
collection and field work required for this exercise. Data collection instruments should be selected
considering COVID-19 related restrictions. While the assessment criteria have been set above, UNICEF
would like the Consultant to use the most significant change technique during all the methods adopted
for the assessment alongside other more rigorous approaches. Consultant should conduct data
interpretation and conceptual work using disaggregated data (by age, by gender, by place of residence
(urban/rural), by the type of the provided services etc). The analysis will be built on triangulating
information collected from different stakeholders through different methods including secondary data
analysis and documentation review. It should critically examine the information gathered from the
various sources and synthesize the information in an objective manner. If contradictory information is
obtained from different stakeholders, an effort should be made to understand the reasons for such
information, including any gender-based differences. The evaluation approach and data collection and
analysis methods should also focus on equity, gender and human rights aspects, be responsive and
appropriate for analysing the gender equality, human rights issues including child rights issues identified
in the scope. Gender equality, equity and human rights considerations will be elaborated by the
Consultant during this phase and addressed across the final report.
During the Reporting phase the Consultant should draft Evaluation Report and pay close attention to
formulating good recommendations, clearly prioritizing 3-5 recommendations for concrete actions. The
evaluation report to be produced must be compliant with the UNICEF Evaluation standards and GEROS
Quality Assessment System.
During the Dissemination phase, the Consultant should pay close attention to involving the key
stakeholders. The Evaluation Report will be disseminated to the UNICEF senior management,
programme specialists/officers, including Field Offices. Findings and recommendations will inform the
work planning process, as well as the CO’s fundraising approach. The findings/recommendations will
contribute to the development of the new NAP 2023-2028.
SPECIAL CONDITIONS AND LIMITATION
The following special conditions and limitation are to be taken into consideration:
▪ Limited data availability and evidence.
▪ Disaggregation of data is limited
▪ Baseline data was unavailable until the Mid-term review, conducted in 2020, that is now available
for the Evaluation as a Results Framework Table and provide brief results achieved under each of
the NAP goal areas
▪ No pre-existing theory of change and will require development of the Theory of change
retroactively.
121
Evaluation of the National Plan of Action for Realization of Children’s rights in Turkmenistan for 2018-2022 (NAP) and
UNICEF’s contribution to its design, implementation and monitoring
▪ Due to Covid-19 situation, no travel is foreseen under this assignment, but support of National
Consultant and SDG Ambassadors should cover regions.
Lack of disaggregated data and baseline data for some of the NAP components might present a
significant constraint for assessing evaluation effectiveness. The data mainly available from
administrative sources and focus on aggregated numbers and not disaggregated by gender, location,
disability, age, social status factors. Such approach presents a significant limitation to the Evaluation, as
the reliability of poorly disaggregated administrative data will require additional methodological work
though some reliable data on NAP might be retrieved from the 2006, 2015-16 and 2019 Turkmenistan
MICS. Sensitivity of some indicators related to child rights, access to justice, children in conflict with
the law and partially on children with disabilities might bring a challenge for evaluators especially
during data collection stage, as respondents might not feel comfortable to talk openly.
Evaluability assessment will be undertaken during the inception phase based on the data and document
review. The identified potential limitations should be closely considered during finalization of the
evaluation methodology and data collection tools.
The evaluation report will not be used for academic publishing.
The following 7 determinants, or “conditions”, will help categorize critical bottlenecks and
barriers:
Determinants Description
Social Norms Widely followed social rules of behavior that are followed
within a society
Legislation/Policy Adequacy of laws and policies to reduce/avoid barriers
Budget / expenditure Allocation & disbursement of required resources that
constrain effective coverage
Management / Coordination Bottlenecks that obstruct accountability and transparency,
as well the impediments to coordination and partnership
Financial access Direct and indirect costs that prevent target group from
utilizing available services or adopting certain practices
from full realization of child rights
Social and cultural practices and beliefs Individual/community beliefs, behaviors, practices,
attitudes
Timing and Continuity of use Completion/ continuity of NAP that undermine the
effectiveness of NAP
Ethical considerations
Considering UNICEF’s strategic agenda to harness innovation and deepen and widen the evidence base
to drive and sustain global progress towards the realization of children’s rights, ensuring ethical conduct
in evidence generation is imperative. This is necessary both in its own right and as a significant
contributor to ensuring quality and accountability in the evidence generation process, especially when
it involves children.
Evaluation methodology should be based on UNEG Ethical considerations and respond to UNEG ethical
guidance to evaluation as guiding principle to ensure quality of evaluation process
(http://www.uneval.org/search/index.jsp?q=ETHICAL+GUIDELINES) as well as on Standard
Operations Procedures (SOP) for Quality Assurance and Ethical Standards in UNICEF-supported
Research, Studies and Evaluations (RSEs) towards Measurable Results for Children in the CEE/CIS
Region and UNICEF Procedure for Ethical Standards in Research, Evaluation, Data Collection and
Analysis.
122
Evaluation of the National Plan of Action for Realization of Children’s rights in Turkmenistan for 2018-2022 (NAP) and
UNICEF’s contribution to its design, implementation and monitoring
Ethical clearance will be obtained before the fieldwork starts through the official ethical approval by
submission to regional LTA holder.
ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES IN THE EVALUATION PROCESS
UNICEF as a commissioner takes the accountability of the evaluation. Managerial function for this
evaluation will be done by Child Rights Monitoring Specialist (Evaluation Manager). Support for this
evaluation will be provided by all UNICEF programme staff.
The Evaluation Manager will have the following responsibilities:
▪ Lead the management of the evaluation process throughout the evaluation (design, implementation
and dissemination and coordination of it follow up);
▪ Convene the ERG meetings; Facilitate the participation of those involved in the evaluation design;
▪ Coordinate the selection of the Consultant;
▪ Safeguard the independence of the exercise and ensure the evaluation products meet quality
standards;
▪ Connect the Consultant with the wider programme units, senior management and key evaluation
stakeholders, and ensure a fully inclusive and transparent approach to the evaluation;
▪ Facilitate the Consultant Team’s access to all information and documentation relevant to the
intervention, as well as to key actors and informants who should participate in interviews, focus
groups or other information-gathering methods;
▪ Provide the evaluators with overall guidance as well as with administrative support; Oversee
progress and conduct of the evaluation, the quality of the process and the products;
▪ Take responsibility for disseminating and learning across evaluations on the various programme
areas as well as the liaison with the RSE Steering Committee;
▪ Ensure that the TOR, IR and Evaluation Report are submitted to external QA review conducted by
external institution;
▪ Disseminate the results of the evaluation.
The Evaluation Reference Group (ERG) will comprise of the representatives of the major
stakeholders including Evaluation Manager, Deputy Representative (or OIC), UNICEF Programme
staff, Regional Monitoring and Evaluation Advisor.
The ERG will:
▪ Provide clear specific advice and support to the Evaluation Manager and the Consultant throughout
the whole evaluation process;
▪ Review the Inception Report and all drafts of Evaluation Report and ensure Final draft meets the
UNICEF-Adapted UNEG Evaluation Reports Standards;
▪ Review and provide comments and feedback on the quality of the evaluation process as well as on
the evaluation products (comments and suggestions on the TOR, draft reports, final report of the
evaluation).
123
Evaluation of the National Plan of Action for Realization of Children’s rights in Turkmenistan for 2018-2022 (NAP) and
UNICEF’s contribution to its design, implementation and monitoring
UNICEF is seeking to contract an international consultant, corresponding to the following
requirements:
The International Consultant should have the following qualifications:
▪ Advanced university degree, preferably in evaluation, human rights, social studies or a related
field. A combination of relevant academic background and relevant work experience may be
accepted in lieu of the advanced university degree;
▪ At least three years’ experience in evaluation, including experience in human rights area;
evaluations using non-experimental approaches; familiarity with UNICEF and the UN system
(CVs required);
▪ Expertise to analyse, good understanding of human rights issues;
▪ Geographical scope of professional experience;
▪ Familiarity with UNICEF work and procedures (possible but not necessary);
▪ Strong analytical skills and statistical data analysis experience;
▪ Ability to produce content for high standard deliverables in Russian and English;
▪ Language skills, ICT skills;
▪ Sensitivity towards ethics with regards to human and child rights issues, different cultures,
local customs, religious beliefs and practices, personal interaction and gender roles, disability,
age and ethnicity.
In order to deliver this assignment, an Consultant will be working in close collaboration with 10 SDG
Ambassadors and Institute of State, Law and Democracy (ISLD) to assist in evaluation design, to
undertake the on-line or country mission interviews and analysis. The ISLD will provide inputs and
feedback to the evaluation report. The Consultant will work jointly with SDG Ambassadors under
guidance of the UNICEF CO and in close cooperation with Ministries and other partners.
The Evaluation Consultant will report to Evaluation Manager and conduct the evaluation by fulfilling
the contractual arrangements in line with the TOR, UNEG/OECD norms and standards and Ethical
Guidelines; this includes developing of an evaluation (implementation) plan as part of the inception
report, drafting and finalizing the final report and other deliverables, and briefing the commissioner on
the progress and key findings and recommendations, as needed.
The Evaluation Consultant should also adhere to UNICEF’s Evaluation Policy, to UNEG’s ethical
guidelines for UN evaluations and to UNICEF Reporting Standards. Evaluation Consultant members
will sign a no conflict of interest attestation.
The Evaluation Consultant must demonstrate personal and professional integrity during the whole
process of the evaluation. The Evaluation Consultant must respect the right of institutions and
individuals to provide information in confidence and ensure that sensitive data cannot be traced to its
source. Further, the team must respect ethics of research while working with children including using
age appropriate consent forms, age appropriate data collection, and principle of do no harm.
Furthermore, the Team must take care that those involved in the evaluation have an opportunity to
examine the statements attributed to them. The evaluation process must be sensitive to beliefs, manners,
and customs of the social and cultural environment in which they will work. Especially, the Team must
be sensitive to and address issues of protection, discrimination and gender inequality. Furthermore, the
124
Evaluation of the National Plan of Action for Realization of Children’s rights in Turkmenistan for 2018-2022 (NAP) and
UNICEF’s contribution to its design, implementation and monitoring
Team is not expected to assess the personal performance of individuals and must balance an assessment
of management functions with due consideration of this principle.
The evaluation should follow UN Evaluation Group Norms and Standards (including ensuring that the
planned evaluation fully addresses any ethical issues).
WORKPLAN AND DELIVERABLES
The evaluation is expected to be completed within 30 days.222 This might be subject to change depending
on the prevailing situation on ground at the time of the evaluation.
The evaluation process at all stages should follow UNICEF Procedure for Ethical Standards in Research,
Evaluation, Data Collection and Analysis.
The Evaluation Consultant is responsible to submit the following Deliverables (subject to external
Quality Assurance):
Detailed Inception Report (IR) in English (Electronic version to be submitted within two months after
signing a contract and initial briefing with the Evaluation Manager, ERB and ERG). This report should
be 20 to 25 pages in length and should be in line with UN standards for IRs. The IR should outline
detailed scope, evaluation framework; methodology; sampling, field visit timing and modality, data
collection methods, timeline for activities and submission of deliverables, dissemination plan). The IR
should also include initial data and findings based on the documentary review and final evaluation
design/plan. The Inception Phase will be used as an evaluability phase and phase to collect and review
all available evidence. This report will be used as an initial point of agreement and understanding
between the Evaluation Consultant and Evaluation Manager. A draft will be shared in advance for
comments and approved by the ERG. Final inception report will be presented by the Evaluation
Consultant to the ERB and ERG and quality assured by RSE Steering Committee, Regional Monitoring
and Evaluation Advisor and external QA institution. Young SDG Ambassadors will be involved to cover
visits into to the velayats to have interviews with local representatives in partnership with the evaluation
Consultant, who will be supporting them on-line. The final list of sites/ institutions as well as
respondents will be defined with the evaluation Consultant.
Draft Evaluation Report in English and Russian (Electronic version of the first draft should be
submitted after completion of the data collection). The draft report should be in line with UNICEF
adapted UNEG Evaluation Report Standards and contain the same sections as the final report (described
in the p. 10) and will be at least 50 pages in length (excluding annexes). It will also contain an executive
summary of no more than 5 pages that includes a brief description of the context and current situation,
the purpose of the evaluation, its methodology and its main findings, conclusions and recommendations.
The draft will be shared with the ERG to seek their comments. The drafts report will be quality assured
by RSE Steering Committee and Regional Monitoring and Evaluation Advisor. The final draft will be
quality assured by external QA institution.
Evaluation Report (Final draft) in English and Russian (Electronic and hard copy versions to be
submitted after receiving consolidated comments and feedback from UNICEF). The final report will be
50 to 60 pages in length. It will also contain an executive summary of no more than 5 pages. The final
report should include all received comments and suggestions provided by QA review providers. The
Evaluation Report should systematically answer the key evaluation questions posed. It should fairly and
clearly represent the views of the different actors/stakeholders. It should clearly give the conclusions
and recommends in a way that is substantiated by evidence. The Final Report should be submitted along
with the Power point presentation in English and Russian (electronic version). Presentation should
222 interested candidates should indicate the expected time to complete the assessment in their proposals
125
Evaluation of the National Plan of Action for Realization of Children’s rights in Turkmenistan for 2018-2022 (NAP) and
UNICEF’s contribution to its design, implementation and monitoring
be based on the finalized evaluation report summarizing the entire process, purpose, objectives,
methodology, findings and recommendations and conclusions.
Dissemination plan and advocacy approaches should be developed as part of the IR and then
discussed/agreed with the CO. Primarily, the result will be disseminated to the CO senior management.
The findings will be discussed at the management team meetings, programmatic reviews to inform the
CO’s programming. The plan for dissemination and advocacy of the Evaluation result will be cleared
by the CO’s Representative.
The Evaluation Consultant should propose a timeline to submit the deliverables in their implementation
plan (in proposals). Necessary and adequate time (at least two weeks) should be allocated for review
and quality assurance processes of the deliverables by the Regional Monitoring and Evaluation Advisor
and External Institution.
The Evaluation Consultant should produce the above assessment and conduct the meetings for
submitting each Deliverable. Deadline for each deliverable to be agreed between the Evaluation
Consultant and UNICEF.
Table 4. Reporting format of the Deliverables
Deliverable Reporting format Time Frame
Evaluation and verification of results:
Home-based consultancy work, to conduct desk Prepared and agreed 30 July 2021
review of the relevant laws, policies, concepts, with UNICEF via
studies, reports, research documents, coordination exchange of e-mails
mechanisms, formal and in-formal services, evaluation schedule,
implementation plan
available statistics. The documents for review to
be provided by UNICEF and the Government.
They should be submitted two weeks prior to the
first consultations with the Government for
dissemination among national partners.
Detailed Inception Report Electronic version in 30 July 2021
1) In consultation with UNICEF and state Russian and English
stakeholders to develop an inception
report with the suggested methodology
and data collection tools for the
evaluation. The inception report should
refine the scope of the evaluation and
evaluation questions and identify
additional data needs. The UNICEF office
in Turkmenistan will then make official
request for data to the relevant
Government offices.
2) Review of the inception Report by
UNICEF and the Government
3) Train SDG Ambassadors for the Field
work and develop structure and agenda
for the required focus groups
4) First consultations with the Government:
in collaboration with the selected national
126
Evaluation of the National Plan of Action for Realization of Children’s rights in Turkmenistan for 2018-2022 (NAP) and
UNICEF’s contribution to its design, implementation and monitoring
expert(s) finalize and agree on the
methodology of the assessment. Initiate
the evaluation by conducting interviews
with relevant partners
Data collection/Field work (virtual, considered Meeting notes, 30 August 2021
COVID-19 related risks). Visits of national participant lists, Focus
consultant and SDG Ambassadors to velayats Group notes
Reporting:
1st interim report (including UNICEF and external Electronic version in 30 October 2021
versions) and incorporation of UNICEF and Russian and English
Government comments
2nd version of report after incorporation of Electronic and hard 30 December 2021
UNICEF and Government comments copy versions in
English and Russian
Presentation of the findings and discussion of Power point 20 February 2022
recommendations presentation on key
findings and
recommendations in
English and Russian
Finalization of the report, including Report in English and 30 March 2022
recommendations to UNICEF and the Russian is
Government of Turkmenistan
Follow up and use of evaluation findings:
Dissemination of the final report to all partners Final Report 30 May 2022
and stakeholders
Development of management response Management 30 May 2022
Response in Russian
and English
All deliverables should be drafted in Russian and English. All reports should follow the structure and
detailed outlines discussed and agreed with UNICEF in Turkmenistan.
All deliverables should respond to UN Evaluation Group QA criteria, including UNEG quality
checklist for Inception Report and Evaluation Report
http://www.unevaluation.org/document/library)
Performance indicators:
a) Timely developed and agreed with UNICEF evaluation schedule and implementation plan;
b) Timely carried inception meetings;
c) Timely delivered Inception Report;
d) Timely carried out field work (considered COVID-19 related risks);
e) Timely prepared Draft of the Report;
f) Timely carried out meetings to discuss Draft of the Reports;
g) Comments from UNICEF and QA institution, if any, to the Draft of the Report, are addressed
and incorporated;
127
Evaluation of the National Plan of Action for Realization of Children’s rights in Turkmenistan for 2018-2022 (NAP) and
UNICEF’s contribution to its design, implementation and monitoring
h) Timely finalized and submitted Evaluation Report (final version after external QA review);
i) Quality and context of all required reports corresponds to the TOR requirements and, if any,
incorporates recommendations of UNICEF and/or QA review;
j) Qualifications of involved staff correspond to TOR requirements.
128