EVALUATION REPORT
December 2021
Evaluation of UNICEF’s coverage
and quality in complex humanitarian
situations: Nigeria
EVALUATION REPORT
December 2021
Evaluation of UNICEF’s coverage
and quality in complex humanitarian
situations: Nigeria
PREFACE
In 2018, UNICEF undertook an evaluation of the coverage and quality of its response to complex
humanitarian emergencies, and as part of this developed 11 country case studies. The purpose
was to generate, through robust and systematic analysis in a range of country contexts,
information on how UNICEF could improve the coverage and quality of its humanitarian response.
Both the evaluation process and its findings have contributed to a body of evidence and learning
regarding the enablers and barriers to delivering high-quality humanitarian action in complex
humanitarian emergencies; these have shown how such barriers have affected UNICEF’s
performance and its ability to reach the most vulnerable populations.
While the country case studies were internal documents, the Nigeria Country Office (NCO) was
interested in expanding and updating its analysis to get an in-depth assessment of the coverage
and quality of UNICEF’s humanitarian response in the country, while identifying enabling and
inhibiting factors and good practice. The decision to develop and update the 2018 country case
study into a fully-fledged evaluation has proved a valuable one, including conducting the second
data collection mission to Nigeria, which was made possible despite the constraints caused by
Covid-19.
This evaluation reveals that UNICEF has been among the largest and most important providers
of humanitarian assistance and protection in north-east Nigeria over the periods 2015–2018
and 2020–2021. UNICEF has been successful in meeting targets, and its generally pragmatic
approach to programme quality has resulted in positive feedback from its beneficiaries. UNICEF’s
broad range of partnerships with both government and non-government partners, alongside
its systematic and generally successful approach to resource mobilization, have put it in a
strong position to deliver humanitarian programmes at scale. The report, however, also sheds
light on areas that require improvement. These include: UNICEF’s approach to target-setting,
which provides little indication of actual performance vis-à-vis humanitarian needs; its siloed,
4
EVALUATION OF UNICEF’S COVERAGE AND QUALITY IN COMPLEX HUMANITARIAN SITUATIONS: NIGERIA
sector-oriented programming; limited and unsystematic community engagement practices; the
complex and challenging issue of a government–United Nations strategy of restricted access to
unsecured areas, which impacts on the equity principle for delivery of humanitarian assistance
in conflict contexts; weak use of digital tools for collecting, analysing and visualizing monitoring
data and information on coverage and quality; and delays in establishing and renewing partnership
agreements, among others.
The evaluation was carried out by an independent team from Itad. On behalf of the Evaluation
Office, I would like to thank Clemens Gros, the team leader, and Pierre Townsend, together with
Monye Chinedu and Esther Igube, for their dedication, expertise and professionalism during the
evaluation process, together with the Itad project management team that made this evaluation
possible.
I would also like to join the evaluation team in thanking Peter Hawkins (Representative), Rushnan
Murtaza (Deputy Representative), Robert Ndamobissi (Evaluation Manager) and Andrea Malatesta
(Emergency Manager) of UNICEF’s Nigeria Country Office for their support during the second
phase of the evaluation. Thanks are also due to the former Representative Mohamed Malick Fall
and Former Emergency Manager Gillian Walker for their assistance in support and oversight of
the first phase of the evaluation in 2018. We are also grateful to UNICEF staff and partners in
Maiduguri and Abuja for their participation in this exercise, namely: Phuong T Nguyen (Chief Field
Office Maiduguri), Boris Matous (Emergency Specialist Maiduguri), Chukwuemeka Henry Okoli
(Monitoring Specialist Maiduguri), Opiyo Nixon (Chief Field Office Abuja), Christina Valderrama
Maya-Alfirev (Emergency Manager Abuja), Olayinka Afolabi (Emergency Specialist Abuja), and
all Section Chiefs and members of the Operations & Security Team of UNICEF Nigeria Country
Office. Finally, I would like to thank my colleagues in the Evaluation Office who managed this
work, namely Jane Mwangi, supported by Carlotta Tincati, and Uyen Kim Huynh and Andres
Ochoa Toasa, who prepared and analysed the U-Report survey data. I would like to thank Celeste
Lebowitz, Geeta Dey and Dalma Rivero for their administrative support throughout the process,
and ProseWorks for managing the editing of this report.
Robert McCouch
Director of Evaluation
5
EVALUATION OF THE UNICEF ROLE AS CLUSTER LEAD (CO-LEAD) AGENCY (CLARE II)
66
EVALUATION OF UNICEF’S COVERAGE AND QUALITY IN COMPLEX HUMANITARIAN SITUATIONS: NIGERIA
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Table of acronyms 10
Executive summary 12
Introduction and context 12
Coverage and quality outcomes 13
How does UNICEF’s approach affect programme coverage and quality? 14
How do UNICEF’s inputs affect programme coverage and quality? 16
Conclusions and recommendations 18
1. Introduction 21
1.1 Evaluation purpose, objectives, scope and target audience 22
1.2 Analytical framework 23
1.3 Evaluation matrix and questions 25
1.4 Overview of methodology and data collection tools 26
1.5 Data analysis and synthesis 29
1.6 Ethics, confidentiality and quality assurance 30
1.7 Limitations 32
1.8 Structure of the report 32
2. The context of the humanitarian response in north-east Nigeria 34
2.1 The humanitarian crisis in north-east Nigeria, 2015–2020 35
2.2 An overview of external factors affecting humanitarian coverage and quality 40
3. Coverage and quality outcomes 46
3.1 Humanitarian coverage 47
3.2 Programme quality 61
3.3 UNICEF’s approach to prioritizing coverage and quality 69
4. How do UNICEF’s ways of achieving outcomes enable or constrain programme coverage and quality? 72
4.1 Programme approaches to strengthen coverage and quality 73
4.2 The influence of security and risk management on coverage and quality 88
4.3 The effect of UNICEF’s partnerships on coverage and quality 93
7
4.4 The role of programme monitoring to identify and address gaps in coverage and quality 98
4.5 Maintaining relevance 104
4.6 Advocacy 111
5. How do UNICEF’s inputs enable or constrain programme coverage and quality? 118
5.1 Human resources 119
5.2 Resource mobilization 123
5.3 Policies and procedures 127
6. Conclusions and recommendations 132
6.1 Conclusions 133
6.2 Recommendations 139
Annexes 144
Annex 1: Summary of terms of reference for the evaluation 144
Annex 2: Evaluation matrix 148
Annex 3: List of interviewees 156
Annex 4: Bibliography 160
Annex 5: Phase 1 evaluation recommendations, management response and follow-up 164
Figures
Figure 1: Analytical framework for the evaluation 24
Figure 2: Four-step process for systematic evidence gathering and analysis 30
Figure 3: Summary of the results of the coverage and quality analysis 44
Figure 4: Understanding the meaning of ‘targets met’ in relation to the number of people in need 54
and UNICEF’s role in the cluster system
Figure 5: Summary of U-Report results, beneficiary perceptions of quality, timeliness and needs 68
met by programme section
Figure 6: Mapping physical access of humanitarian organizations 79
Figure 7: UNICEF Nigeria HPM process and workflow 100
Figure 8: Staffing levels in the Maiduguri Field Office, 2015-2020 120
Figure 9: Number of staff (fixed-term and temporary) by programme area, 2015–2020 121
Figure 10: UNICEF Nigeria funding trends for Other Resources: regular (ORR) and emergency (ORE)\ 124
Figure 11: Proportion of funds available vs requirements as defined in HAC, by programme section 124
Figure 12: HAC appeal amounts funded in USD by programme section 126
8
EVALUATION OF UNICEF’S COVERAGE AND QUALITY IN COMPLEX HUMANITARIAN SITUATIONS: NIGERIA
Tables
Table 1: Scope of the evaluation 23
Table 2: Summary of documents reviewed 26
Table 3: Summary of key informant interviews conducted during the evaluation 27
Table 4: Summary of community consultations during phase 1 of the evaluation 28
Table 5: Timeline of key humanitarian, political and security-related events 37
Table 6: Summary of findings by OECD/DAC evaluation criteria 138
Table 7: Recommendations 139
9
TABLE OF ACRONYMS
AAP Accountability to Affected EQ Evaluation Question
Populations FGD Focus Group Discussion
AAH/ACF Action Against Hunger FO Field Office
AAWG Assessment and Analysis GBV Gender-based Violence
Working Group HAC Humanitarian Action for
AWG Access Working Group Children
BAY Borno, Adamawa, Yobe HACT Harmonized Approach to Cash
C4D Communication for Transfers
Development HC Humanitarian Coordinator
CCC Core Commitments for Children HCT Humanitarian Country Team
CEF Consolidated Emergency HNO Humanitarian Needs Overview
Report HPD Humanitarian Programme
CHS Core Humanitarian Standard Document
CHTE Complex High-threat HPM Humanitarian Performance
Environment Monitoring
CJTF Civilian Joint Task Force HQ Headquarters
CO Country Office HRP Humanitarian Response Plan
Covid-19 Coronavirus disease HRS Humanitarian Response
CRM Complaints Response Strategy
Mechanism IASC Inter-Agency Standing
CTG Committed to Good Committee
DHIS District Health Information IDP Internally Displaced Person
System IHL International Humanitarian Law
DO Designated Official INGO International Non-governmental
EiE Education in Emergencies Organization
EO Evaluation Office INSO International NGO Safety
e-PMV Electronic Programmatic Organization
Monitoring Visits IT Information Technology
10
EVALUATION OF UNICEF’S COVERAGE AND QUALITY IN COMPLEX HUMANITARIAN SITUATIONS: NIGERIA
IYCF Infant and Young Child Feeding PSS Psychosocial Support
JIAF Joint Inter-agency Assessment PRC Partnership Review Committee
Framework RC Resident Coordinator
KfW Kreditanstalt für Wiederaufbau RC/HC Resident/Humanitarian
(German Development Bank) Coordinator
KII Key Informant Interview RRM Rapid Response Mechanism
LHD Linking Humanitarian and RUTF Ready-to-use Therapeutic Food
Development SAM Severe Acute Malnutrition
M4R Management for Results SECTO Special Emergency
MSNA Multi-sector Needs Compressed Time-off
Assessment SitRep Situation Report
MRM Monitoring and Reporting SOP Standard Operating Procedures
Mechanism SRP Strategic Response Plan
MWASD Ministry of Women Affairs TA Temporary Appointment
and Social Development TOR Terms of Reference
NAF Nigerian Armed Forces TPF Third-party Facilitator
NCO Nigeria Country Office UN United Nations
NGO Non-governmental UNDSS United Nations Department of
Organization Safety and Security
NRC Norwegian Refugee Council UNEG United Nations Evaluations
NSAG Non-state Armed Group Group
OCHA Office for the Coordination of UNICEF United Nations Children’s
Humanitarian Affairs Emergency Fund
OECD/DAC Organization for Economic UNSG United Nations Secretary
Co-operation Development/ General
Development Assistance UNSMS United Nations Security
Committee Management System
ORE Other Resources Emergency USAID United States Agency for
ORR Other Resources for Regular International Aid
OTP Outpatient Therapeutic Centre WASH Water, Sanitation and Hygiene
PEA Political Economy Analysis WFP World Food Programme
PMV Programmatic Monitoring Visits WHS World Humanitarian Summit
PoLR Provider of Last Resort
11
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
Introduction and context Methodology
The evaluation was conducted in two phases.
Purpose of the evaluation
Nigeria was a case study for the global thematic
The objectives of the evaluation were to evaluation of UNICEF’s coverage and quality
assess UNICEF’s performance in achieving in complex humanitarian situations (phase
coverage and quality in Nigeria between 2018 1), which covered the period 2015–2017 and
and 2020. The evaluation aimed to identify was published in 2018. In the second phase,
internal and external enabling and inhibiting conducted in 2021, the Nigeria case study was
factors that influenced the delivery of high- updated with a view to publishing a fully-fledged
quality humanitarian action, and to capture evaluation report. Throughout both phases,
good practice and innovation. the team used a mixed-methods approach for
12
EVALUATION OF UNICEF’S COVERAGE AND QUALITY IN COMPLEX HUMANITARIAN SITUATIONS: NIGERIA
data collection and analysis. Qualitative data – are also the result of an ad hoc and intuitive
was gathered through a literature review, key approach to adapting to unforeseen changes
informant interviews (KIIs) and focus group in need, situational context, funding or partner
discussions (FGDs) with community members capacity. The demands placed on humanitarian
who had accessed UNICEF’s humanitarian actors by the civilian and military authorities
assistance. Quantitative data was drawn inhibit access, hinder needs assessments and
from UNICEF’s situation reports (SitReps), constrain programme delivery, which severely
and a U-Report text-message poll was affects UNICEF’s coverage. An estimated 1
conducted in 2020, receiving responses from million people live in areas inaccessible to
2,862 beneficiaries of UNICEF humanitarian humanitarian actors. The ‘Covid-proofing’ of its
assistance. entire humanitarian and development portfolio
meant that UNICEF was largely successful in
The following paragraphs summarize the key avoiding major disruptions in service delivery.
findings, which are reproduced below under
each evaluation question. Quality
UNICEF staff and its implementing partners
Coverage and quality outcomes
displayed a good level of familiarity with the
Core Commitments for Children (CCCs) and
Coverage other standards. Across the sectors examined,
proactive measures have been taken to
Over the past three years, UNICEF communicate quality standards to stakeholders
programmes in north-east Nigeria have been and to support the application of benchmarks. In
largely successful in meeting their targets. practice, the evaluation found that approaches
However, results vary sharply from year to year to quality among UNICEF staff were generally
and across programmes. Inter-agency needs pragmatic rather than standards based. These
assessments in support of the Humanitarian approaches entailed an acceptance and
Needs Overview (HNO) and Humanitarian understanding of what optimal quality looked
Response Plan (HRP), in which UNICEF like, given a unique set of enabling and limiting
participates, have provided a solid foundation factors in the environment. Implicit in this view
on which to base UNICEF’s targeting. While is the notion that quality is not finite and should
data on people in need has improved, UNICEF always be improved upon when conditions
continues to place its focus on sector targets allow. Section staff generally had a good sense
and the number of people it reaches, making of where room for improvement existed in their
it difficult for the organization to determine its programmes and how to prioritize measures
own coverage and actual performance vis-à-vis to strengthen quality on a responsive and
humanitarian needs. UNICEF’s sector targets opportunistic basis.
– subject to large variations from year to year
13
Beneficiaries generally view UNICEF’s challenges, partly due to insecurity and
humanitarian assistance favourably. A U-Report bureaucratic impediments imposed by the
survey was commissioned for this evaluation in Nigerian Government and military, but also due
June 2020. It attracted 2,862 responses from to internal constraints. UNICEF’s components
an opportunistic sample of internally displaced of the response package (i.e., water, sanitation
persons (IDPs) in camps and host community and hygiene (WASH) and nutrition) could
residents across Borno, Adamawa and Yobe not be deployed in time, partly due to the
(BAY) states who reported having received need to obtain military clearance for moving
humanitarian assistance in at least one UNICEF humanitarian cargo, but also because internal
programme area. For each programme section, administrative procedures were not started
77–87 per cent of respondents somewhat or soon enough or could not be completed quickly
strongly agreed that UNICEF’s programmes enough.
were delivered on time, were of high quality
and met people’s needs. Approach to gaining principled access
In the face of the Nigerian military’s tight
How does UNICEF’s approach affect
control over access to affected populations,
programme coverage and quality?
the humanitarian community in Nigeria has
struggled to develop a strategy to ensure
Programme approaches: integration, rapid principled humanitarian access or to create
response mechanism, third-party space for negotiation with all parties to the
facilitators, and remote and mobile conflict, to the extent that this would be viable
programming given their position. As a consequence, there
has been little success in expanding coverage
While there is some evidence of integration into areas not yet secured by the Nigerian
between programme sections, there is scope military and to locations where IDPs have had
to strengthen this significantly by addressing to relocate after their camps had been closed
the underlying causes: siloed work plans and by the Government. Faced with limited initiative
results frameworks that incentivize single- from the UN’s leadership in Nigeria, UNICEF is
sector programming; an absence of in-depth, yet to develop its own strategy for principled
cross-sectoral needs assessments; and limited engagement and approaches to expanding
partner capacity to work in more than one coverage.
sector.
Security and risk management
UNICEF has played a key role in re-establishing
the rapid response mechanism (RRM) in UNICEF has taken significant steps to improve
north-east Nigeria, but the first round of RRM staff safety and security. At the same time,
implementation in 2021 highlighted several security staff in Maiduguri have been used
14
14
EVALUATION OF UNICEF’S COVERAGE AND QUALITY IN COMPLEX HUMANITARIAN SITUATIONS: NIGERIA
mainly to manage security rather than to work in some sectors. However, the Government’s
jointly with programmes to create an enabling ability to respond to humanitarian needs is
environment for expanding humanitarian beset by challenges due to capacity, willingness
coverage. This has led UNICEF to become and budget constraints, which negatively affect
passively over-reliant on the United Nations the quality of the response. The partnerships
Department of Safety and Security (UNDSS), with local and national non-governmental
interpreting its risk advisory as mandatory organizations (NGOs) have enabled UNICEF
instruction on where and when not to to expand coverage because organizations are
travel, and thus contributing to widely held based in (or are willing to travel to) areas where
perceptions of UNICEF staff lacking field UNICEF staff cannot go. Most of these NGOs
presence. Community engagement has also have had limited humanitarian experience,
remained underutilized as an approach to resulting in variable programme quality.
cultivating acceptance and enhancing the Recognizing these limitations, UNICEF has
safety of staff in the field, with the ultimate invested in strengthening specific technical
goal of gaining access and expanding partner capacities, but has overall fallen short
coverage outside the relatively secure garrison on its Grand Bargain commitments on
towns. Going beyond Communication for localization.
Development (C4D), community engagement
here refers to the ‘active participation of people Programme monitoring
and communities in ways that mean their
voices are heard and their active contribution UNICEF’s emergency team has successfully
to decision-making is safe, equitable and institutionalized a robust humanitarian
effective’.1 This includes processes for listening performance monitoring (HPM) mechanism,
to and communicating with people in order to which periodically provides structured
better understand their needs, vulnerabilities feedback on gaps and challenges on a
and capacities, and gathering, responding to sample of humanitarian interventions. The
and acting on their feedback. overall practices in respect of programme
quality monitoring, which is the responsibility
Partnerships and localization of programme sections, leave room for
improvement. Indicators on programme quality
Government institutions and agencies have were not tracked systematically, and partners
been UNICEF’s main implementing partners indicated that there was limited follow-up
for the humanitarian response, which has been with them on the quality of implementation,
effective in expanding humanitarian services particularly because they rarely saw UNICEF
1 XXX
15
staff in the field. With coverage, quality and found that the process of collecting and verifying
monitoring data all kept largely offline, the evidence on alleged grave violations was
Country Office (CO) has not yet utilized the rigorous and systematic, albeit limited to areas
potential of modern IT solutions. currently accessible to humanitarian actors.
Despite capacity and coverage constraints,
Maintaining relevance: analysis and the MRM is widely thought to contribute
accountability to affected populations meaningfully to an enabling environment for
child protection in north-east Nigeria. The
Despite UNICEF guidance emphasizing the MRM draws on some of UNICEF’s core areas
importance of context analysis and adapting of expertise and allows it to demonstrate its
programmes to contextual needs, the added value in the United Nations response.
evaluation did not find evidence of regular Beyond the MRM, UNICEF senior management
context analysis of the programme in north- was perceived to be measured yet steadfast
east Nigeria to ensure that it adapts approaches and consistent in its advocacy for principled
and delivery mechanisms to the changing humanitarian action. At the local level, UNICEF
context. This makes it difficult for UNICEF has registered notable successes in advocating
to have confidence that it is maximizing its on behalf of its partners, for example to ensure
potential to achieve coverage and quality. A the timely deployment of government staff,
comprehensive analysis of the context and such as health and nutrition workers or female
political economy would also go a long way teachers, to NGO partner intervention sites.
towards developing a holistic strategy for the
north-east. UNICEF engages with affected
How do UNICEF’s inputs affect
populations in its humanitarian response in
programme coverage and quality?
a number of different ways, but the variety
of approaches lacks consistency, coherence
and follow-up, meaning that the organization Human resources
is still some way from meeting UNICEF’s
corporate aspirations and commitments on The Nigeria Country Office (NCO) and
Accountability to Affected Populations (AAP), Maiduguri Field Office (FO) have phased out
which will soon become mandatory with the surge deployments and invested substantially
revised emergency procedures. in staff well-being. Overall, this has led to
greater continuity among staff. However, most
Advocacy and the monitoring and reporting personnel in the Maiduguri FO appear to have
mechanism significantly more experience in development
programming than in humanitarian assistance.
The operational core of UNICEF’s capability This determines the range of UNICEF’s
for advocacy in Nigeria is the monitoring and capacity and options for conducting context
reporting mechanism (MRM). The evaluation analysis, developing strategies and designing
16
EVALUATION OF UNICEF’S COVERAGE AND QUALITY IN COMPLEX HUMANITARIAN SITUATIONS: NIGERIA
effective programmes. Attracting a diverse Aid (USAID) funding because of a conflict of
field of candidates regarding gender-balance principles is of concern and should be taken
and nationalities has been challenging. up by the Office for Emergency Programmes
(EMOPS).
Resource mobilization
Policies and procedures
Despite significant fundraising efforts, UNICEF
has seen a steady decline in Other Resources There has been no improvement in the slow
for Emergency (ORE) over the years, broadly pace of processes to establish new or to renew
in step with the decreasing inflow of Other expired partnership agreements since the 2018
Resources for Regular (ORR) programming. evaluation raised this as a significant concern
Underlying this trend appears to be a certain for the coverage and quality of the response.
level of donor fatigue, although the total Delays in partnership processing, often of
volume of incoming funding is still significant between two and eight months, have created
and UNICEF has been able to finance sectoral frustration among staff, partners and donors
responses consistently, on average, at 50–60 and have led to breaks in humanitarian service
per cent of Humanitarian Action for Children delivery. Three years on, there is a pressing need
(HAC) requirements. UNICEF’s inability to to address this now. The supply and logistics
access United States Agency for International functions have generally performed well in the
17
humanitarian response, with UNICEF being a of the crisis in the north-east, this points to
major contributor to the WASH and nutrition the need for UNICEF to develop a vision and
‘common pipelines’, and procurement not strategy for programming in the BAY states,
having emerged as a significant constraint. Yet, including for humanitarian access.
concerns were raised about the timeliness of
off-shore procurement processes. Ways of achieving outcomes
Siloed, sector-oriented approaches still
Conclusions and recommendations
predominantly characterize UNICEF’s
humanitarian portfolio, which affects
Coverage and quality outcomes programme quality. Multi-sector partnerships
have only recently come into focus and are one
UNICEF has been among the largest and most of several steps that can be taken to strengthen
important providers of humanitarian assistance integration. Contingency partnerships provide
and protection in north-east Nigeria, having to a viable option for improving readiness, but
balance and manage programme delivery with cannot address the CO’s underlying difficulties
significant risk to its own staff and partners. It in processing partnerships in a timely manner.
has mostly been successful in meeting targets, UNICEF’s broad range of partnerships with
but targets are set by balancing estimations both government and non-government
of needs against a forecast of the operational partners have put it in a strong position to
capacity that can realistically be mustered to deliver humanitarian programmes at scale,
address them. Therefore, programme coverage but investments in capacity are required to
relative to targets provides little indication ensure quality and to contribute to localization.
of actual performance vis-à-vis humanitarian Overall, there is room for UNICEF to engage
needs. UNICEF Nigeria can strengthen its more proactively in risk management to
targeting and monitoring of programme increase its field presence, together with more
coverage, as well as its accountability, by using systematic community engagement within
‘people in need’ as a consistent reference UNICEF programmes beyond C4D to cultivate
point. acceptance and to make the organization’s
humanitarian response more consistently
The pragmatic approach to programme quality relevant, inclusive and accountable. TPFs
has resulted in overall favourable feedback can play an enabling role in this, as well as in
from UNICEF’s beneficiaries, although there monitoring programme quality, which must
are prominent opportunities to strengthen be led more systematically by programme
quality management through enhanced field sections. The use of digital tools for collecting,
presence of staff, follow-up with implementing analysing and visualizing monitoring data and
partners, systematic quality monitoring and information on coverage and quality – currently
data management. Given the protracted nature largely absent – is overdue and will significantly
18
EVALUATION OF UNICEF’S COVERAGE AND QUALITY IN COMPLEX HUMANITARIAN SITUATIONS: NIGERIA
enhance UNICEF’s management of the humanitarian operation that is entirely within
response. its control.
Inputs Recommendations
UNICEF’s relative continuity in FO staffing Based on the analysis of the coverage
and its significant – albeit steadily declining – and quality of UNICEF’s humanitarian
emergency funding provide strong foundations programming and the lessons highlighted in
for operating a large-scale response. However, the report, the evaluation makes the following
the delay with which UNICEF establishes and recommendations. Additional detail for each
renews partnerships constitutes the single recommendation is provided in section 6.2 of
biggest obstacle to a more agile, responsive the report.
# Recommendation Action to be led by?
Calculate targets and report coverage based on an assessment of people in need and apply
this across all clusters led by UNICEF. Changes in targets should be consistently monitored
1 Emergency Manager
and transparently reported. This will provide the strongest evidence for advocating
adequate resources for humanitarian response.
Introduce a user-friendly digital tool and use it to monitor humanitarian programme
Deputy Rep., with support
performance data on coverage and quality across all programme sections and implementing
2 from Chief of M4R and ICT; in
partners; the software will generate visual dashboards and a community-level map of
consultation with EMOPS
operational presence.
Strengthen programme integration with granular cross-sectoral needs assessments and
by incentivizing programme sections to establish multi-sector interventions, by building
3 Representative
integration into performance reviews and developing multi-sectoral results frameworks as
part of the country programme and annual planning processes.
Strengthen the CO capacity for context and conflict analysis; undertake and regularly
4 update an in-depth analysis of the context and political economy of (a) the humanitarian Emergency Manager
operating environment in the north-east and (b) opportunities for principled access.
Develop a UNICEF strategic vision and plan to guide the humanitarian response and efforts Representative, with support
5 to connect humanitarian, development and peacebuilding-oriented programming in the from Chief of FO; Emergency
north-east, based on the insights generated from recommendation #4. Manager
Secure a more direct role alongside OCHA in the UN’s operations-level engagement in
Representative, with support
civil–military coordination with the Nigerian Armed Forces (NAF) in Maiduguri, geared
6 from Chief of FO and Emergency
specifically to advocacy in support of easing the bureaucratic impediments to the response
Manager
and enabling faster RRM deployment.
More broadly, UNICEF Nigeria should develop its own access strategy that identifies
Representative, with support \
opportunities and specifies roles and responsibilities for the organization, while continuing
7 from Emergency Manager and
to use its influence and advocacy through the Humanitarian Country Team (HCT) and other
Chief of FO
coordinated United Nations mechanisms.
19
# Recommendation Action to be led by?
Establish a systematic mechanism for AAP, implementing UNICEF’s corporate global Representative with support
8
guidance on AAP. from Emergency Manager
Strengthen localization by (a) mapping actors, their capacity and presence; and (b) defining Chief of Maiduguri FO, with
9 a capacity development strategy for local and national implementing partners, considering support from Emergency
the Government’s current constraints on capacity and political will. Manager
Streamline the process for establishing and renewing partnership agreements and set a
maximum target duration, for example 60 days from advertisement to signature by UNICEF;
Deputy Representative, Chief of
10 concrete steps include the restructuring of the ‘advisory’ Partnership Review Committee
M4R, Chief of FO
(PRC) in Maiduguri and increasing the CO threshold for PRC reviews from USD 100,000
upwards.
Consider the establishment of an internal contingency funding facility to enable small, but
rapid and unconditional disbursements to pre-selected partners on a ‘no-regrets’ basis,
Deputy Representative,
11 to support responses to localized, sudden-onset emergencies. This can build on and be
supported by Chief of Operations
justified with the new emergency procedures, which will introduce ‘start-up funding’ for
new partners, although this should also be possible for existing partners.
Ensure that UNICEF staff involved in the humanitarian response have the requisite skills and
experience in humanitarian action. This would include make experience in humanitarian
Chief of People and Culture, with
programming a core requirement when recruiting to staff positions involved in the
12 support from Chief of FO and
response, establishing mentoring arrangements for less experienced staff, and offering
Emergency Managerr
periodic refresher training and orientations on systems and processes relevant to the
response, which should be mandatory for all new staff.
20
EVALUATION OF UNICEF’S COVERAGE AND QUALITY IN COMPLEX HUMANITARIAN SITUATIONS: NIGERIA
1 . I N T R O D U C T I O N
This section introduces the evaluation, summarizes its
purpose and objectives, and provides an overview of the
methodology.
21
1.1 Evaluation purpose, objectives, commissioned a thematic evaluation of
scope and target audience UNICEF’s coverage and quality in complex
humanitarian situations (referred to as ‘phase
1’ in this report). Nigeria was one of 11 country
The purpose of this evaluation was to
case studies prepared for the evaluation,
provide evaluative insights and practical
which covered the period from 2015 to 2017.
recommendations to improve the coverage
Findings, lessons and good practice from the
and quality of UNICEF’s humanitarian response
Nigerian context informed the global synthesis
in north-east Nigeria.
report.2
The evaluation had three objectives:
The final Nigeria country case study report was
Assess UNICEF’s performance in achieving
submitted in January 2019. In April that year,
coverage and quality in complex humanitarian
the NCO prepared an internal management
situations, including identifying internal and
response that indicated overall agreement
external enabling factors and challenges to
and outlined follow-up actions to the seven
UNICEF’s performance;
recommendations that had been made (see
Identify internal and external enabling
Annex 5).3 A decision was subsequently made
factors and challenges to UNICEF’s
for the evaluation team to return to Nigeria to
fulfillment of its protection mandate and
expand and update the Nigeria case study and
role in complex humanitarian situations,
publish the report as a fully-fledged evaluation
including its designated role in the MRM
report (referred to as ‘phase 2’).
resulting from United Nations Security
Council resolutions on Children Affected by
This report builds on the phase 1 evaluation
Armed Conflict;
and sets the temporal scope primarily on
Capture good practice and innovations the time period after the phase 1 report, i.e.
that are improving humanitarian action and from 2018 until 2020 (see Table 1). Relevant
analyse their potential for more general developments in 2021 are considered insofar
application by UNICEF. as they occurred until the country mission in
September 2021 and had a direct bearing on
The evaluation was conducted in two phases. the evaluation findings and recommendations.
In 2018, the UNICEF Evaluation Office (EO)
2 UNICEF Evaluation Office (2019), Evaluation of the Coverage and Quality of the UNICEF Humanitarian Response in Complex
Humanitarian Emergencies: Volume One, Main Evaluation Report, January 2019.
3 Annex 5 of this report summarizes the phase 1 recommendations and shows that most follow-up actions were in fact not
implemented, potentially because the phase 1 report was seen as a pilot case study to inform a global evaluation report.
22
EVALUATION OF UNICEF’S COVERAGE AND QUALITY IN COMPLEX HUMANITARIAN SITUATIONS: NIGERIA
TABLE 1
Scope of the evaluation
Evaluation scope Description
The evaluation focused on UNICEF’s humanitarian response from 2015 to 2020. The phase
Temporal scope 1 report covered the period from 2015 to 2017. This report (phase 2) builds on phase 1, but
focuses primarily on the period of 2018 to 2020.
The geographic scope of this evaluation is north-east Nigeria, primarily Borno State
and, to the extent that humanitarian interventions are operational there, Adamawa
Geographic scope and Yobe States. The evaluation team acknowledges that a humanitarian situation is
beginning to unfold in north-west Nigeria; however, this could not be covered by this
evaluation.
The evaluation did not focus on any particular sector. Instead, it explored the two focal
areas of coverage and quality of humanitarian action across all UNICEF’s sectors, as
Thematic scope
stipulated in the terms of reference (TOR). This breadth in thematic scope meant that no
single programme sector could be covered comprehensively and in depth.
The evaluation is targeted primarily at the
UNICEF NCO and Maiduguri FO, particularly
senior leadership within the CO, field operations
and emergency staff, and key programme
sections. It should also have relevance for
UNICEF staff working in other COs in complex
humanitarian contexts, UNICEF regional staff,
headquarters divisions, the EO, affected
populations, donors and the wider humanitarian
sector.
1.2 Analytical framework
Given the primary focus of this evaluation
on practical solutions rather than theory, the
analytical framework articulates the critical
building blocks and enablers of success for
UNICEF to achieve coverage and quality in its
humanitarian response (see Figure 1).
23
FIGURE 1
Analytical framework for the evaluation
UNICEF Established and Innovative Assistance & Protection
INPUTS WAYS OF ACHIEVING OUTCOMES OUTCOMES
Risk
management
Human
and security Programme
Coverage
EQ5 EQ3
Maintaining Programme
EQ1
relevance approaches
EQ4 EQ3
Financial Humanitarian Equity
principles
EQ5
Partnership
Advocacy Programme
for delivery
Quality
Systems & EQ3 Programme EQ2
EQ1
Procedures monitoring
EQ5 EQ3
In line with the TOR for the evaluation exercise, vulnerability due to, for example, age, gender
coverage is defined as ‘the extent to which and disability.
major population groups facing life-threatening
suffering are being (or were) reached by The quality of humanitarian response does not
humanitarian action’.4 For UNICEF, the concept have a unified definition in UNICEF. For the
of coverage also includes the extent to which purposes of the evaluation, the assessment of
UNICEF is identifying and reaching the most quality is understood to be the degree to which
vulnerable, and is addressing differences in UNICEF is adhering to the benchmarks set out
4 ALNAP/ODI (2016), Evaluation of Humanitarian Action Guide, p114.
24
EVALUATION OF UNICEF’S COVERAGE AND QUALITY IN COMPLEX HUMANITARIAN SITUATIONS: NIGERIA
in its Core Commitments for Children (CCC) in way; and what good practice, lessons
complex high-threat environments (CHTEs), and practical solutions can be identified to
and also supplementary commitments the inform improvements across UNICEF’s
organization has made to (a) the Core response?
Humanitarian Standard;5 (b) technical standards
for humanitarian programming (primarily EQ2 – Ways of achieving outcomes: In
the Sphere standards6 and INEE minimum what ways and how effectively has UNICEF
standards7 ); (c) Accountability to Affected influenced others to strengthen protection
Populations;8 and (d) commitments made by and to increase the quality and coverage of
UNICEF at the World Humanitarian Summit, humanitarian action?
especially within the Grand Bargain.9 In
assessing performance, the evaluation will EQ3 – Ways of achieving outcomes: What
recognize that this list represents a mixture programme approaches and partnership
of well-established and new commitments by strategies has UNICEF employed at the
UNICEF. field level to gain principled access and
improve coverage and quality, and with
1.3 Evaluation matrix and questions
what success?
Based on the analytical framework set out EQ4 – Ways of achieving outcomes: To
above, an evaluation matrix consisting of five what extent is UNICEF’s humanitarian
headline evaluation questions (EQs) and 16 response designed to be relevant and is
evaluation sub-questions was used to assess adapted to ensure its ongoing relevance to
performance and to identify how good practice evolving needs and priorities?
and innovations at the field level contributed to
coverage and quality outcomes. EQ5 – Inputs: To what extent do UNICEF’s
human and financial resource management,
EQ1 – Outcomes : To what extent is UNICEF and systems and procedures support an
UNICEF achieving coverage and quality effective response in complex humanitarian
in its humanitarian action, in an equitable situations?
5 https://corehumanitarianstandard.org/the-standard.
6 http://www.sphereproject.org/.
7 Inter-Agency Network for Education in Emergencies, http://www.ineesite.org/en/minimum-standards.
8 UNICEF (2020), Accountability to Affected Populations: a handbook for UNICEF and partners, Geneva: EMOPS, June 2020.
9 https://interagencystandingcommittee.org/working-group/documents-public/grand-bargain-shared-commitment-better-serve-
people-need.
25
The evaluation matrix is included in Annex
2 of this report and includes the evaluation
questions and sub-questions, alongside
indicators, and methods and tools for data
collection and analysis.
1.4 Overview of methodology and
data collection tools
A mixed-methods approach was used for data
collection and analysis, as listed below.
1.4.1 Document and literature review
Over both phases of the evaluation, the team
conducted a review of internal and external
documentation relating to the coverage and
quality of humanitarian assistance in Nigeria
(see Table 2 and Annex 4).
TABLE 2
Summary of documents reviewed
Type of document Description Internal External
Documents cited in this report UNICEF reports, HNOs, HRPs, CERs 30 43
Access-related Access strategies, reviews, analysis 3 5
General strategy and analysis Context analysis, policy papers 7 9
Policies and procedures Corporate, emergency, logistics and supply, finance 5 0
Programme-related CP, WASH, education, health, nutrition 27 8
Security and risk Security policies, risk management, programme criticality 3 2
Situation reports UNICEF, OCHA, UNSG reports 36 14
26
EVALUATION OF UNICEF’S COVERAGE AND QUALITY IN COMPLEX HUMANITARIAN SITUATIONS: NIGERIA
1.4.2 Semi-structured key informant conducted with community members in two
interviews humanitarian hubs in north-east Nigeria (Gwoza
and Ngala) and in Muna Garage IDP camp on
Semi-structured KIIs were conducted during the outskirts of Maiduguri. The purpose of
both phases of the evaluation. Informants these was to explore perceptions of the quality
included country-level staff, United Nations and coverage of UNICEF interventions.
agency staff, government partners, NGOs and
1.4.4 Humanitarian coverage and
donor representatives (see Table 3 and Annex
quality assessment
3).
1.4.3 Community engagement and focus During phase 1 of the evaluation, a coverage
group discussions and quality analysis tool was developed to
generate quantitative and qualitative data on
Sex- and age-disaggregated FGDs were UNICEF’s performance in accessing those
conducted with community members in three in greatest need of assistance. The tool
IDP camps around Maiduguri in September harvested coverage and quality data from
2021 (see Table 4). In phase 1, FGDs were also UNICEF’s SitReps against the CCCs and
TABLE 3
Summary of key informant interviews conducted during the evaluation
Informant Description # in phase 1 # in phase 2 Total
UNICEF, Abuja UNICEF staff based in the Abuja office 8 12 20
UNICEF, Maiduguri UNICEF staff based in Maiduguri 25 28 53
UNICEF implementing Local, national and international UNICEF partners and
11 20 31
partners: NGOs third-party consultants in the BAY states
Agencies and institutions supported by UNICEF to
UNICEF IPs: government 0 6 6
implement humanitarian interventions
Other United Nations United Nations agencies and NGOs working in Borno
6 6 12
agencies State
Donors Donor representatives based in Abuja 3 5 8
Total 53 77 130
27
TABLE 4
Summary of community consultations during phase 1 of the evaluation
Male FGDs Female FGDs
Location Description
15-24 yrs 25 yrs+ 15-24 yrs 25 yrs+
Maiduguri, phase 2
1 x adolescent women, 1 x adolescent men,
(Teachers’ Village,
3 x older women, 3 x older men, 1 x community 10 28 10 26
Custom House, Elmiskin
leaders
Centre IDP camps)
Maiduguri, phase 1 2 x older men, 2 x young men, 1 x women 0 10 10 10
Gwoza 1 x young men, 2 x older men 9 30 0 0
1 x older men, 1 x older women, 1 x young
Ngala 0 10 10 10
women
Total 19 78 30 46
benchmarks. It was disseminated to section captured through the tool provided a platform
staff in Nigeria before the phase 1 and phase 2 to explore the different factors that enabled or
country missions for validation and discussion. inhibited the attainment of the standards.
Each section was also asked multiple-choice
questions on achieving coverage with equity, 1.4.5 U-Report text-message poll among
and on managing trade-offs between coverage beneficiaries of UNICEF humanitarian
and quality, while also asking respondents to assistance
identify key factors that enabled or inhibited
coverage and quality. U-Report is a text-messaging platform and
data collection mechanism developed by
The results of the self-assessment tool were UNICEF. The U-Report system operated
discussed during interviews with sector by UNICEF Nigeria has over 3.95 million
staff and triangulated during interviews with registered users, one of the biggest U-Report
partners and community members. The data instances worldwide.10 Over 55,000 of the total
10 https://nigeria.ureport.in/engagement/
28
EVALUATION OF UNICEF’S COVERAGE AND QUALITY IN COMPLEX HUMANITARIAN SITUATIONS: NIGERIA
subscriber base indicated that they reside When the U-Report survey was commissioned
in the BAY states and are therefore potential in May 2020, the expectation was that the
beneficiaries of UNICEF’s humanitarian evaluation team would undertake the field
response. Therefore, following a suggestion by mission in autumn 2020. This was eventually
the UNICEF EO in New York, the evaluation team rendered impossible by the global Covid-19
worked with the EO and the NCO to prepare a (coronavirus) pandemic, which led to a
U-Report survey to obtain direct feedback from postponement of the mission to September
beneficiaries on the interventions they had 2021. Therefore, at the time of writing this
benefited from and the perceived timeliness report in autumn 2021, the survey data was
and quality of these programmes. over a year old. However, resources and staff
capacity did not allow for a re-run of the survey
Text messages inviting U-Reporters to in 2021. Nevertheless, the direct feedback
participate in the poll were sent out starting from nearly 3,000 beneficiaries constitutes a
on 27 May 2020. Since U-Report participants valuable source of insights for this evaluation, as
are self-registered, meaning their identities and reported in section 3.2.3 of this report. A caveat
demographic profiles cannot be confirmed, applies, in that IDP and beneficiary status are
the survey started with screening questions to self-reported and could not be independently
determine whether respondents identified as verified by UNICEF or the evaluation team.
IDPs living in camps or in host communities,
1.5 Data analysis and synthesis
or as ‘regular’ host community members.
Screening questions were also used to filter out
responses from people who had not benefited The evaluation team used an inductive
from any humanitarian interventions by UNICEF. approach to data collection and analysis, and
Out of the total 25,205 responses that were to assessing UNICEF’s contribution to results.
received from across the three conflict-affected To achieve this, a three-step process was
states by 10 June 2020, a subset of 2,862 designed to systematically and transparently
respondents indicated that they had benefited gather data on how and why UNICEF has
from UNICEF humanitarian programmes in at been able to overcome challenges to deliver
least one sector. Out of these, 44 per cent lived coverage and quality in its humanitarian
in Borno State and the rest were spread equally assistance in a way that sought to minimize
across Adamawa and Yobe States. Further, 33 bias. This was complemented by the adoption
per cent of respondents were female, 29 per of a pragmatic but systematic approach to
cent were camp-based IDPs, and the remainder analysing a substantial volume of qualitative
were either IDPs or permanent residents in and quantitative data and evidence (see Figure
host communities. 2).
29
FIGURE 2
Four-step process for systematic evidence-gathering and analysis
1. Preliminary 2. Field-level 3. Review and 4. Data analysis
assessment of assessment revision (phase 2)
coverage and (phase 1) • Triangulation
quality • Agreement on • Evidence
• Verification of priorities for assessment table
• Secondary data preliminary phase 2 country • Analysis of
• Interviews analysis visit patterns
• Field-level • Secondary data • Evaluation report
interviews to review preparation and
explore how and • Field-level submission
why interviews
An evidence assessment table was prepared 1.6 Ethics, confidentiality and quality
that summarised key evidence against each of assurance
the five evaluation questions. These summaries
were then reviewed to identify emerging 1.6.1 Ethical considerations and
issues, common themes and patterns. These confidentiality
formed the basis for the final evaluation report.
The phase 1 Nigeria case study report was
This evaluation was undertaken in line with
used as the basis for the updated evaluation
the relevant UNICEF and United Nations
report.
Evaluations Group (UNEG) guidance on
evaluation ethics, specifically the UNEG
Ethical Guidelines for Evaluations;11 the UNEG
11 UNEG (2008), UNEG Ethical Guidelines for Evaluation, March 2008.
30
Code of Conduct for Evaluation in the United
Nations System, which commits signatories to
independence, impartiality, proper disclosure
of conflicts of interest, honesty and integrity,
among other principles;12 and the UNICEF
Procedure for Ethical Standards in Research,
Evaluation, Data Collection and Analysis.13
The evaluation team recognized the importance
of including the views of affected populations,
including children. Therefore, FGDs composed
of members of communities accessing
UNICEF’s humanitarian programmes were and to enable the evaluation to gain access
conducted in both phases of the evaluation. to relevant information, while balancing the
Participation was voluntary and informed requirement of the TOR for COs to receive
consent was sought from all focus group written reports.
participants. Separate meetings were organized
with groups of adolescent boys and girls (aged For the purposes of publishing the phase 2
15–24 years). The guidance on Ethical Research report, it was agreed that analysis would be
Involving Children was strictly adhered to carefully decontextualized to avoid disclosure
and permission and informed consent were where it was considered to be sensitive and
obtained from the children and their parents or the CO would guide the evaluation team on
legal guardians.14 any particular sensitivities. Interviews were
undertaken based on agreement that details
Initial interviews during the inception period would not be attributed to a specific person or
of phase 1 highlighted sensitivities regarding agency. A similar approach was taken for the
information about access negotiations and community FGDs. Notes from the interviews
humanitarian principles. It was agreed that and FGDs were kept digitally in secure online
phase 1 country case study reports would storage. Informed consent was obtained from
remain internal to mitigate risks for participants all evaluation participants.
12 UNEG (2008), UNEG Code of Conduct for Evaluation in the United Nations System, March 2008.
13 UNICEF (2015), UNICEF Procedure for Ethical Standards in Research, Evaluation, Data Collection and Analysis, 1 April 2015.
14 Graham, A., Powell, M., Taylor, N., Anderson, D. & Fitzgerald, R. (2013), Ethical Research Involving Children. Florence: UNICEF
Office of Research - Innocenti.
31
1.6.2 Quality assurance Annex 1). During the inception phase, the
evaluation team engaged with the CO to
Itad’s role: The evaluation was carried out by identify and prioritize key issues for more
an independent evaluation team from Itad. To in-depth investigation and analysis. Some
ensure the quality of results, the evaluation complex areas and topics that could justify
team applied the UNICEF Global Evaluation dedicated evaluation exercises in and
Report Oversight System (GEROS). The of themselves (for example, the conflict
evaluation report was peer reviewed by Itad’s sensitivity of UNICEF’s programmes) are
Evaluation Manager. The evaluation team only superficially covered in this evaluation,
integrated comments from the CO into the given the need for brevity within the
final report. evaluation report.
UNICEF’s role: The evaluation was overseen by Partner consultation: Time constraints also
an Evaluation Manager from UNICEF’s EO, limited the extent to which the evaluation
with practical support and guidance provided by team could consult with UNICEF’s partners
the NCO Evaluation Manager and Emergency during phase 2 of the evaluation. A small
Manager. A Reference Group formed of CO- number of partners (both governmental
based staff reviewed and commented on the and non-governmental) were identified as
evaluation report. interlocuters for phase 2, and interviews
with a wider set of partners from phase 1
1.7 Limitations of the evaluation were re-reviewed for their
relevance.
The main limitations are listed below.
1.8 Structure of the report
Lack of staff continuity: It proved
challenging to interview CO staff present Section 1 of the report provides an
for the entire period under evaluation due introduction and background to the
to high staff turnover. For this reason, evaluation. It summarizes the purpose and
many interviews with people in key objectives of the evaluation and outlines
positions were repeated during phase 2 of the scope.
the evaluation. It was possible to partially
Section 2 examines the context of the
mitigate this through the use of different
humanitarian response in Nigeria during the
sources of information, including document
period under evaluation (2015–2020, with
review and KIIs.
particular emphasis on the last three years).
In so doing, it highlights and analyses
Breadth of the TOR: The evaluation covers
the significant external factors that have
a wide range of topics, functions and
played a part in enabling or constraining
processes within the work of the CO (see
programme coverage and quality.
32
EVALUATION OF UNICEF’S COVERAGE AND QUALITY IN COMPLEX HUMANITARIAN SITUATIONS: NIGERIA
Section 3 identifies and analyses the To share more of the rich data underlying
range of coverage and quality outcomes this report, it includes direct quotes from key
or results that have been produced by informants who were interviewed for the
UNICEF’s humanitarian programme in the evaluation and from UNICEF beneficiaries who
BAY states. It provides an indication of engaged in FGDs during the evaluation field
the coverage and quality achieved by each mission. Sources are not identified by name
of the different programme sections. It or designation to safeguard their anonymity;
includes a summary of how UNICEF has the type of respondent is indicated instead. All
made decisions in its relative prioritization quotes follow the same formatting to allow the
of coverage and quality. reader to distinguish them from the writing of
the evaluators:
Section 4 focuses on the relevance and
effectiveness of different approaches and
ways of achieving coverage and quality
‘This is the verbatim quote from a key
outcomes that UNICEF has adopted in
its humanitarian programme. As such, it informant or focus group participant’.
critically reviews how UNICEF’s ways of - Type of respondent (e.g. UNICEF
working either enable or constrain the implementing partner)
delivery of high-quality programmes at
scale and within given timeframes.
Section 5 examines how UNICEF’s
organization and management of its people
and funds have supported or hindered the
relevance and effectiveness of UNICEF’s
coverage and quality in north-east Nigeria.
It includes an assessment of human
resources, resource mobilization, and
policies and procedures.
Section 6 synthesizes the findings from
the evaluation to draw conclusions on
UNICEF’s effectiveness in reaching those in
greatest need with programmes that meet
quality standards. Based on the conclusions,
recommendations to strengthen coverage
and quality are made.
33
2 . T H E C O N T E X T O F T H E
H U M A N I T A R I A N R E S P O N S E
I N N O R T H - E A S T N I G E R I A
This section examines the context of the humanitarian
response in Nigeria. It highlights and analyses significant
external factors that have enabled or constrained programme
coverage and quality.
19 The designation of UNICEF as education co-lead is the prerogative of the HC in consultation with the HCT.
34
EVALUATION OF UNICEF’S COVERAGE AND QUALITY IN COMPLEX HUMANITARIAN SITUATIONS: NIGERIA
2.1 The humanitarian crisis in number of humanitarian actors engaged in
north-east Nigeria, 2015–2020 the response stabilized at around 100 thereafter
(102 agencies by the end of 2020, and 109 by
mid-2021).18
The conflict between non-state armed groups
(NSAGs) and the Nigerian military dates back
After over a decade of armed conflict, the
to mid-2009, although the Government did not
humanitarian crisis in Nigeria’s north-east BAY
declare a state of emergency in Borno, Adama-
states continues to severely affect an estimated
wa and Yobe (BAY) states until 2013. The situa-
8.7 million people in need in 2021, subjecting
tion escalated rapidly in 2014 and 2015 as Boko
them to new or continued displacement,
Haram took control of large parts of the three
impoverishment and threat of violence. This
north-east states, leading to the displacement
includes 1.7 million IDPs and 1 million people
of over half of the population of north-east
living in areas inaccessible to humanitarian
Nigeria. By early 2015, it was estimated that
actors.
there were more than 1 million IDPs in the city
of Maiduguri alone, with numbers continuing
Since mid-2019, the Nigerian Armed Forces
to increase throughout the year as the conflict
(NAF) have moved to concentrating troops in
intensified (see Table 5).
‘super camps’. With most IDP camps located
within the garrison towns, this NAF strategy
In the early years of the humanitarian response,
has affected the security and protection of
capacity was limited, with only a small number
IDPs and other civilians outside these areas.
of NGOs and United Nations agencies having
It has also contributed to a highly volatile
an existing presence in the north-east. The
operating environment for humanitarian actors,
bombing of United Nations House in 2011,
particularly in Borno State, where all the
which killed 25 staff members, had a profound
major roads – including humanitarian supply
effect on the humanitarian community both
routes – have become dangerous for civilians
in Nigeria and globally. Yet, the engagement
and specifically for aid workers, humanitarian
of humanitarian agencies increased slowly
cargo and assets. Humanitarian hubs and aid
over time, with 62 organizations operating in
the areas by 2016,15 growing to 73 by 2018,16 organizations’ offices suffered regular attacks
and peaking at 117 by the end of 2019.17 The in 2020.19
15 United Nations (2015), 2016 Humanitarian Response Plan: Nigeria.
16 United Nations (2017), 2018 Humanitarian Response Plan: Nigeria.
17 United Nations (2019), North-East Humanitarian Operational Presence, October–December 2019.
18 United Nations (2020), North-East Humanitarian Operational Presence, October–December 2020; United Nations (2021),
North-East Humanitarian Operational Presence, March–June 2021.
19 United Nations (2021), Humanitarian Needs Overview: Nigeria, February 2021.
35
Beginning in 2019, the humanitarian need and to avoid duplication. In addition,
community pivoted to preparing a multi-year the new ministry is tasked with overseeing
Humanitarian Response Strategy (HRS), with the scaling up and better streamlining of the
the first one covering the period 2019–2021, Government’s humanitarian response through
in addition to annual response plans.20 This the strengthening of internal coordination
follows the recognition that north-east Nigeria among the many government entities
is now in complex and protracted crisis, with involved. However, nearly two years since its
both acute and chronic needs, and requiring a establishment, the extent to which the ministry
more strategic approach and holistic response has played a constructive role in strengthening
by international and local actors. The HRS coordination and the Government’s own
provides the framework for planning and humanitarian interventions remains unclear.
coordinating the delivery of humanitarian The 2021 Humanitarian Response Plan (HRP)
assistance that can also catalyze early presents a sobering stock-take in stating
recovery and long-term development. The that the ministry ‘continues to grapple with
strategy facilitates increased engagement operationalization of systems and frameworks
and synergies between humanitarian and underpinning its mandate, inclusive of those
development programmes to address the agreed with the international community’.21
structural drivers of the crisis. It is aligned to
support the recognized capacity of the Nigerian The global Covid-19 pandemic reached
Government to own and lead the response and Nigeria in February 2020. To date, Nigeria has
development efforts. registered over 200,000 confirmed cases of
the disease. The BAY states have also recorded
The Ministry of Humanitarian Affairs, Disaster Covid-19 cases, including in IDP camps. The
Management and Social Development was pandemic has deepened humanitarian needs
newly established in 2019 by the Government and complicated the response in the north-
of Nigeria to enhance its leadership and east, further impacting weak basic service
coordination of humanitarian assistance. The infrastructure.
mandate of the ministry is to provide increased
visibility to government plans, activities and
financial commitments to allow international
organizations to better support those in
20 United Nations (2018), Humanitarian Response Strategy: Nigeria, January 2019–December 2021, published December 2018.
21 United Nations (2021), Humanitarian Response Plan, issued February 2021.
36
EVALUATION OF UNICEF’S COVERAGE AND QUALITY IN COMPLEX HUMANITARIAN SITUATIONS: NIGERIA
Moreover, the Nigerian economy has suffered
‘During the Covid-19 lockdown when there
from the fall in global oil prices and from
was restriction of movement, we needed
measures to curtail the spread of the virus. The
a pass [from the Government] to get to the
consequent impairment of livelihoods has led
community, but only few select organizations
to loss of income and purchasing power, with
were granted community passes. Some
acute effects on the already vulnerable and food
organizations who got the pass started to
insecure. Operationally, Covid-19 measures to
exploit the situation by requesting that we
keep humanitarian staff and beneficiaries safe
hire their vehicles with a pass to be able to
consume time and resources.
access the communities where we needed
to intervene.’ - UNICEF implementing partner
(Nigerian NGO)
TABLE 5
Timeline of key humanitarian, political and security-related events22
PEOPLE PEOPLE
IN NEED TARGETED
2009
Boko Haram starts attacking police stations; deadly clashes with Nigerian
security forces in the north-east
MAY 2013
Nigerian Government declares a state of emergency in BAY states
JAN-DEC 2014 Significant escalation of conflict by Boko Haram across the north-east,
with a corresponding increase in internal displacement and refugee
arrivals in Cameroon, Chad and Niger
FEB 2015
Military operations against Boko Haram supported by Cameroon,
Chad and Niger
MAR 2015
UNICEF declares Level 2 (L2) corporate emergency
MAR 2015
Strategic response plan launched, requesting USD 100.5 million 4.6m 2.8m
22 Dates, events and numbers of IDPs are taken from the United Nations Strategic Response Plan (SRP) and Humanitarian
Response Plan (HRP).
37
PEOPLE PEOPLE
IN NEED TARGETED
MAR 2015
Boko Haram pledges allegiance to ISIS
DEC 2015
Launch of the 2016 Humanitarian Response Plan (HRP) appeal for USD 7m 3.9m
248 million
Joint United Nations multi-sectoral assessment in Bama, Damboa,
APR 2016
Dikwa and Monguno, the first mission of the United Nations outside
Maiduguri, precursor to the expansion of the response outside the
State capital
JUL 2016
First United Nations Humanitarian Air Service (UNHAS) helicopter flight
to Bama, Borno State
AUG 2016
UNICEF declares L3 corporate emergency
OCT 2016
Activation of the sectors (clusters) in Nigeria
DEC 2016
Launch of the 2017 HRP appeal for USD 1.05 billion 8.5m 6.9m
FEB 2017
First humanitarian hub opens in Maiduguri
APR 2017
Humanitarian hubs in Bama and Gwoza made operational
AUG 2017
Cholera outbreak declared in Borno State
DEC 2017
Launch of the 2018 HRP appeal for USD 1.05 billion 7.7m 6.1m
MAR 2018
Three aid workers killed and three female aid workers abducted
by NSAGs in Rann, Borno State
MAY 2018
The Humanitarian Country Team (HCT) endorses Nigeria’s first Civil–
Military Coordination Guidance and Access Strategy
38
EVALUATION OF UNICEF’S COVERAGE AND QUALITY IN COMPLEX HUMANITARIAN SITUATIONS: NIGERIA
PEOPLE PEOPLE
IN NEED TARGETED
DEC 2018
Launch of the Humanitarian Response Strategy 2019–2021, identifying
7.1m 6.2m
a requirement of USD 848 million
JAN 2019
UNICEF deactivates L3 corporate emergency status for north-east
Nigeria
AUG 2019
Commemorating World Humanitarian Day, OCHA reports that a total
of 37 aid workers have been killed since the start of the conflict
SEP 2019 Military-imposed suspension of operations of Action Against Hunger
(AAH/ACF) and Mercy Corps, limiting services that these
organizations provide to more than 400,000 people in the north-east
OCT 2019 Federal Government lifts the suspension of AAH/ACF and Mercy Corps
and issues seven-point agenda to strengthen coordination between the
humanitarian community and the Government in the north-east
FEB 2020
First case of Covid-19 detected in Lagos
MAR 2020
Launch of 2020 HRP with a funding requirement of USD 839 million 7.9m 5.9m
MAY 2020 Covid-19 Addendum to the 2020 HRP issued, raising requirements by
10.6m 7.8m
an additional USD 246 million for the Covid-19 response, to a total of
USD 1.08 billion
FEB 2021
Launch of the 2021 HRP appeal, requiring USD 1 billion in funding 8.7m 6.4m
MAY 2021
Delisting of the Civilian Joint Task Force (CJTF) from the United
Nations Secretary General’s report on Children and Armed Conflict
SEP 2021 Nigeria experiences one of its worst cholera outbreaks in years,
with the north registering 98% of suspected cases and over 2,300
people dying from the disease
39
2.2 An overview of external factors Nigeria, the north-east has historically seen
affecting humanitarian coverage few development and investment initiatives,
and quality including in education and health.25 Access
to education has been historically low, with
more than one-third of children in BAY states
Several contextual factors have influenced and
out of school. Of those who attend school, 72
continue to influence the coverage and quality
per cent are unable to read upon completion of
of UNICEF’s humanitarian response in north-
sixth grade.26
east Nigeria. While the conflict began in 2009,
and the humanitarian response started gaining
Long-term marginalization has perpetuated
momentum from 2016 onwards, it is important
cycles of deprivation and further eroded social
to emphasize that many of the contextual
and economic structures: at the end of 2020,
factors pre-date the conflict. These factors are
Nigeria’s national unemployment rate stood
not specific to UNICEF’s response, but affect
at 33 per cent, while youth unemployment
the ability of the national and international
(people aged 15–24, just entering the labour
humanitarian system to deliver effective
market following education) registered a
assistance, and therefore provide important
staggering 53 per cent. The three north-east
context for the findings of the evaluation.
BAY states ranked among those with the
2.2.1 Long-term underdevelopment as highest unemployment rates in Nigeria: 55 per
an underlying cause of the conflict cent in Adamawa, 53 per cent in Yobe and 43
per cent in Borno State. There is recognition that
the radicalization of NSAGs stems from these
Prior to the start of the open conflict in 2009,
deep-rooted issues of political marginalization
north-east Nigeria was already plagued with
and socio-economic grievances.
high levels of poverty, inequalities (including
gender), underdevelopment, unemployment,
The BAY states’ limitations on human and
poor governance, weak justice systems and
ecological degradation.23 The latest data (2018) financial capital help to explain why the
capacity of public administration and services
indicates that 40 per cent of Nigerians – over
was, and continues to be, overwhelmed by
83 million people at the time – live below the
poverty line.24 Compared to other areas in the humanitarian needs. It also goes some
23 United Nations (2018), Humanitarian Response Strategy: Nigeria, January 2019–December 2021, published December 2018.
24 World Bank data portal, Nigeria: https://data.worldbank.org/country/nigeria
25 World Bank (2014), Nigeria Country Partnership Strategy 2014–2017.
26 United Nations (2018), Humanitarian Response Strategy: Nigeria, January 2019–December 2021, published December 2018.
40
EVALUATION OF UNICEF’S COVERAGE AND QUALITY IN COMPLEX HUMANITARIAN SITUATIONS: NIGERIA
way towards explaining the challenges that of 2021, humanitarian hubs and convoys in
international humanitarian actors have found in and around north-east garrison towns such as
forging effective partnerships with government Damasak, Ngala and Dikwa have been attacked
departments that have long suffered repeatedly. The offices of partner NGOs,
capacity gaps. These dynamics underscore their vehicles, equipment and even facilities
the importance of linking humanitarian, providing humanitarian services, such as a
development and peace initiatives to achieve nutrition stabilization centre, were destroyed. It
results towards resilience. was reported that some NSAGs had conducted
house-to-house searches, reportedly looking
2.2.2 NSAG are uninterested in engaging for civilians identified as aid workers.27
with humanitarian actors, and target
people and assets The hostility of NSAGs towards humanitarian
actors, their unwillingness to engage in
Unlike in other country contexts, the Nigerian dialogue and the Government’s outright
Government forbids humanitarian organizations ban on any activity in this direction have left
or anyone else to engage with other parties to approximately 1 million people in need without
the conflict, be it for negotiating for humanitarian humanitarian assistance in inaccessible areas.
access or otherwise. In addition, based on the While UNICEF and others have been able to
Terrorism Prevention Amendment Act 2013, forge practical agreements at different levels
which criminalizes engagement with groups to gain humanitarian access to people in need
the Government lists as terrorist, the military in complex crisis contexts such as Afghanistan
has restricted aid organizations from operating and Syria, this has not been possible in north-
outside government-controlled areas. east Nigeria.
Even if the Government’s policy were 2.2.3 A strong state with limited will to
more permissive, all available evidence and acknowledge the severity of the
reporting suggest that the NSAGs have crisis and needs
been uninterested in talking to humanitarian
organizations. On the contrary, armed groups Both prior to and after the election of President
have specifically targeted assets and personnel Muhammadu Buhari in 2015, the Nigerian
of aid organizations. In 2020, five aid workers Government did not seem to want to recognize
were killed and more abducted. In the first half the severity of the displacement crisis in the
27 United Nations (2021), Northeast Nigeria violence forces 65,000 to flee, humanitarians targeted by armed groups, United Nations
News, 14 April 2021.
41
north-east. Nigeria had been free of any major
‘Returning IDPs are frequently confronted
complex humanitarian crises stemming from
with challenges in gaining full access to
conflict since the Biafra war in the 1960s. Prior
return areas because of insecurity. Most then
to 2015, the narrative around the north-east
opt to either settle in new makeshift camps
tended to be framed around the security and
in the safest towns closest to their original
counter-terrorism aspects of the crisis, rather
places of residence, or they try to return back
than the humanitarian needs of the conflict-
to their former IDP encampments, which have
affected population.
been closed.’ - UNICEF implementing partner
It is symptomatic that, in mid-2020, the (Nigerian NGO)
Borno State Government issued a 25-
Year Development Framework & 10-Year
Strategic Transformation Plan that does not
acknowledge the vast humanitarian needs, The desire to appear in control and the
despite Borno State being the epicentre Government’s portrayal of the situation as a
of armed conflict and displacement in the domestic security matter, to be dealt with by
north-east. Instead, the document calls for the military, have had significant implications
the voluntary resettlement of IDPs into their for humanitarian access, as discussed below,
local government areas (LGAs) of origin, a and for the humanitarian space in which local
practice that has been ‘promoted’ by the and international actors can engage more
Borno State Government since 2020, in many broadly.29
cases without the active engagement of
humanitarian organizations. In practice, this Even though the federal Government appears
means that humanitarian actors lose access to have signalled some political will to address
to IDPs who are moved to inaccessible LGAs the humanitarian crisis, as witnessed by the
due to insecurity and NSAG activity.28 One establishment of the Ministry of Humanitarian
national NGO implementing partner who was Affairs, Disaster Management and Social
interviewed for this evaluation described the Development in 2019, and the North-East
consequences: Development Commission in 2017, it is still
28 United Nations (2021), Humanitarian Needs Overview 2021, published February 2021.
29 Roiron, V. (2017) A Square Peg in a Round Hole: The Politics of Disaster Management in North-East Nigeria, in Humanitarian
Exchange, Issue 70, October 2017, Humanitarian Practice Network/Overseas Development Institute. McIlreavy, P & Schopp, J.
(2017) A collective shame: the response to the humanitarian crisis in north-east Nigeria, in Humanitarian Exchange, Issue 70,
October 2017, Humanitarian Practice Network/Overseas Development Institute.
42
EVALUATION OF UNICEF’S COVERAGE AND QUALITY IN COMPLEX HUMANITARIAN SITUATIONS: NIGERIA
unclear whether and to what extent this has to the humanitarian crisis when it
made a difference in driving the Government’s first emerged. The lack of significant
humanitarian and development interventions in humanitarian programming in Nigeria meant
BAY states. that there was limited staff capacity and a lack
of meaningful preparedness-planning in place.
Over time, and especially since 2017, UNICEF
2.2.4 The pre-eminence of development,
and other humanitarian actors have significantly
and difficulties in bringing in and
increased the staff and financial capacity of their
maintaining a humanitarian cadre
response, including with surge deployments.
However, as the crisis in the north-east
Prior to the conflict in Nigeria’s north-east,
has become protracted and a sustainable
international assistance was largely focused on
resolution of the conflict is nowhere in sight,
development. The mix of long-term presence
it is important to note that interviewees during
and programmes resulted in a development
the September 2021 country mission sensed
community that had close relations with
that the profiles of UNICEF staff in BAY
the federal and state governments. Despite
states had begun to change. An increasing
widespread underdevelopment, lack of
number of staff members were perceived
infrastructure and extreme poverty of the
to have mostly ‘development profiles’ and
northern states, only a few programmes were
only limited experience in managing large-
focused on these areas, limiting the presence
scale humanitarian interventions, despite the
and engagement of development actors in
continuing high needs.
this region. This history meant that the
international community was poorly
placed to acknowledge or respond
43
FIGURE 3
Summary of the results of the coverage and quality analysis
44
EVALUATION OF UNICEF’S COVERAGE AND QUALITY IN COMPLEX HUMANITARIAN SITUATIONS: NIGERIA
Figure 3 provides an overview of UNICEF’s against target (the darker the colour, the higher
coverage by section over the period of the the percentage). Funding is often cited as a
evaluation (2018–2020). The data was compiled key factor that influences both coverage and
by the evaluation team using the ‘coverage and quality, and therefore funding information
quality analysis tool’ in MS Excel and reviewed was extracted from the SitReps to indicate
by UNICEF sections. The tool uses data from the percentage of required funding that each
the HRP and UNICEF’s SitReps to show the section received in each of the three years. In
number of people in need of assistance by the coverage and quality analysis tool, UNICEF
section and CCC commitments, together with staff were also asked a series of qualitative
UNICEF data on the number of people that questions to rate their achievements and
UNICEF targeted and those it reached with share reflections on determinants of coverage
assistance. A system of colour coding has been and quality. These insights have informed the
used to indicate UNICEF’s percentage coverage evaluation findings presented in section 3.
45
3 . C O V E R A G E A N D Q U A L I T Y
O U T C O M E S
This section identifies and analyses the range of coverage
and quality outcomes or results that have been produced
by UNICEF’s humanitarian programme in BAY states. It will
seek to look across the different programme sections to build
an overall picture of coverage and quality. It will include a
summary of how UNICEF has made decisions in its relative
prioritization of coverage and quality.
46
EVALUATION OF UNICEF’S COVERAGE AND QUALITY IN COMPLEX HUMANITARIAN SITUATIONS: NIGERIA
KEY MESSAGES
UNICEF programmes in north-east Nigeria have been largely successful in meeting their targets, which provides
little indication of actual performance vis-à-vis humanitarian needs because coverage is not reported against
the number of people in need.
Risk is not consistently factored into targeting processes. Therefore, UNICEF sector targets vary widely from
year to year and do not reflect possible shortfalls in operational resources or capacity, or contextual obstacles to
delivery. These include insecurity, funding and implementing partner capacity, but also the demands placed on
humanitarian actors by the civilian and military authorities, some of which are incompatible with humanitarian
principles.
The quality of UNICEF programmes in north-east Nigeria is viewed favourably by beneficiaries, despite severe
contextual obstacles to adhering consistently to formal quality standards. The proportion of nearly 2,900 survey
respondents who agreed that UNICEF’s programmes were delivered on time, were of high quality and met
people’s needs was consistently high, between 77 per cent and 87 per cent for each programme section.
Approaches to quality among UNICEF staff were generally pragmatic and incremental rather than standards
based. Implicit in this view is the notion that quality is not finite and should always be improved upon when
conditions allow. Section staff generally had a good sense of where room for improvement existed in their
programmes and how to prioritize measures to strengthen quality on a responsive and opportunistic basis.
UNICEF Nigeria does not consolidate, aggregate or visualize information on the coverage of its humanitarian
response or indicators of quality across programme sections. Digital tools are suitable and available for use.
3.1 Humanitarian coverage targets provides little indication of actual
performance vis-à-vis humanitarian needs.
3.1.1 Achievements against targets
In terms of coverage against annual targets,
Over the past three years, UNICEF sector programmes have generally performed
programmes in north-east Nigeria have well in the three years covered by phase 2
been largely successful in meeting their of this evaluation (2018–2020).30 On average,
targets. However, results vary sharply across the country programme’s five sectors,
from year to year and across programmes. 90 per cent of all beneficiaries targeted were
In itself, programme coverage relative to reached with assistance during the three years
30 The figures quoted in this section are based on the data collected using the coverage and quality analysis tool (see Figure 3). These
figures are either quoted directly, or averaged across programme sectors or implementation years.
47
under review. Coverage against targets varies It is emphasized that UNICEF’s average results
sharply from year to year, with 68 per cent are against targets that were reviewed and
reached in 2018, and targets exceeded the modified annually on the basis of a range
following year, with 116 per cent reached. In of variables other than the level of assessed
2020, total country programme coverage stood humanitarian needs. Notable among these
on average at 84 per cent of that year’s targets. were changes and fluctuations in the CO’s
programme resources, number of partners
Coverage also varied by programme sector, and level of access to vulnerable groups. In
with the health sector registering an average themselves, therefore, these results are not
of 125 per cent coverage over targets in the reflective of programme performance. Rather,
three years under review. Education and child they may be a better reflection of programme
protection registered 56 per cent and 72 per capacity, and should be interpreted in the light
cent respectively during the same period, while of their operational context.
WASH and nutrition achieved 89 per cent and
97 per cent coverage respectively. In many cases, target adjustments in a given
year have caused relative coverage to either
An overall observation on the number of people rise or drop, even as it remained constant or
reached vs. those targeted across all years is even showed an inverse trend in absolute
the seeming disconnect between the rate of terms. For example, this was the case in the
achievement and the proportion of required nutrition sector, where the target for children
funding received. Some sections reported under five years admitted to therapeutic care
coverage rates of 150 per cent and more in was raised almost threefold in 2020. Although
years when they were only resourced for 20– coverage in absolute terms almost doubled
40 per cent. UNICEF’s overachievements stand during that period, coverage against the new
in contrast to OCHA’s humanitarian dashboard, target showed a moderate decline. Conversely,
which reported year-end results for people in the WASH sector, a reduction in the target
reached vs. targeted between 50 per cent and for access to safe water in 2019 strongly
80 per cent for most sectors and years. The contributed to an increase that year in coverage
inter-agency underperformance suggests that against this measure.
UNICEF’s high coverage rates in some sectors
are the result of under-targeting, among other Notwithstanding this caveat, coverage figures
factors. If UNICEF were to take on a greater do provide a sense of the scale of UNICEF
share of the total sector target and thereby try programmes in north-east Nigeria. The
to close the coverage gap, its own coverage following is a summary of coverage achieved
results would likely decrease proportionately. by sector between 2018 and 2020:
48
Nutrition absolute terms, coverage in 2020 did not meet
the target, which almost trebled that year to
Over the three years under review (2018–2020), 455,620.
the number of women and children accessing
appropriate infant and young child feeding During the period under review, the number
(IYCF) services in affected areas rose steadily of under-five children receiving micronutrient
in absolute terms, from 285,450 to 389,400.31 powder showed a steady decline in absolute
Owing to the fact that coverage targets were terms, from 244,100 to 128,940. Relative to
lowered consecutively during the same period, annual targets, however, coverage remained
these targets were exceeded by a wide margin broadly stable.
in 2019 and 2020.
WASH
In 2018, the total number of severe acute
malnutrition (SAM) cases admitted to The number of people given access to safe
therapeutic care stood at 224,020. It declined water32 stood at 233,970 in 2018. Coverage
to 139,380 the following year, then rose sharply in absolute terms dropped to 169,390 the
in 2020 to 272,800. Despite this increase in following year, then increased sharply to
31 Figures are rounded to the nearest tenth.
32 From 2019 onward, the indicator was modified to the ‘number of people gaining access to adequate safe water facilities and
services as per sector’s standard through new construction and rehabilitation of water systems’.
49
316,760 in 2020. The target for this indicator
was set excessively high in 2018, when
it stood at 1,050,000 and caused relative
coverage to amount to no more than at 22 per
cent. The target was then lowered significantly
the following year, to 149,800, then adjusted
250,000 in 2020. These adjustments caused
coverage relative to annual targets to increase
sharply in 2019 and 2020, to 113 per cent and
126 per cent respectively.
During the same period, annual targets for
access to improved sanitation remained
broadly stable, with a minor increase in 2019,
from 250,000 to 300,000. Coverage in absolute
terms increased sharply over this period, from
94,150 to an impressive 342,100. Coverage
against targets rose commensurately, from 38
per cent in 2018 to 114 per cent in 2020.
Health
In 2018, the number of children vaccinated In 2018, the number of people reached with
against measles totalled 310,130. This number emergency primary healthcare services stood
peaked to 1,395,10 the following year, then at 3,321,770. It increased the following year to
declined sharply in 2020 to 277,050. Over 3,969,670, then declined slightly to 2,627,540
the period under review, the target for this in 2020. Again, annual targets showed an
indicator showed an inverse trend. It was set at inverse trend, dropping from 2,340,000 in 2018
2,025,050 in 2018, then lowered the following to 1,140,000 in 2019, and rising again in 2020 to
year to 720,230; in 2020, the target was 3,713,100. As a result, coverage against target
adjusted upward to 1,186,000. This explains peaked from 142 per cent in 2018 to 348 per
sharp fluctuations in coverage relative to annual cent the following year, then dropped sharply
targets, from 15 per cent in 2018 to a peak of to 70 per cent in 2020.
193 per cent in 2019, followed by a sharp drop
to 23 per cent in 2020.
50
EVALUATION OF UNICEF’S COVERAGE AND QUALITY IN COMPLEX HUMANITARIAN SITUATIONS: NIGERIA
Education coverage was achieved in 2019 with 358, 960
children receiving PSS. For both these groups,
The number of children given access to school coverage dropped sharply in 2020, to 1,490
or temporary learning facilities increased at and 146,270 respectively. Given downward
a rapid and steady pace over the three years adjustments in target levels in 2019, coverage
under review, starting at 55,990 in 2019 and relative to target does not reflect this decline.
reaching 587,820 in 2020. This trend does not At its peak, coverage against targets for these
reflect annual targets, which were far above two groups was 107 per cent and 143 per cent
coverage actually achieved in 2018 and 2019, respectively.
and were then adjusted downward to a level
significantly below coverage achieved in 2020. In absolute terms, the number of children
receiving mine education also dropped, from
For the number of children attending education 211,420 in 2018 to 10,340 in 2019; none
in a classroom, and those reached with received mine education in 2020. At its highest
learning materials, coverage approximately in 2020, coverage against target was 120 per
doubled from 2018 to 2019, then declined by cent.
about one-third and slightly more than one-half
respectively. At its peak in 2019, coverage in It is important to highlight that the global
absolute terms was 821,630 children reached pandemic has affected all humanitarian actors
by learning materials, and 307,480 attending and complicated the response since early
education in a classroom. That year, coverage 2020. Movement restrictions imposed by the
relative to targets for these two indicators was Government led to temporary disruptions in
78 per cent and 96 per cent respectively. programmes in mid-2020. UNICEF has taken
a pragmatic approach of ‘Covid-proofing’ its
Child protection entire humanitarian and development portfolio
instead of creating a separate work stream that
Over the three years under review, the would have isolated the Covid-19 response
number of unaccompanied and separated from programmatic interventions. This appears
children supported by UNICEF declined in to have been successful. UNICEF and partners
absolute terms. The same is true of children who spoke on the issue noted the temporary
who received psychosocial support (PSS). For disruptions, but overall did not raise any major
the first group, peak coverage was 11,230 breaks in humanitarian coverage that would
children assisted in 2018; for the second, peak have been attributable to the pandemic.
51
3.1.2 Needs assessments as a basis for There are essentially two broad areas in
determining coverage targets which inputs and processes external to
UNICEF contribute to setting the scope of its
The collective way in which needs are programme coverage. The first relates to data
assessed affects how UNICEF sets the collection, needs assessments and target-
scope of its programme coverage. This setting. The second touches on policy-making
must be considered when attributing and stakeholder engagement, most notably
results in programming and target-setting. with regard to setting the parameters of the
Inter-agency assessments, and UNICEF’s UN’s relationships with governmental and
strong role as cluster lead, have so far military authorities. This latter area is examined
provided a strong foundation for UNICEF in more detail in sections 3.1.6 and 4.1 below;
programming. the rest of the current section focuses on data
collection and assessments.
As for all responses in protracted emergencies,
UNICEF Nigeria’s decisions on the scope of its Respondents in the evaluation were unanimous
coverage are taken in the broader context of in saying that significant progress had been
the annual response-wide HRP planning cycle. made in the past three years in assessing
The HRP process is mediated through the humanitarian needs in Nigeria. In large part,
Inter-Agency Standing Committee (IASC) inter- they attributed this to the early roll-out of the
agency coordination system, which involves a UN-wide response of the Joint Inter-agency
broad range of participants other than UNICEF. Assessment Framework (JIAF), which was
The evaluation found that the collective nature piloted in Nigeria in 2017 and 2018.33 The JIAF
of HRP planning and decision-making, and the provides a clear outline for needs assessments
system of governance that underpins the UN- and prescribes a set of detailed processes
wide humanitarian response, have an indirect for the response-wide collection and analysis
but profound impact on the way in which of relevant data. UNICEF’s participation in
the scope of UNICEF programme coverage these processes is primarily in its capacity as
in Nigeria is ultimately set. These effects are cluster lead in nutrition and WASH, co-lead
hard to attribute in detail, given the range and in education, and as sub-cluster lead in child
complexity of causal pathways that lead to them. protection.
Nonetheless, they should be acknowledged in
any attempt to assess UNICEF’s programme UNICEF’s leadership across these sectors
coverage in north-east Nigeria. means that it plays a predominant role in the
33 Okular Analytics (2018), Basic Needs Assessment Guidance and Toolbox, Part 1: Background and Concepts.
52
EVALUATION OF UNICEF’S COVERAGE AND QUALITY IN COMPLEX HUMANITARIAN SITUATIONS: NIGERIA
HRP process and in the needs assessments of this work feeds directly into UNICEF’s
that precede it. It is telling of UNICEF’s centrality programming.
in the process that three of the six indicators The quality of collective assessment work
used to forecast additional people in need in done in each of the three annual planning
the 2021 Humanitarian Needs Overview were cycles examined was demonstrably well
taken from sectors over which it has leadership. above average. In Nigeria, as in most United
Nonetheless, UNICEF’s role in the assessment Nations responses, much of the information
and targeting process is not exclusive. Other used in programme planning is drawn from
actors contribute substantively to assessment multi-sector needs assessments (MSNAs),
data, and to decisions on how this data which are coordinated by OCHA. Respondents
should inform the HRP. Key among these is in the evaluation were in general agreement
the Assessment and Analysis Working Group as to the high quality of MSNAs conducted in
(AAWG), which is composed of multiple United Nigeria in the past three years. This favourable
Nations and other actors, including UNICEF, and opinion is echoed in two reviews of MSNAs
is chaired by the Office for the Coordination of carried out in 2018 and 2020 by ECHO34 and
Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA). AAWG’s role is to USAID35 respectively. The USAID review,
oversee system-wide data collection, to ensure in particular, gives high scores to MSNAs
that it complies with methodology prescribed conducted in Nigeria in the period 2018–2020,
by the JIAF and, where needed, to adapt this and describes the latest of these as a model of
methodology to the Nigerian context. ‘best practice’.36 Some of the raw data that fed
into these assessments originated in sectors
From an evaluative point of view, UNICEF’s in which UNICEF has contributed substantially
shared responsibility in planning and conducting to building the required capabilities. This is the
assessments that inform decisions on the case, for example, with Sentinel site sampling
coverage of its programmes raises questions and community nutrition screening, used in the
of attribution. One should note that alongside nutrition sector to generate timely data on the
UNICEF, a range of other actors are collectively nutrition status of vulnerable groups.
accountable for ensuring that the most acute
humanitarian needs are appropriately captured
in the scope of its coverage, and in the rationale
for prioritization that underpins it. The outcome
34 Sorensen, C. (2019), Review of 2018 MSNAs, ECHO, 2018.
35 Okular Analytics (2021), Technical Review of 2020 MSNAs in Protracted Crises.
36 Ibid.
53
3.1.3 UNICEF’s approach to setting targets A striking feature of annual targets across the
five UNICEF programme sectors examined
There is a lack of uniformity in approaches is how widely they vary from year to year.
to setting sector targets. While considerable Overall, these variations are generally more
progress has been made in assessing needs, pronounced than variations in the number of
no standard approach exists to balancing people in need. Given the time constraints, the
needs, responsibilities and opportunities, evaluation team could not investigate these
and to factoring risk into targeting variations in depth. Nonetheless, the evidence
processes. As a result, sector targets are set collected does allow it to conclude that
in a way that does not consistently reflect fluctuations in humanitarian need alone cannot
possible shortfalls in operational resources explain them satisfactorily. At least in part,
or capacity, or contextual obstacles to these variations in targets are corrective, and
delivery. are due to persistent difficulties in forecasting
FIGURE 4
Understanding the meaning of ‘targets met’ in relation to the number of people in
need and UNICEF’s role in the cluster system
CALCULATING CALCULATING JUSTIFYING
UNICEF’S TARGET UNICEF’S REACH UNICEF’S REACH
No Access
People Capacity
in need Others outside the
cluster
Not
No Capacity
reached
by UNICEF
No Funds
Sum of the
targets of
Cluster
other cluster
agencies
Reached
by UNICEF
UNICEF’s
UNICEF
target
54
EVALUATION OF UNICEF’S COVERAGE AND QUALITY IN COMPLEX HUMANITARIAN SITUATIONS: NIGERIA
conditions and capacity for programme delivery and their capacity to take on a share of assessed
from one year to the next. needs. In the case of MSNAs conducted for
the 2021 planning cycle, data collected served
When questioned on the rationale for target- to inform sector-specific severity ratings and
setting, UNICEF and other respondents helped to determine the number of people
acknowledged a lack of uniformity in targeted by a given sector. After this was done,
approaches used. They described a process the task remained to allocate sector caseloads
in which targeting essentially aims to balance among cluster members in each sector led
estimations of need against a forecast of the by UNICEF. By default, targets for UNICEF’s
operational capacity that can realistically be own programmes are often set with the aim
mustered to address them. However, it remains of covering the balance of these needs. Figure
extremely difficult to forecast the volume and 4 illustrates the cascade of needs, targets and
geographical spread of humanitarian needs at number of people reached and puts UNICEF’s
the outset of an annual planning cycle. This is contribution into the cluster perspective.39
due in large part to the fluidity of the situation
on the ground. Although they can be mitigated, 3.1.4 Limited use of risk and contextual
gaps and inconsistencies in the data collected information to guide coverage
remain inherent to the assessment process. objectives
Another important factor, analysed in phase
1 of this evaluation37 and also found here, is The evaluation found limited evidence of
that no standard approach exists to setting UNICEF systematically appraising the risks
programme targets in sectors in which UNICEF related to unforeseen changes in need,
has leadership. situational context, funding or partner
capacity. Instead, the widely varying sector
The setting of sector targets is based as much targets are the result of an ad hoc and
on assessed needs as on ad hoc operational intuitive approach of adapting to emerging
considerations. For example, target decisions issues. Where cluster members are unable
are heavily influenced by the presence of cluster to honour their commitments, UNICEF aims
members on the ground, as reflected in 5Ws,38 to extend its coverage beyond its original
37 UNICEF Evaluation Office (2019), Evaluation of the Coverage and Quality of the UNICEF Humanitarian Response in Complex
Humanitarian Emergencies: Volume One, Main Evaluation Report, January 2019.
38 The 5W data process is designed to provide essential information regarding which organizations (Who) are carrying out which
activities (What), in which locations (Where), in which period (When), and for which beneficiaries (Whom).
39 Source for Figure 4: UNICEF Evaluation Office (2019), Evaluation of the Coverage and Quality of the UNICEF Humanitarian
Response in Complex Humanitarian Emergencies: Volume One, Main Evaluation Report, January 2019, p.53.
55
targets using its existing partners, to fill the at the time of planning. UNICEF then took on
gap on a Provider of Last Resort (PoLR) basis. the remaining balance, which usually amounted
However, its local implementing partners, to 60–70 per cent of the total, according to
often on site and best placed to respond to interviewees.
sudden-onset events, perceive the rigidity
of UNICEF’s partnership agreements as an The approximative nature of the exercise
obstacle to delivering an agile response – a added to the inherent uncertainty of the target-
missed opportunity for expanding coverage. setting process: where cluster members are
unable to honour their commitments, UNICEF
The quality of response-wide assessments in aims to extend its coverage beyond its original
recent years has helped UNICEF to capture targets, to fill the gap on a PoLR basis.40
the most acutely vulnerable groups in its UNICEF staff understood the PoLR role broadly
programme targets. However, it emerged in line with IASC operational guidance,41 as
during interviews that routine risk analysis the commitment of cluster leads to do their
has not consistently informed the process of utmost to ensure an adequate and appropriate
setting programme targets. Rather, there is response. For UNICEF, the gaps in coverage that
evidence that participants in the process have can result from shortfalls in cluster resources
tended to appraise risk in an ad hoc, intuitive are an added hurdle in preparing for and
and often approximative manner. As a result, responding to relatively localized emergencies,
targets do not consistently reflect risk linked to such as the successive population influxes that
shortfalls in resource mobilization or capacity took place into Bama town between May and
deployment, or to contextual obstacles in August 2021.
programme delivery.
Given security and access constraints,
Unforeseen events and unpredictability in UNICEF’s local on-site implementing partners
the funding of cluster members have made it are often the first to respond to sudden-onset
difficult to plan sector-wide coverage reliably. events, which have regularly occurred over the
The process typically involved cluster members past three years. In interviews, multiple IPs
making offers to take on a share of the target stated that the resources they had received
caseload, based on their respective capacities from UNICEF were too rigidly target based,
40 Funding shortfalls are not the only reasons for cluster members’ inability to maintain coverage. In September 2019,
Action Against Hunger and Mercy Corps were ordered by the Nigerian Armed Forces to close a number of their field offices,
pending an investigation into charges that they had abetted the insurgency. In that instance, too, UNICEF filled the gap as
provider of last resort.
41 IASC (2008), Operational guidance on the concept of ‘provider of last resort’.
56
EVALUATION OF UNICEF’S COVERAGE AND QUALITY IN COMPLEX HUMANITARIAN SITUATIONS: NIGERIA
and gave them no latitude to address additional
needs resulting from these events. The process
of reassigning budgets or securing new funding
was unwieldy, according to these sources, and
did not allow for the rapid responses that these
events required. Two interviewees stated that,
as a last resort, they had engaged in an ad hoc
process of consultation with other national
NGOs active in their area, to agree on a way
of allocating the excess caseload that their
UNICEF budget could not accommodate.
‘Project targets and geographical
locations are fixed under the UNICEF grant
and there is no room for contingency funds
for situations where there is an increase
Among the key predictors of a programme’s
in target groups (…). When we have an
capacity to deliver, insecurity and funding
increase in our target groups, we talk to
were cited by respondents as the most
other local and international partners (…)
critical. As noted above, access in north-
to help out and cover emergency needs
east Nigeria is heavily constrained. In Borno
while we engage UNICEF for additional
State, 22 of the 26 LGAs are partly or entirely
support.’ - UNICEF implementing partner
inaccessible.42 Problematically in terms of
target-setting, security conditions are also fluid
and unpredictable, as shown by the disruptions
3.1.5 Other determinants of UNICEF’s
caused to relief operations by multiple security
ability to meet targets
incidents, including attacks on humanitarian
assets in Ngala and Dikwa in 2020 and 2021.
Insecurity, funding and implementing The influence of security and risk management
partner capacity affect the extent to which is discussed in more detail in section 4.2.
UNICEF can meet its coverage targets.
42 United Nations (2021), Humanitarian Needs Overview - Nigeria, Humanitarian Programme Cycle 2021.
57
In these conditions, covering the extra costs
‘During the project, there was an attack of a programme response to an unforeseen
in Dikwa LGA where we implemented emergency can sometimes come down to a
zero-sum game. In 2020, UNICEF could only
interventions. Because of the attack,
finance its response to a measles outbreak
all actors pulled out for over a month,
by redirecting development funds towards
including the community nutrition
emergency activities.47 Overall funding and
mobilizers who do the screening and
resource mobilization trends are discussed
enrolment into the nutrition programme.
further in section 5.2 below.
So we could not meet the numbers we
were supposed to enrol for that period.’ -
Among other impediments to programme
UNICEF implementing partner
delivery, it is worth mentioning the co-
dependence that exists between UNICEF and
its government or community partners. Multiple
respondents in the evaluation acknowledged
Unpredictable funding streams are the other that efforts aimed at building local partner
key constraint to coverage. In the five sectors capacity have not kept pace with needs on the
examined by the evaluation, insufficient ground. This is discussed further in section 4.3
funding was cited as one of the main reasons below.
for missed targets in 2019.43 That year, funding
gaps in the nutrition programme caused the The constraints above were sometimes
closure of three stabilization centres in Bama compounded where co-dependence exists
and Mafa LGAs in Borno, and Jakusko LGA across distinct programme strands. For
in Yobe.44 The same year, funding shortfalls example, while two respondents in interviews
nearly caused a breakdown in the supply of acknowledged UNICEF’s efforts to build gender-
ready-to-use therapeutic food (RUTF).45 In appropriate sanitation facilities in schools, they
2020, low funding continued to pause a risk noted that the pace of progress in this area was
to life-saving nutrition activities. At the end still modest and cited the continued scarcity of
of that year, there was a 44 per cent funding these facilities as one of the reasons for low
gap in the UNICEF humanitarian programme.46 school attendance among girls in some LGAs.
43 UNICEF Nigeria (2019), Humanitarian Situation Report, December 2019.
44 UNICEF Nigeria (2019), Humanitarian Situation Report, February 2019.
45 UNICEF Nigeria (2019), Humanitarian Situation Report, July 2019
46 UNICEF Nigeria (2020), Humanitarian Situation Report N. 12, January-December 2020.
47 Ibid.
58
EVALUATION OF UNICEF’S COVERAGE AND QUALITY IN COMPLEX HUMANITARIAN SITUATIONS: NIGERIA
When questioned on the subject, UNICEF staff was broad agreement among respondents in
in the WASH sector explained that other, more the evaluation that the type of relationship that
pressing priorities, most notably in IDP sites, the authorities are attempting to impose on their
imposed limits on how extensively sanitation United Nations counterparts is based largely
requirements could be addressed in schools. on military stabilization principles and aims to
leverage aid as a force multiplier in the counter-
3.1.6 Access constraints and restrictions insurgency effort. According to this conception
imposed by civilian and military of aid, assistance should not be dispensed
authorities limit needs assessment to populations perceived to be sympathetic
and coverage to NSAGs, or should be used strategically to
win hearts and minds in areas where the state
The demands placed on humanitarian actors authority might gain from broader acceptance
by the civilian and military authorities inhibit by the population.
access, hinder needs assessments and
constrain programme delivery. The United This understanding of aid is incompatible
Nation’s posture vis-à-vis these demands with humanitarian principles. It assumes that
may compound obstacles to programme aid should be subordinated to political and
coverage. military efforts to defeat the insurgency. By
doing so, it precludes an approach to aid based
The system of governance of the Nigeria on humanitarian need alone, and potentially
response conforms with the standard IASC exposes humanitarian actors to greater risk by
model, in which policy decisions are taken preventing them from operating in a neutral
collectively by the Humanitarian Country Team and independent manner. By increasing risk
(HCT), under the final authority of a Resident/ to aid actors on the ground, it also potentially
Humanitarian Coordinator (RC/HC). Again, this constrains their ability to access vulnerable
multilateral model of governance raises issues groups in conflict-affected areas.
of attribution and accountability in some of the
policy outcomes impacting the coverage of Given the absence of a counterfactual, it is
UNICEF programmes. difficult to establish exactly whether and how
a better application of humanitarian principles
Humanitarian operations in north-east Nigeria might be conducive to broader access in the
take place in a highly restrictive environment. context of north-east Nigeria. What can be stated
While insecurity is undoubtedly the most with more certainty is that the administrative
constraining factor for humanitarian actors and logistical restrictions placed by the Borno
in the north-east, the restrictions placed on State Government and the Nigerian military on
humanitarian operations by the civilian and the operational independence of the United
military authorities come a close second, as Nations do, on the whole, inhibit humanitarian
further discussed in section 4.1 below. There access. By extension, they are also inhibitive
59
of UNICEF programme coverage. This is their responsiveness and capacity to adapt
discussed in further detail in sections 4.1 and to changing circumstances on the ground.
4.2 below. This has immediate implications for UNICEF,
for example, given its lead role in the RRM,
The evidence collected suggests that the net for which a lead time of four to six weeks to
effect of government restrictions on the conduct obtain clearance from NAF for the movement
of humanitarian operations in north-east Nigeria of goods is a significant obstacle, as discussed
is twofold. First, it limits the feasibility of needs in section 4.1.2.
assessments and programme delivery outside
areas controlled by the Government. An There was unanimous concern among
estimated 1 million people live in these areas.48 respondents about the demands imposed on
This group has been included in the 2021 HRP them by the civilian and military authorities.
estimate of people in need, yet cannot so far There was a widely held view that more
be included in programme targets. Given the should be done to assert the United Nations’
absence of basic services in out-of-reach areas, independence from the Nigerian authorities,
levels of vulnerability in this group are assumed and that doing so would be directly conducive
to be extremely high. to improvements in access and coverage. The
extent to which this might indeed be the case
Second, the restrictions imposed on is discussed further in section 4.1.3 below.
humanitarian operations considerably limit
48 United Nations (2021), Humanitarian Response Plan – Nigeria: 2021.
60
EVALUATION OF UNICEF’S COVERAGE AND QUALITY IN COMPLEX HUMANITARIAN SITUATIONS: NIGERIA
3.2 Programme quality feasibility of person-to-person engagement
was acknowledged a major impediment to
3.2.1 Efforts to introduce and maintain programme quality.
quality standards
Quality considerations are integral to UNICEF ‘When UNICEF visit the field, they offer
programme planning and implementation. us advice on how to improve quality
Across the sectors examined, proactive and they also come with us when we do
measures have been taken to communicate distributions in the community. Sometimes
quality standards to programme staff and they invite us to their office to discuss
stakeholders, and to support the application difficulties and they provide mentorship
of benchmarks. The supervisory support
support.’ - UNICEF implementing partner
provided by UNICEF to its partners is well
received, but remains constrained by the
limitations on the field presence of UNICEF
Across the sectors, the evaluation found
staff. Given the complexity of the context
that specific measures have been adopted
in north-east Nigeria, the evaluation found
to support quality in programme delivery. For
that staff considered programme quality as
example, responses provided by UNICEF
a matter of professional ethics and culture
staff using the coverage and quality analysis
at least as much as it was about programme
tool suggest that disaggregating assessment
tools and processes.
data is now an established practice, and that
this disaggregation does inform programme
UNICEF personnel interviewed for the
approaches to reaching the most vulnerable
evaluation displayed a good level of familiarity
groups in targeted populations. Humanitarian
with the CCC and how these apply in their
performance monitoring (HPM) has been used
respective sectors. The notion of quality as a
as a mechanism to strengthen quality, as well
professional value was viewed as especially
as programmatic monitoring visits (PMV), albeit
relevant, given the contextual challenges
to a lesser extent, as discussed in section 4.4
involved in implementing more process-based
below.
approaches to programme quality. In line with
this, high value was placed on person-to-person
At sector level, there is good evidence that as
approaches to quality. In particular, supervisory
the response has become protracted, more
support and mentoring were viewed by both
deliberate investments in time and resources
UNICEF staff and their counterparts as the
have been made to ensure the quality of
best medium for conveying and maintaining
services whose provision is now clearly
quality standards. Conversely, the limited
understood to be set in the long term. In
61
some cases, such as in WASH and education, counterparts, and to help build local capacity to
quality standards and approaches have evolved monitor and report on these standards. In the
accordingly. In WASH, minimal standards education sector, for example, several hundred
in daily water supply per person have been quality assurance officers and mentors have
raised, where improved systems for delivery been trained to disseminate knowledge
allow. The design of sanitation facilities has on quality standards, and to support their
also been standardized, in view of the need to application.
ensure broader compliance with standards. In
education, staff stated that the overall teacher– In all sectors, programme quality was found
student ratio had improved significantly in to be integral to the provision of training to
areas covered by UNICEF programmes. The community and government workers. In
gradual mainstreaming of the ‘Teaching at nutrition, refresher courses are periodically
the Right Level’ approach has continued, conducted for government health workers and
where possible, with the aim of ensuring community nutrition mobilizers. In education,
that the schooling provided can be more training provided to teachers covers thematic
specifically targeted to the various groups of areas inherently geared to quality, such as
children covered by the programme. In health, classroom management and PSS. In the child
management and reporting practices aimed at protection sector, government, community and
quality have been mainstreamed. While the implementing partner staff are trained to apply
health-related indicators used at field level are quality norms set out in UNICEF guidance and
not designed to track programme quality per se, standard operating procedures. Adherence
they nonetheless offer a basis for substantive to these standards is supported by their use
quality monitoring.49 These indicators provide of dedicated case management tools. In
context for quarterly meetings held with health nutrition, likewise, the evaluation found that
facilities at LGA level. They allow UNICEF staff quality benchmarks were widely known and
or TPFs to get a sense of whether good practice understood by government and community
is adhered to, and what remedial measures are workers. A majority of IPs stated that in their
called for in the event of quality shortfalls. estimation, community nutrition mobilizers are,
in general, appropriately trained and supported
The evaluation found that programme sections to meet standards in nutrition screening and
have worked consistently to communicate enrolment.
quality standards to partners and local
49 These indicators included metrics on stocks, morbidity, number and profile of patients treated and staff attendance.
62
EVALUATION OF UNICEF’S COVERAGE AND QUALITY IN COMPLEX HUMANITARIAN SITUATIONS: NIGERIA
Across all sectors examined, the volume of also conducted on a regular basis, in locations
training provided by UNICEF was substantial, where this was possible. While access and
given the contextual constraints. Multiple coverage limitations in the deployment of
implementing partners expressed the view TPFs were widely acknowledged, a majority
that training activities were aimed on a priority of implementing partner sources nonetheless
basis to government and community workers, stated that their working relationship with
with too little provided to non-governmental facilitators was helpful and well received.
implementing partners. They had concerns
that this might eventually give rise to a 3.2.2 Contextual obstacles undermining
disparity in competencies between them and the application of quality
their government or community counterparts. benchmarks
Another recurrent comment was that training
was too narrowly focused on programme Despite sustained and deliberate efforts
activities, and did not cover broader aspects to achieve programme quality, contextual
of programme management, as discussed in obstacles severely undermine the consistent
more detail in section 4.3.2. application of quality benchmarks in
UNICEF interventions, most prominently in
issues related to insecurity, lack of access,
‘I will score UNICEF 100 per cent in the funding shortfalls, unpredictability in the
training of health workers for the effective scale of needs, and low or uneven capacity
delivery of clinical services; but I will score among LGA-level counterparts.
them about 40 per cent for institutional or
Despite the measures and approaches
agency-wide capacity development.’
described above, UNICEF sector staff
- UNICEF implementing partner
recognized in interviews that, given a highly
adverse operating environment, quality
standards could not be consistently maintained
These observations notwithstanding, the
across the range of locations covered by their
prevailing view among government and NGO
programmes. A recurrent observation was
partners interviewed was that UNICEF’s
that although CCC and other quality standards
training and support geared towards
were attainable in the right conditions, whether
programme quality were satisfactory, and
or not they were in fact achieved depended
measurably informed implementation practice.
heavily on the operating environment. Although
In health and nutrition, there was a sense that
the usefulness of these standards in providing
this support was systematic; management
clarity on ‘what good outcomes look like’ was
and reporting mechanisms were stated by
widely acknowledged, interviewees were more
several implementing partners to be well
guarded on their potential use for summative
structured and clearly established. In education
or accountability purposes.
and child protection, project site visits were
63
impediments to quality most often mentioned
in interviews were lack of access, funding
shortfalls, unpredictability in the scale of needs,
and low or uneven capacity among LGA-
level counterparts. Among these obstacles,
the latter was generally viewed as the most
challenging. Other obstacles, such as lack of
access or funding, were considered problematic
mostly in their ultimate effect of constraining
UNICEF support to local counterparts, and the
localization of the aid effort. In much of 2021,
for example, hostilities in Dikwa and Mobbar
caused these LGAs to become temporarily
inaccessible, with prolonged interruptions in
UNICEF supply lines and supervisory support
to community and government workers
involved in aid programmes in these areas.
This adversely impacted nutrition and WASH
activities in these localities, according to
UNICEF staff.
Their perspective in that respect is more
nuanced than that reflected in responses to the According to multiple UNICEF implementing
quality and coverage analysis tool (see Figure partners interviewed in Maiduguri, the forced
3). In the questionnaire, programme sectors relocation of IDPs from camps to remote and
generally rate the quality of their interventions often unsafe areas, which began in late 2020,
favourably, with four of the five sectors has had a significant impact on programme
stating that they had ‘mostly’ succeeded in quality. In multiple cases, dedicated training
maintaining CCC and other quality standards. In provided to government and implementing
interviews, sector staff caveated this positive partner staff who were due to be assigned to
self-assessment. The majority acknowledged camps was lost, as insecurity and a need for
that a range of contextual factors hampered security clearance for access to IDP relocation
the maintenance of quality standards, both sites caused staff to be both unwilling and
geographically and over time. unable to redeploy there. In the education
sector, programme quality was generally
There was a shared recognition across the the most consistent in host communities,
sectors of the challenges inherent in quality according to staff, as activities there could rely
monitoring, and in the maintenance of on better community engagement and a more
quality standards in north-east Nigeria. The stable base of local government counterparts.
64
EVALUATION OF UNICEF’S COVERAGE AND QUALITY IN COMPLEX HUMANITARIAN SITUATIONS: NIGERIA
programmatic mindset likely accounts
‘The Government’s policy on camp for the high level of satisfaction recorded
closures affected our ability to reach among UNICEF beneficiaries.
children initially, because most of the
Given the constraints detailed above,
learning centres were set up in IDP
approaches to quality among UNICEF staff
camps. Insecurity limited the possibility
interviewed were generally pragmatic rather
of expanding learning centres to
than standards based. These approaches
communities outside of Maiduguri town.’
entailed an acceptance and understanding
- UNICEF implementing partner
of what optimal quality looked like, given a
unique set of enabling and limiting factors in
the environment. Several of these sources
referenced the ‘good enough’ principle, which
In the WASH sector, according to UNICEF
posits that the first priority of humanitarian
staff, quality standards were often more readily
programmes is to address the immediate
attainable in IDP camps than in other sites, given
requirements of crisis-affected groups, rather
the presence there of implementing partners,
than to deliver an elaborate response to their
and the availability of camp management
needs. Implicit in this view is the notion
capabilities that could be drawn on for quality
that quality is not finite and should always
control and maintenance. Conversely, multiple
be improved upon when conditions allow.
sources, including UNICEF and implementing
However, other UNICEF staff were concerned
partner staff, stated that it was very difficult to
that ‘nearly 12 years after the start of the crisis
sustain quality standards in areas to which IDPs
we should be way past the “good enough”
had been relocated, given access constraints
approach’, suggesting that there should have
and the absence in these areas of a strong
been sufficient time to professionalize and
enough network of local counterparts.
standardize the quality of the response.
3.2.3 Pragmatic perspectives on
The evaluation found that UNICEF section staff
programme quality and beneficiary
generally had a good sense of where room for
perceptions
improvement existed in their programmes,
and knew how to prioritize measures to build
Given the contextual constraints to the
quality on a responsive and opportunistic basis.
consistent maintenance of standards,
The advocacy work done by UNICEF sector
UNICEF staff approach quality pragmatically.
staff on behalf of their implementing partners,
An underlying assumption among UNICEF
mentioned in section 4.6 below, is a good
interviewees was that quality could
example of this.
always be improved upon, regardless of
the standards met. At least in part, this
65
At least in part, this pragmatic outlook may In nutrition, the services most frequently
explain why, despite severe contextual received were treatment for SAM (39 per
obstacles to adhering consistently to formal cent), IYCF (17 per cent), and micronutrient
quality standards, UNICEF programmes in powder (7 per cent). In total, 80 per cent of the
north-east Nigeria are viewed favourably by respondents agreed that the services provided
their beneficiaries. This positive outlook is had been of good quality, 78 per cent agreed
captured in a U-Report survey of self-reporting that they had been timely, and 77 per cent
beneficiaries in June 2020 (see section 1.4.5).50 agreed that they had met needs.
Among all respondents, health (26 per cent)
and education (25 per cent) were the services ‘They give us maganin tamuwa (RUTF) to
most frequently received, followed by nutrition give the children and they also teach us
(16 per cent), coronavirus information (12 per how to prepare food that will make them
cent), WASH (9 per cent) and child protection
grow well.’ -FGD participant
(4 per cent).51 The beneficiaries were asked
to what extent the assistance delivered in the
respective programme area was timely, of
In education, the provision of learning materials
satisfactory quality, and whether it met their
(61 per cent), regular access to school/teachers
needs (see Figure 5).
(13 per cent) and the provision of school
uniforms (8 per cent) were the services most
In health, the provision of drugs (39 per cent),
frequently received. In total, 86 per cent of the
other support (14 per cent) and medical
respondents agreed that the services provided
consultations (12 per cent) were the services
had been of good quality, 87 per cent agreed
more frequently provided. In total, 85 per cent
that they had been timely, and 79 per cent
of the respondents agreed that the services
agreed that they had met needs.
provided had been of good quality, 81 per cent
agreed that they had been timely, and 81 per
cent agreed that they had met needs.52
50 The polling period ran from 27 May 2020 until 10 June 2020. A total of 25,205 responses were received across the three states.
Analytical report: UNICEF (2020), U-Report North-East Nigeria Humanitarian Evaluation, analysis by A.O. Toasa,
September 2020, re-analysed and updated by C. Gros, September 2021.
51 These figures should be interpreted in light of the fact that some respondents or their household members may not have been
aware of assistance they received from UNICEF. For example, this is particularly likely to be the case in WASH and Child
Protection.
52 Responses presented here conflate ‘somewhat agree’ and ‘strongly agree’ responses made in the survey.
66
EVALUATION OF UNICEF’S COVERAGE AND QUALITY IN COMPLEX HUMANITARIAN SITUATIONS: NIGERIA
‘I made sure my children attended school ‘The water points are not close to
every day because I didn’t have to worry our homes for all of us. It depends on
too much knowing that they had at least where you live. For my family, we get a
one meal a day. The school feeding wheelbarrow to carry jerrycans of water
programme helped us to save money to from the waterpoint to the house because
solve other important problems that we it is not so close.’ -FGD participant
had.’ -FGD participant
In child protection, child-friendly spaces (21 per
In WASH, the services most frequently cent), PSS (20 per cent) and family reunification
received were water for drinking/cooking (26 (15 per cent) were the services most often
per cent), WASH kits (19 per cent) and water received. In total, 87 per cent of the respondents
treatment (14 per cent). In total, 78 per cent agreed that the services provided had been of
of the respondents agreed that the services good quality, 81 per cent agreed that they had
provided had been of good quality, 82 per cent been timely, and 78 per cent agreed that they
agreed that they had been timely, and 79 per had met needs.
cent agreed that they had met needs.
67
FIGURE 5
Summary of U-Report results, beneficiary perceptions of quality, timeliness and needs met by programme section
Health Nutrition
Quality 9% 7% 85% 11% 9% 80%
Timeliness 8% 11% 81% 12% 10% 78%
Met Needs 10% 8% 81% 12% 11% 77%
100 50 0 50 100 100 50 0 50 100
Percentage Percentage
Education WASH
Timeliness 5% 8% 87% 11% 9% 82%
Quality 5% 9% 86% 12% 6% 79%
Met Needs 12% 9% 79% 12% 8% 78%
100 50 0 50 100 100 50 0 50 100
Percentage Percentage
Child Protection
Legend:
Strongly disagree
Quality 6% 6% 87%
Somewhat disagree
Timeliness 7% 12% 81% Neutral
Somewhat agree
Met Needs 9% 12% 78%
Strongly agree
100 50 0 50 100
Percentage
EVALUATION OF UNICEF’S COVERAGE AND QUALITY IN COMPLEX HUMANITARIAN SITUATIONS: NIGERIA
3.3 UNICEF’s approach to prioritizing over time in areas where regular access is
coverage and quality possible. In these areas, which include IDP
camps and host communities, quality is a
3.3.1 Balancing coverage and quality function of programme processes that develop
incrementally: successive assessments
improve the quality of knowledge fed into
The evaluation found limited evidence of a
programming; programme infrastructures are
clear rationale to inform trade-offs between
rolled out and gradually firmed up; partners
coverage and quality, and to prioritize one
and counterparts are selected, trained and
over the other on the basis of objective
mentored; monitoring and supervisory support
factors such as access. Rather, it found that
mechanisms are slowly bought into by
coverage was ultimately dictated by ad hoc
stakeholders; and accountability mechanisms
contextual and operational constraints and
become better honed and enable the broader
imperatives, often independently of targets
participation of affected groups in programming
set. In those areas where coverage was
processes. More often than not, however, this
achieved, quality tended to be uniformly
ideal-case scenario is disrupted by adverse
pursued through a standard set of measures
events: the capacity developed in IDP camps
and approaches. The success of these
is periodically strained by new influxes; training
measures was variable; however, there
invested in government workers is lost in rapid
was some evidence to suggest that quality
turnover; budget lines are cut; and quality in
improved over time if access and coverage
the delivery of implementing partners ebbs and
could be maintained.
flows.
The evaluation could discern no clear rationale
Despite these adverse events, beneficiary
used to prioritize either coverage or quality
feedback captured in the U-Report survey
in UNICEF’s interventions on the ground. An
suggests that the quality of UNICEF
assumption might have been that quality was
programming, defined here as the degree of
proactively pursued on a priority basis in easily
satisfaction among intended beneficiaries, is
accessible areas, while coverage was prioritized
good. At the least, this appears to be true in the
in areas where access was difficult to maintain.
two types of locations covered by the survey;
Although this might be true to some extent, it
that is, IDP camps and host communities.
was less the result of a deliberate choice, and
Although the evidence to support this is limited,
more a function of operational circumstances
it can probably be assumed that the satisfaction
on the ground.
of beneficiaries in these two locations is due,
at least in part, to the fact that they are readily
There is strong anecdotal evidence to suggest
accessible to UNICEF programme staff.
that all other things being equal, the quality of
UNICEF programming will normally improve
69
Conversely, there is strong anecdotal evidence
to suggest that the maintenance of programme ‘UNICEF is providing all the necessary
quality is significantly more difficult to achieve support, but the question is: what happens
in areas where regular access is compromised. if, for whatever reasons, the funding
As noted above, for example, UNICEF staff
and support stops? How do we sustain
and implementing partners both reported that
the scale and quality of interventions?’’
the quality of programme delivery in Bama
-Governmental implementing partner of
and Dikwa suffered as a result of interrupted
UNICEF, Borno State
access to these areas in 2021. Notably, erratic
access also adversely affected coverage.
In these areas, UNICEF’s dual mandate
In the context of north-east Nigeria, the notion
does require it to explore options for more
of prioritizing either coverage or quality is
development-oriented interventions ultimately
problematic, as it presumes that these options
aimed at improving the quality of basic services
are a matter of choice. The evidence suggests
available to the local population. An indication of
otherwise. Where security enables access, the
the possible dilemmas implied in this is provided
acuteness of humanitarian needs is usually such
by interviews held with local government actors
that it will dictate an expansion of coverage.
in Borno State, where UNICEF’s cooperation
In turn, where coverage is possible, the low
with the local government is much more
baseline from which capacity-building must
advanced. These interviews make clear that
usually begin requires that sustained focus be
in its pursuit of quality, UNICEF can engage
placed at the outset on the rapid development
in partnerships that are so close as to entail
of quality. Where constrained access impedes
a form a substitution with local governments.
quality, it is often the case that coverage is also
The depth and extent of these partnerships
compromised.
raise questions about their sustainability, the
In line with this observation, the evaluation
dependencies created, and the feasibility of
found that in conflict-affected areas of
exit strategies for UNICEF in the long-term.
Borno State, UNICEF section staff generally
dedicated a uniform level of attention to quality
wherever coverage was possible. The outlook
‘I do not see UNICEF as a partner, [but]
was more nuanced with regard to areas on the
rather like a department in [a government
periphery of the humanitarian emergency, in
agency]. This is how close the working
Yobe and Adamawa States. In these locations,
relationship is. They work with us like we
humanitarian needs in a number of LGAs are
are an extension of UNICEF, and we work
less acute and do allow for more deliberate
with them like an in-house department.’
decisions on the desirable scope of coverage
and the quality of programming to strive for. -Governmental implementing partner of
UNICEF, Borno State
70
EVALUATION OF UNICEF’S COVERAGE AND QUALITY IN COMPLEX HUMANITARIAN SITUATIONS: NIGERIA
3.3.2 UNICEF’s approach to managing data systematically between sections. Similarly,
on coverage and quality indicators on programme performance are not
tracked in a digital, harmonized manner that
UNICEF and its partners contribute to LGA- would allow for aggregation, disaggregation,
level mapping of operational presence analysis and visualization of information,
through the cluster system. Internally, as discussed further in section 4.4.3 on
UNICEF Nigeria does not consolidate, programme monitoring.
aggregate or visualize information on the
coverage of its humanitarian response or One reason for the limited digitalization and
indicators of quality across programme use of data visualizations (customizable
sections. There is currently no map dashboards, maps etc.) for programme
showing the communities within which decision-making may be that the CO has
UNICEF’s programmes operate, nor the been waiting for UNICEF’s corporate suite of
number of people they serve. The underuse e-Tools to incorporate the requisite features.
of more granular data constitutes a missed Despite indications from headquarters (HQ)
opportunity because it could help UNICEF that such functionalities were coming ‘soon’,
and its implementing partners to better COs are still waiting and have been for years.
understand the geographic footprint of Meanwhile, user-friendly data analysis and
the response better, and the locations of visualization have been standard components
people in need and underserved areas. of off-the-shelf web-based monitoring and
More detailed data would also enable reporting solutions.
better access to important indicators on
programme performance. However, one NGO implementing partner who
was interviewed cautioned: ‘Please don’t put
OCHA regularly updates an LGA-level map us on a map – it would make us easy targets
of the humanitarian presence in north-east for armed groups.’ UNICEF Nigeria could take
Nigeria, which shows a ‘heat map’ of the this important concern seriously by putting in
number of partners per sector per LGA. This place appropriate data security measures and
includes UNICEF implementing partners. Some only grant role-based, personalized access to
UNICEF programme sections have facility-level trusted users. Given the possibilities offered by
data, for example, the health section draws on modern IT solutions for monitoring, reporting
information from the web-based District Health and data visualization, UNICEF stands to gain
Information System (DHIS). The evaluation did from investing in more systematic, digital
not find evidence of sub-LGA-level information management of coverage and quality data
on programme presence being shared in order to inform decision-making within its
humanitarian programmes.
53 See for example: United Nation (2021), Nigeria: North-east Humanitarian Presence, April - June 2021, published 5 August 2021.
71
4 . H O W D O U N I C E F ’ S W AY S O F
A C H I E V I N G O U T C O M E S E N A B L E
O R C O N S T R A I N P R O G R A M M E
C O V E R A G E A N D Q U A L I T Y ?
This section focuses on the relevance and effectiveness of different
approaches and ways of achieving coverage and quality outcomes that
UNICEF has adopted in its humanitarian response. It critically reviews how
UNICEF’s ways of working either enable or constrain the delivery of high-
quality programmes at scale and within given timeframes.
72
EVALUATION OF UNICEF’S COVERAGE AND QUALITY IN COMPLEX HUMANITARIAN SITUATIONS: NIGERIA
KEY MESSAGES
Integrated programming could strengthen the quality and coverage of the response, but structural disincentives
and limited partner capacity for multi-sector interventions have meant that UNICEF has not pursued integration
systematically.
The humanitarian community in Nigeria, including UNICEF, has struggled to develop a strategy to ensure
principled humanitarian access to affected populations, which is tightly controlled by the Nigerian military. The
authorities have also created bureaucratic impediments that hinder UNICEF and others in responding rapidly.
Government institutions and agencies have been UNICEF’s main implementing partner in the response, which
has been effective in expanding services in some sectors, but has also affected programme quality.
Partnerships with local and national NGOs have enabled UNICEF to expand coverage. Many partners credited
UNICEF with helping to strengthen their technical capacity, but say they require more systematic development
of their institutional capabilities.
Humanitarian performance monitoring has been successfully institutionalized and periodically provides
structured feedback on gaps and challenges on a sample of humanitarian interventions. These monitoring
‘snapshots’ include some feedback on quality aspects, but cannot replace more systematic programme quality
monitoring, for which the evaluation found limited evidence.
The evaluation did not find evidence of regular context analysis of programmes in north-east Nigeria to ensure
that UNICEF adapts its approaches and delivery mechanisms to the changing context.
UNICEF engages with affected populations in its humanitarian response in a number of different ways, but
the variety of approaches lacks consistency, coherence and follow-up, as required by UNICEF’s corporate
commitments.
The Nigeria CO has successfully strengthened the MRM. The evaluation found that the process of collecting
and verifying evidence on alleged grave violations was rigorous and systematic, albeit limited to areas currently
accessible to humanitarian actors.
4.1 Programme approaches to 4.1.1 Programme integration and
strengthen coverage and quality convergence
UNICEF has used a number of strategies to Integrated humanitarian programming
achieve greater coverage of its humanitarian can deliver better outcomes and therefore
response in the north-east, and to strengthen quality. In north-east Nigeria, UNICEF
the quality of its interventions. This section re- has implemented some geographical
views and assesses approaches with the po- convergence of its health, nutrition and
tential to unlock opportunities for enhancing WASH interventions, while programmatic
coverage and quality. integration by outcome has remained
73
limited. The evaluation identified three in some locations, the education section has
main underlying causes: incentives from worked with the WASH section on securing
siloed work plans and results frameworks, WASH facilities in schools, and with the child
the absence of granular, multi-sector needs protection section to operate child-friendly
assessments, and limited partner capacity spaces in schools.
to work across multiple sectors. Integration
through multi-sector partnerships is a UNICEF and partner interviewees for this
promising avenue for which some early evaluation provided a range of examples
examples exist. where the absence of integrated programming
negatively affected programme quality. For
Integration is understood as ‘the intentional example, the nutrition section runs outpatient
combining of one or more sector interventions therapeutic centres (OTP) sites where children
to achieve improved humanitarian outcomes’.54 are meant to pass an ‘appetite test’ during
Several approaches to integration are in use screening. Safe drinking water is required for
across UNICEF offices: by consolidation, this test, but there are UNICEF-run OTP sites
by convergence, by contribution, and by without water so the test procedure cannot
outcomes. A 2014 UNICEF study identified be followed. Other examples include UNICEF-
convergence – the geographical co-location of supported schools without sanitation facilities;
services – as the most common understanding health posts meant to be offering treatment of
of integration within UNICEF.55 This is also true SAM that had RUTF in stock but not the drugs
for the humanitarian response in north-east required according to SAM protocol; and health
Nigeria. facilities where patients evidently practised
open defecation in the immediate vicinity
UNICEF’s humanitarian programming in BAY because there were no toilets. As one UNICEF
states has focused mainly on the convergence staff member interviewed for this evaluation
of health, nutrition and, to some extent, WASH put it: ‘We talk about integration a lot, but it
activities, but not systematically and not at does not happen in the field.’
scale. The health and nutrition sections have
also used the Communication for Development The evaluation has identified three main
(C4D) network of community volunteers for underlying causes for the lack of systematic
outreach and to ensure that those in need programme integration:
of services avail themselves of these. Also,
54 UNICEF (2014) Study on Integrated Programming in UNICEF Humanitarian Action, February 2014.
55 Ibid.
74
EVALUATION OF UNICEF’S COVERAGE AND QUALITY IN COMPLEX HUMANITARIAN SITUATIONS: NIGERIA
1. Many interviewees indicated that There is undoubtedly strong interest among
programme sections still work in relative UNICEF management and staff to operationalize
isolation, failing to share information across programme integration to strengthen the quality
various sector-based boundaries. Their of the humanitarian response. Multi-sector
work plans and result frameworks are programme partnerships are evident steps in
sector-specific, so they have an incentive to the right direction. In September 2021, the CO
deliver only on the objectives set for their advertised a call for expressions of interest for
own programme section. partnerships that can deliver integrated WASH,
nutrition and health interventions in Rann, the
2. Integrated programming would be
administrative capital of Kala-Balge LGA in
greatly facilitated by integrated needs
Borno State. Admittedly, integration in only one
assessments, yet there is a noticeable
municipality in one out of 27 LGAs in Borno
absence of such cross-sectoral analytical
State is a humble start, but it could serve as
efforts, beyond the robust but higher-level
an opportunity for learning and ideally scale-up
MSNA that feed into the HRP. Interviewees
elsewhere. However, the previous evaluation
confirmed that UNICEF currently neither
in 2018 noted similar attempts to implement
assesses needs with a view to identifying
multi-sector pilots, such as a DFID-funded, one-
multiple or overlapping deprivations,
year intervention to integrate nutrition, child
nor tracks coverage in a way that would
protection, education and WASH services. This
generate information on whether a child
does not seem to have caught on.
has been reached by one, two or more
sectoral interventions.
Given the nature of the access that UNICEF has
3. Many implementing partners only have
to displaced people, which is most frequently
capacity in one sector. Even if UNICEF
either in camp situations or in a mix of camps
wanted to pursue integrated programming,
and host communities in LGA headquarter
it faces a supply constraint, insofar as
towns, there are considerable efficiencies to be
integration is unlikely to be implemented
gained from delivering integrated programmes.
by a single partner: it would require the
By combining its service delivery, UNICEF
coordination or a consortia of multiple
also has the greatest potential to strengthen
partners, which could be time-consuming
the effectiveness of its interventions. There is
for UNICEF to manage.
thus a strong argument for making integrated
programming the norm.
75
4.1.2 Rapid Response Mechanism mostly single-agency response efforts that
were difficult to distinguish from regular
UNICEF has contributed to a significant programming. In addition, the participating
overhaul of Nigeria’s RRM, building on the agencies did not pursue a multi-sectoral
lessons of past experience to establish approach, and nor were their interventions
a multi-partner, multi-sector mechanism informed by early warnings or an alert system.
that is intended to respond to early A dedicated, multi-sector RRM stand-by team
warnings of arising needs. The first round did not exist.
of RRM implementation highlights several
challenges. Given the difficult access and Building on these lessons, UNICEF has been
security context, the RRM has the potential a driving force behind the re-establishment
to expand coverage in newly accessible of the RRM in mid-2021. It is envisaged as a
areas, while inaccessible areas remain out multi-partner, multi-sector approach, with the
of reach. overarching objective of delivering a timely,
life-saving response package for food security,
The RRM has its basis in the strategic objectives nutrition and WASH. A humanitarian early
of successive Nigeria HRPs to support life- warning system across BAY states is meant
saving activities and alleviate suffering through to produce alerts that trigger (a) rapid multi-
integrated and coordinated humanitarian sectoral follow-up assessments and, where
response that focuses on the most vulnerable needed; (b) life-saving integrated interventions
people. In mid-2016, OCHA had coordinated a ‘to highly vulnerable populations living in
first attempt to set up an RRM structure for accessible and hard to reach areas when there
north-east Nigeria, with UNICEF as one of the is no operational capacity on the ground (…)
partners involved. However, the approach soon within a reasonable timeframe’.56 The RRM
faltered and fell dormant. aims to deliver the response ‘within two to four
weeks’ of receiving the alert.57
In 2021, UNICEF – together with the World
Food Programme (WFP) and Norwegian The recent, first activation of the RRM did not
Refugee Council (NRC) – presented the quite follow these short timeframes, although
findings of a critical review of why the previous it might have been considered a trial run. The
attempt to establish an RRM had failed. They first warning signs were detected in October
concluded that the 2016–2017 RRM produced 2020, and the alert was finally raised in April
54 UNICEF/WFP/NRC (2021), NE Nigeria RRM Approach, internal approach paper dated 7 October 2021.
55 Ibid.
76
2021, when high rates of SAM in Gubio LGA, military clearance for humanitarian cargo
Borno State, indicated an emergency food movements. Some interviewees for this
security situation. WFP eventually responded evaluation suggested that the utility of the
as part of the RRM with a general food RRM will likely be limited to urban areas only,
distribution in early September 2021, five and more specifically to garrison towns. In the
months after the alert. The UNICEF and Action event of an influx of IDPs into these locations,
Against Hunger (AHH) components of the humanitarian actors usually have access
response package, for WASH and nutrition, without being constrained by their own
could not be deployed in time, partly due to the organization’s or the military’s security
need to obtain military clearance for moving clearance system. For deep-field locations, the
humanitarian cargo.58 lead time required by NAF to provide an armed
escort or clearance through the Humanitarian
This points to two related contextual barriers Cargo Movement Notification System can
for the RRM in north-east Nigeria: the consume two weeks or more from the ‘rapid’
inaccessibility of people in need due to response time window (see Box 1).
insecurity, and the requirement to obtain
58 UNICEF Nigeria/RRM Nigeria (2021), NE Nigeria Rapid Response Mechanism (RRM) Regular Meeting, 21 September 2021,
meeting minutes, unpublished.
77
BOX 1
The military-imposed Humanitarian Cargo Movement Notification system: providing security
or hindering humanitarian operations?
Nigeria’s military imposed the Humanitarian Cargo Movement Notification system in 2019, in the light of the scale-up
of the response, recurrent attacks and looting of humanitarian convoys. The justification was that the notification
system would allow the military to provide escorts or mobile patrols where required.
The system stipulates that all humanitarian cargo movements within BAY states that are bound for locations outside
the state capitals of Borno (Maiduguri), Adamawa (Yola) and Yobe (Damaturu) should be notified to NAF using the
Humanitarian Cargo Movement Notification form. Transport routes, volumes and days must be specified exactly.
The haulage of fuel, communications equipment or fertilizer is subject to additional clearance requirements and
restrictions by NAF. The Standard Operating Procedures (SOP) indicate that military clearance will be given within
48 hours.59
Interviews for this evaluation and research by other agencies suggest that in practice, the notification system is a
sign of the deep mistrust that security forces harbour for humanitarian actors, and that it is used to bring response
activities under military control.60 This in turn has implications for how principled humanitarian interventions can
be. In its 2021 HRP, the Humanitarian Country Team and partners concluded that ‘the Nigerian Armed Forces tightly
control movements of food, fuel, fertilizer and cash, among other goods. This is a major cause of deficiencies in IDP
camp conditions and services, despite years of effort.’61
4.1.3 Approach to gaining principled continues to be implemented largely
access to people in need in militarized zones, often with clearly
defined security perimeters and restrictions
The humanitarian community in Nigeria has enforced by the Nigerian military. In
struggled to develop a strategy to ensure this context, access has generally been
principled access, as already diagnosed determined by the military and the NSAGs,
in phase 1 of this evaluation in 2018. The who appear to consider humanitarians as
humanitarian response in the north-east legitimate targets for attack.
59 Nigeria Logistics Cluster (2021), Standard Operating Procedures, Humanitarian Cargo Movement Notifications, WFP, published 12
February 2020.
60 Human Rights Watch (2020), Nigeria: Army Restrictions Stifling Aid Efforts, 4 March 2020.
61 United Nations (2021), Humanitarian Response Plan 2021, issued February 2021.
78
EVALUATION OF UNICEF’S COVERAGE AND QUALITY IN COMPLEX HUMANITARIAN SITUATIONS: NIGERIA
De facto, the military currently controls both
FIGURE 6
access of those who need assistance to
Mapping physical access of
humanitarian organizations, and access of
humanitarian organizations
humanitarian organizations to those in need of
assistance. For the former, the military’s super-
camp strategy has directed them into garrison
towns, where NAF contends that it is easier to
defend and assist communities, leaving large
areas exposed to NSAGs and criminal activity.
For the latter, the military has permitted access
to areas that are either under its control or that
it considers have been ‘cleared’ of NSAGs.
Humanitarian actors therefore find themselves
in a difficult access situation, characterized
by a dwindling number of safe roads and ‘an
operational dependence on armed forces who
prioritize combat operations over humanitarian
convoy escorts’ (see Figure 6).62,63 Even
experienced national NGOs find it difficult to
deliver assistance given the insecurity:
‘Before 2018, we implemented programmes in
Dikwa and Mungono, but due to the insecurity
in these areas and the increasing difficulty
[in] moving staff, equipment and supplies to
insecure areas, we have pulled out and now
This context has proved extremely challenging
implement mostly within Maiduguri. This has
for humanitarian agencies to make a
implications for our ability to ensure adequate
distinction between needs-based, neutral and
coverage of humanitarian assistance to
independent humanitarian assistance and the
everyone in need.’ - UNICEF implementing
political and military objectives of NAF and
partner, Nigerian NGO
the Government. Responding to the urgent
62 United Nations (2021), Humanitarian Response Plan 2021, published March 2021.
63 United Nations (2020), Humanitarian Situation Update, January 2020 edition. A more recent map, published in the HRP Periodic
Monitoring Report for January–June 2021, shows that the inaccessible area has increased in some parts. However, the map used
in this report illustrates road accessibility and the role of garrison towns more clearly.
79
humanitarian needs of civilians seeking refuge frustration at the humanitarian community’s
from violence in IDP sites around the north-east, calls for expanded and principled access to
the humanitarian community has frequently people in need in accessible areas, while the
used military defence assets, which has blurred quality of the response in accessible areas
the distinction between humanitarians and was ‘poor’. Instead, he seemingly favoured an
the Nigerian security forces. This has made it approach of handing over humanitarian goods
extremely difficult to promote humanitarian and resources to the military for it to deliver
assistance as neutral or impartial.64 assistance in areas deemed inaccessible to
humanitarian actors. While problematic from
It took members of the humanitarian community the perspective of humanitarian principles,
in Nigeria a long time to reach consensus he indicated that ‘this approach has not been
about a common interpretation of how they piloted yet’. As one senior UNICEF staff
can use humanitarian principles as a means of member put it: ‘There has been no real strategic
accessing those most in need. It was only in direction for the north-east – not from the UN,
2018, nine years into the conflict, that a first not from government, and not from donors.’
Humanitarian Access Strategy was negotiated
and ultimately endorsed by the HCT. However, In 2020, a new Access Working Group (AWG)
the adoption of the strategy never translated was formed, co-chaired by OCHA and the
into tangible steps by the United Nations RC/ International Non-Governmental Organization
HC, the HCT or other humanitarian actors in (INGO) Forum, to promote principled
order to try to expand access. humanitarian action by developing common
analysis of humanitarian access constraints
Interviewees for the evaluation suggested and their impact on humanitarian programmes,
that the 2018 strategy had lacked the realism and by formulating specific inter-agency
that could have guided agencies and staff. response and advocacy plans in support
In addition, the RC/HC – in post since 2017 of the HCT.65 The AWG core team meets
– appears to have prioritized alignment with every other week in Maiduguri. UNICEF is
the Government over confronting barriers an active contributor and has helped to draft
to humanitarian access – admittedly a highly a new Access Strategy 2021.66 This new
sensitive and politically risky task. At the same strategy document appears to have found the
time, the UN’s senior leader in Nigeria expressed previously lacking realism. The It spells out
64 United Nations (2018), HCT Humanitarian Access Strategy for North-east Nigeria.
65 United Nations (2020), Terms of Reference: Humanitarian Access Working Group, endorsed by HCT 2020.
66 United Nations (2021), Access Strategy 2021, AWG Draft 1, 2021, unpublished.
80
EVALUATION OF UNICEF’S COVERAGE AND QUALITY IN COMPLEX HUMANITARIAN SITUATIONS: NIGERIA
specific access constraints and analyses their state armed actors, to avoid compromising
causes, including bureaucratic impediments, their neutrality, impartiality and independence
the lack of a joint approach by the humanitarian (…), and in turn humanitarian access’. Second,
community, and the propagation of an ‘anti- the draft document identifies community
humanitarian narrative’ by all parties to the engagement, building community acceptance
conflict, leading to widespread acceptance of and sensitization on IHL at all levels, including
such attitudes among the population. the military, as key mechanisms to counter
the spreading anti-humanitarian narrative and
Two features of the 2021 draft access strategy ultimately to strengthen access.
are particularly noteworthy: first, the document
invokes international humanitarian law (IHL) It is a promising sign of progress that the HCT
and argues, albeit implicitly, that the Nigerian has publicly recognized the most pressing
Government’s ban on talking to NSAGs goes access issues with unprecedented candour
against the internationally agreed norms in the 2021 HRP. The current response plan
governing armed conflict. The strategy asserts has also identified key ingredients for a
that ‘humanitarian actors have a responsibility reinvigorated access effort (see Box 2).
to liaise with all relevant parties, including non-
BOX 2
Key elements of a comprehensive access strategy for the north-east, as identified in the
Humanitarian Response Plan 202167
It will (…) be a priority for the humanitarian community in the north-east to reinvigorate a comprehensive access
strategy that mitigates the worst aspects of the current and potential access constraints, and identifies some
contingency options in case security and access decline further. Key elements are likely to include:
proactive engagement with local communities and traditional leaders on humanitarian action, to bolster
acceptance and open lines of communication on potential threats
sensitization of NAF to the nature of humanitarian operations and partners to civil–military guidelines
67 United Nations (2021), Humanitarian Response Plan 2021, issued February 2021, p.34.
81
high-level, strategic engagement with Government and security forces on humanitarian principles, IHL and
access, and on reducing bureaucratic impediments to access
identification and implementation of new operational modalities and strategies to deliver humanitarian
assistance in hard-to-reach locations and to improve access to currently reachable locations
joint work with Government to prioritize returns to areas of origin that are secure for civilians and accessible to
international humanitarian actors.
(…) Bureaucratic impediments to humanitarian action will have to be overcome, and this a key advocacy point
for the HCT. A negative narrative about international humanitarian action has been taking shape, in which aid
organizations are said to be inherently ineffective, or even interested in prolonging the crisis out of some sort of
self-interest. To the extent that such perceptions contribute to a mind-set in which impeding humanitarian action
bureaucratically is justified, these become a self-fulfilling prophecy: humanitarian actors cannot be effective if they
are obliged to contend with an administrative environment that is in some ways less than conducive.
It remains to be seen whether the HCT will ‘access through acceptance and principled
stay the course and be willing to harness its engagement’,68 yet little has been done in this
political clout in support of a coordinated, regard. Moreover, there is a significant risk that
comprehensive access effort. The indications the Government will reject this strategy. Its
given in the 2021 HRP, and the re-formation success or otherwise will largely depend on the
of the AWG and its draft strategy are positive vigour with which international humanitarian
signs of resolve, but implementing the access leaders in Nigeria, with support from bilateral
strategy will almost certainly require confronting donor country missions, are willing to defend
the Nigerian Government and military on long- the principles that enshrine humanitarian
entrenched positions and policies. action.
The record of the United Nations and its In the present context, UNICEF could add
leadership in Nigeria suggests that this the greatest value by supporting a strategic,
is unlikely to happen. In the three-year collective push for principled access, both
Humanitarian Response Strategy published within the HCT and in engagement with the
in late 2018, the HCT had already declared Government.69 However, the evaluation also
its commitment to pursuing expanding recognizes the difficulty of confronting a strong
68 United Nations (2018), Humanitarian Response Strategy 2019-2021, published December 2018.
69 Section 4.6 of this document reviews to what extent UNICEF has used broader advocacy efforts in support of humanitarian access.
82
EVALUATION OF UNICEF’S COVERAGE AND QUALITY IN COMPLEX HUMANITARIAN SITUATIONS: NIGERIA
state, and the significant challenges that exist In 2021, UNICEF has taken an important
in liaising with NSAGs in Nigeria. strategic step in reviewing and reorganizing
the management and deployment of TPFs,
In the event of a collective humanitarian addressing concerns diagnosed in the
approach failing or stalling, UNICEF should 2018 evaluation and shared by many staff
consider defining its own access strategy, and consultants. With the overhaul of the
as it does in other emergency contexts. The TPF mechanism only a few months old,
organization’s child-centred mandate implies there may be room to further strengthen
that the objective of access is to deliver the coherence and strategic definition of
results for children, and not merely to enable functions performed by TPFs to maximise
UNICEF’s programmes. UNICEF’s draft Access their effect on coverage and quality.
Field Manual provides actionable guidance
and practical tools.70 An analysis of access The Nigeria CO has significant experience of
gaps and existing needs will be required. using TPFs across programmes and field offices
While considerable information on needs in since 2013, and at a large scale since 2016.
inaccessible areas already exists, UNICEF In October 2020, the Nigeria Country Office
and others have not yet invested in assessing (NCO) had a total of 472 TPFs under third-
the political economy of the conflict with a party contract. Of these, 125 worked under the
view to mapping actors, positions, interests, supervision of the Maiduguri FO.71 The TPFs
relationships, networks and entry points for are consultants contracted through a third party
engagement. The Access Field Manual also that is responsible for all administrative and
gives pointers on this, and UNICEF is well financial matters. The TOR for the deployment
positioned and resourced to lead on this of TPFs are set by UNICEF’s programme
analytical and strategic effort. sections, whose staff manage the facilitators,
and their programmatic tasks and movements.
4.1.4 The use of third-party facilitators to
expand coverage and manage quality TPFs are deployed in a range of functions
to provide flexible humanitarian response
TPFs have been key in scaling up and capacity. They have been used both to deliver
maintaining UNICEF’s humanitarian programmes and to monitor the effectiveness
programme in the north-east since 2016. of delivery. UNICEF staff interviewed for this
70 At the time of writing, the evaluation team only had access to a 2018 draft version of UNICEF’s Access Field Manual. See UNICEF
(2018), Access Field Manual, draft 0, UNICEF, EMOPS, August 2018.
71 UNICEF Nigeria (2020), Presentation on use of field facilitators. Unpublished.
83
evaluation have characterized them as ‘our ears To implement the lessons learned and
and eyes on the ground’, ‘the only thing that recommendations from the comprehensive
keeps our programmes running’, ‘indispensable review, the CO developed new ‘SOP for the
support for service delivery where we work Management of Facilitators’ and TOR for TPFs.
through the government’. However, some – The new framework documents provide more
including external partners – also remarked clarity on management oversight, roles and
on the mixed skill sets that TPFs bring, with responsibilities, and security management (see
some being considered highly experienced Box 3). A generic job description outlines the
and technically skilled, while others seen main responsibilities for the two categories of
as generalists who had difficulty following TPF to be engaged: LGA facilitators and state
more thematic or technical discussions and facilitators (the latter also carry out expert
instructions. advisory tasks). The specific functions to
be performed by a given facilitator are up to
In 2020, the CO commissioned an independent each programme section to define. Therefore,
in-depth review of the TPF mechanism, which their overall calibre does not appear to have
confirmed and expanded upon concerns changed significantly since the new contractor,
already raised in phase 1 of this humanitarian Committed to Good (CTG), took over in mid-
evaluation.72 The problematic issues identified 2021.
arose both from within UNICEF and the
contracting third party, which was Deloitte At the time of writing, this new arrangement
at the time. On UNICEF’s side, management was just a few months old. Therefore, the
of TPFs was overly complicated and lacked evaluation was not yet able to assess the
strategic direction, factors exacerbated by a extent to which the new contractual and
lack of understanding and supervision of TPF managerial framework has translated into
roles and responsibilities by UNICEF staff. On practical changes on the ground and at scale.
the part of the contractor, the evaluation and However, based on a review of the new SOP,
later the independent review found significant TOR and job descriptions, and interviews with
administrative flaws (especially delays in salary current TPFs and UNICEF staff, two issues
payments, and in performance and workload that were meant to be addressed after the
management) and stark neglect of the duty comprehensive review still seem to leave room
of care and risk management support (one for improvement: facilitator empowerment in
facilitator was killed and two were kidnapped the field, and risk management.
on duty).
72 Fisher, Benjamin S. (2020), Use of field facilitators: a review. Unpublished.
84
EVALUATION OF UNICEF’S COVERAGE AND QUALITY IN COMPLEX HUMANITARIAN SITUATIONS: NIGERIA
BOX 3
Roles and responsibilities of UNICEF’s third-party facilitators
The TOR for CTG define the roles and intended use of facilitators in the broadest terms as:
Support UNICEF’s work in monitoring implementation of initiatives and tasks in areas which are not accessible
to UNICEF staff, or where there is lack of capacity in government structure. Depending on the context and
need, facilitators might be required to undertake operational requirements. At times, also depending on
the nature of work required, facilitators might be required to undertake ‘hands-on’ implementation of tasks
and activities. When this happens, it will be clearly articulated in the individual terms of reference before
hiring. The key considerations determining the use of facilitators are access constraints, capacity of the
government structure and the capacity of FO staff to cover hard-to-reach areas.73
The generic job descriptions for LGA and state facilitators further specify the main responsibilities:74
1) Coordinate UNICEF-supported activities at LGA level with relevant authorities
2) Undertake regular situation monitoring in specific areas based on specific requests
3) Undertake regular field visits to monitor projects/programmes (implementation against agreements;
verify supplies and works) and monitor the overall performance of project/programme implementation
4) Verify and validate data
5) Communicate and coordinate programme activities, if required, with implementing partners, in
consultation with the respective UNICEF Chief of Field Office or his/her delegate
6) Any other programme-specific related task assigned by a supervisor
In addition, state facilitators are expected to provide expert technical support to implementing partners, ministries,
departments and agencies and counterparts in the respective subject matter area, to ensure effective and efficient
implementation of UNICEF-supported programmes, in consultation with UNICEF.
73 UNICEF Nigeria (2021), Terms of Reference: Third Party Management of Field Staff (Facilitator) in Nigeria. Unpublished. Emphasis
(highlighting) added.
74 UNICEF Nigeria (2021), Job Descriptions for LGA and State Level Facilitators. Unpublished. Emphasis (highlighting) added.
85
These job descriptions put TPFs in a position to be given, or must not be charged with. This
coordinate the work of UNICEF’s implementing should extend to the responsibilities of the
partners and to monitor progress – tasks supervising UNICEF staff members who must
that are supervisory in nature even when remain attentive and responsive to ensure that
not communicated in this way. Therefore, facilitators can work effectively in the field.
it does not come as a surprise that several
interviewees indicated that they still face On risk management and the duty of care, the
issues with facilitators wanting to be seen as SOP only indicate that UNICEF will review the
UNICEF staff and creating the impression of group life insurance for the facilitators. The
speaking for UNICEF in the field, which poses contractor, CTG, is tasked with ensuring that
reputational and potentially operational risks all TPFs receive adequate security training.
to UNICEF. Yet ‘SOP for the Management UNICEF staff and facilitators also said that
of Facilitators’ clearly states that ‘under no they maintained WhatsApp groups for sharing
circumstances shall facilitators be considered information, including on security risks. It
as employees of UNICEF’ and they should not remained unclear to this evaluation whether
speak on behalf of UNICEF.75 and how UNICEF or CTG systematically
supported facilitators with security information
In the light of this, several cluster leads and (for example, by including them in the
implementing partners questioned the utility UNDSS messaging system) and evacuation
of having facilitators participate in LGA-level assistance in extreme circumstances. One
coordination meetings when they were not interviewee recounted a security incidence in
empowered to speak on behalf of UNICEF. Dikwa LGA, Borno State, where TPFs were
Partners also expressed frustration that the denied access to an evacuation flight. It is
facilitators did not appear to have the required suggested that UNICEF and CTG clearly define
direct link back to UNICEF staff when needed and communicate security risk management
to make commitments, as for example when support, roles and responsibilities.
partners were urgently looking to UNICEF for
information or action such as the deployment 4.1.5 Remote programming and
of supplies. alternative approaches
This points to a need for the NCO to define Several UNICEF programme sections
a more granular typology of tasks and have successfully piloted remote and
accountabilities that facilitators can or should mobile programming approaches, some at
75 UNICEF Nigeria (2021), SOP for the Management of Facilitators - UPDATED Aug 2021. Unpublished.
86
EVALUATION OF UNICEF’S COVERAGE AND QUALITY IN COMPLEX HUMANITARIAN SITUATIONS: NIGERIA
scale, to expand coverage to underserved Covid-19 in 2020. For example, during the
populations due to insecurity or movement school closures of the Covid-19 pandemic, the
restrictions. While remote programming has UNICEF education team helped to develop
limited potential to strengthen acceptance, a remote learning model called ‘last-mile
it is a pragmatic approach, given current learning’ for non-formal education (see Box
constraints, and should be explored further. 4). Similarly, UNICEF trained its national NGO
partners on remote and mobile programming
Remote programming is understood to be (such as mobile and online case management
programming without the presence of UNICEF and support services), which partners reported
staff due to unacceptable security risks or denial had enabled them to migrate programming
of access by authorities.76 UNICEF guidance with displaced populations who were at risk
recommends that remote programming be used of losing access to humanitarian assistance
as a ‘last resort’ approach.77 This is because as a result of IDP camp closures and their
where humanitarian assistance becomes movement to areas inaccessible to UNICEF
invisible, it does not contribute to increasing staff.
the acceptance of humanitarian actors, which
is linked to communities seeing concrete There is room for UNICEF to explore in which
benefits from the presence of humanitarians: other sectors remote programming and
‘Under normal circumstances, our proximity management and mobile interventions can
to affected populations and understanding of be used to expand humanitarian coverage to
local contexts maximise the sustainability and underserved populations in need. However,
accountability of the programmes we deliver.’78 this should be done cognizant of the risk that
the potential ‘invisibility’ of remote approaches
Several of UNICEF’s programme sections poses to acceptance and humanitarian access,
have used innovative means to establish and should therefore be focused on specific
remote programmes and manage partners intervention areas or pockets of need.
remotely, given the highly constrained access
environment in the north-east, which was
temporarily exacerbated by Government-
imposed movement restrictions due to
76 UNICEF (2012), Remote programming in humanitarian action, EMOPS programme guidance, New York.
77 UNICEF (2020), Strengthening UNICEF’s Humanitarian Action - The Humanitarian Review: Findings and Recommendations.
78 UNICEF (2012), Remote programming in humanitarian action, EMOPS programme guidance, New York.
87
BOX 4
Lessons from other UNICEF emergencies: A remote learning approach for Education in
Emergencies (EiE)
UNICEF helped to develop last-mile learning for non-formal education in 2020, responding to the closure of schools
that took place due to the Covid-19 pandemic.
The approach is essentially a radio learning programme, consisting of pre-recorded lessons that are presented by
a teacher. The content is aired on radio and television on three days a week for one hour a day.
To reach children and communities without access to radio, television or electricity, UNICEF established reading
hubs. Teachers are given USB drives and solar-powered speakers. Each teacher gathers 15–20 children in a hub
and shares the programme via the loudspeaker.
The Nigerian Teachers’ Union was quick to support remote learning. UNICEF has worked to scale up the approach
to reach additional areas that are currently beyond humanitarian coverage. A UNICEF staff member estimated that
1.1 million children had been reached via the remote learning programme across BAY states in 2020, although it was
difficult to confirm the accuracy of these figures.
4.2 The influence of security and risk children have been abducted since 2013,80
management on coverage and and nearly 2.2 million people have remained
quality internally displaced as of August 2021.81 Borno
State remains the epicentre of the humanitarian
crisis, with dozens of conflict incidents reported
The security environment in north-east Nigeria
each month. Humanitarian organizations and
has remained extremely complex. Since the
their staff have been declared legitimate targets
start of the conflict in 2009, more than 35,000
people have been killed,79 more than 1,000 of attack by NSAGs (see section 2.2.2 above).
79 UNDP (2020), Assessing the impact of conflict on development in north-east Nigeria.
80 UNICEF (2018), More than 1,000 children in northeastern Nigeria abducted by Boko Haram since 2013, Press Release, 13 April
2018.
81 UNHCR (2021), Operational Data Portal: Nigeria Situation. https://data2.unhcr.org/en/situations/nigeriasituation. Accessed on
27/10/2021.
88
EVALUATION OF UNICEF’S COVERAGE AND QUALITY IN COMPLEX HUMANITARIAN SITUATIONS: NIGERIA
4.2.1 UNICEF’s safety and security by UNICEF and United Nations systems to
management within the United managing security and risk has an impact on
Nations system context UNICEF’s humanitarian access, coverage and
ability to manage quality in the field.
While UNICEF has taken significant steps
to improve staff safety and security, it has UNICEF has worked diligently to improve staff
not yet explored the full potential of its safety and security; protective strategies have
own security staff and capability to take included increasing compound security for the
a proactive approach to risk assessment UNICEF office, building dedicated and secure
and management – beyond what UNDSS compounds for staff, investing in armoured
advises – that would aim to create an vehicles and radio equipment, and using the
enabling environment for expanding common United Nations VHF communications
humanitarian coverage. service. For its Maiduguri staff, UNICEF has
also made significant efforts to support staff
While often thought to have a security- well-being.
only mandate, the United Nations Security
Management System (UNSMS), the There was near unanimity among staff and
Designated Official (DO) and the United implementing partners interviewed for the
Nations Department of Safety and Security evaluation that UNICEF was passively over-
(UNDSS) are tasked with the dual objectives reliant on UNDSS and has tended to interpret the
of (a) enabling the conduct of United Nations latter’s risk advisory as mandatory instruction
system operations and creating a conducive on where and when not to travel. This has
environment for humanitarian assistance; contributed to rather broadly held perceptions
and (b) ensuring the safety, security and well- of UNICEF lacking field presence and having
being of personnel and the security of United become ‘comfortable in their offices’.
Nations premises and assets.82,83 Decisions
about where United Nations staff and partners UNDSS was seen to be overly dependent
can go, how they travel and whether they are on the Government and the military for risk
seen using armed escorts or not will affect intelligence. This led some interviewees to
their access and acceptance among affected characterize UNDSS as ‘out of touch and out of
populations. Therefore, the approach adopted context’ in the north-east. Rather than providing
82 UNDSS (2020), DO and SMT Handbook: A guide for Designated Officials for Security and Security Management Teams, new
edition.
83 IASC (2016), Safety and Security: Creating an Enabling and Conducive Environment for Humanitarian Assistance. White Paper
circulated at the IASC Principals Meeting, 24 November 2016.
89
situation and risk context analyses, its advisory
releases were described as ‘amounting to a list
of security incidents’, which were appreciated
but not what humanitarian programme
managers were looking for.
Interviewees suggested that UNICEF’s
security staff in Maiduguri were being used
solely to manage security rather than to work
jointly with programme staff to explore options
for strengthening access. The interviews
further revealed consensus among United
Nations agencies and implementing partners
that the mandatory use of military escorts on
some roads – generally discouraged by the
IASC except as a last resort84 – has further
complicated movements and discouraged
acceptance of humanitarian actors among
affected populations.
The Government’s ban on engaging with other
parties to the conflict, to the extent that this
‘Military escorts impact on the humanitarian
would even be feasible given its position,
principles. Especially INGOs have tried to
has removed access negotiations as a means
find different ways of moving around. Where
to strengthen security and coverage for the
the military requires you to use an escort,
humanitarian community. This leaves several
they provide an erratic service at best. They
options to strengthen security and access
sometimes delay, sometimes their vehicles
open, none of which has been explored
break down, and you never know when the
extensively by UNICEF or other United Nations
military is really ready and when the convoy
agencies, as far as the evaluation is aware: for
will move.’
example, cultivating greater acceptance, low-
- United Nations agency staff partnering with
profile approaches, and remote programming
UNICEF
and management (see Box 5).
84 IASC (2013), IASC non-binding guidelines on the use of armed escorts for humanitarian convoys.
90
EVALUATION OF UNICEF’S COVERAGE AND QUALITY IN COMPLEX HUMANITARIAN SITUATIONS: NIGERIA
BOX 5
LESSONS from other UNICEF emergencies: Negotiation of modalities within the United Na-
tions security management system to support low-profile missions
Low-profile missions that use local vehicles and staff (including security officers) and that are not UNICEF-branded
have played a key role in enabling UNICEF staff to support and monitor programmes throughout Somalia and in
Afghanistan.
In Somalia, low-profile missions are identified by the Zonal Offices; these are then entered into an online system
for approvals, which has played an important role in enabling UNICEF staff to quickly turn around requests, and
also helps the Representative to understand the mission and take a decision about accepting the risk. Travel
authorization can then be finalized and security clearance agreed with the UNDSS Chief Security Advisor using
the Programme Criticality Framework as a key frame of reference. In Mogadishu, there are two or three low-
profile missions a day. In the South Central Zone, there are one to three low-profile, deep-field missions a week.
These missions allow UNICEF to maintain a good understanding of the situation and offer a feedback loop back to
UNDSS.85
In Afghanistan, blanket travel authorizations are sought for routine journeys in insecure parts of the country for six-
month periods, in addition to ad hoc authorizations for travel to new areas. In some regions, there are up to three
low-profile missions a day: these may be complemented by low-profile, deep-field missions. These missions allow
UNICEF to maintain a good understanding of the situation and to provide hands-on support to its partners, and they
also strengthen acceptance of UNICEF’s presence among communities.86
Personality, experience and seniority across UNICEF and UNDSS were considered to be essential ingredients for
the success of the approach.
85 UNICEF (2019), Evaluation of the Coverage and Quality of the UNICEF Humanitarian Response in Complex Humanitarian
Emergencies, Volume One, Main Evaluation Report. UNICEF Evaluation Office, New York.
86 UNICEF (2020), Evaluation of UNICEF’s coverage and quality in complex humanitarian situations: Afghanistan. UNICEF Evaluation
Office, New York.
91
UNICEF’s 2020 Humanitarian Review below. People rely on UNICEF services and
confirmed that, in most emergency contexts, appreciated efforts to engage them through
the organization’s presence, its network of these services. This is a potential foundation
local partners, its breadth of programming and for strengthening community understanding
its popular mandate give it multiple entry points of UNICEF’s mission and acceptance more
with communities and actors through which broadly, although this aspect of community
to attain information that is relevant to risk engagement appears to have been overlooked.
management. ‘UNICEF should be able to use
this comparative advantage to better support
UNDSS in developing accurate situational
‘Every section of the community has several
analyses and in improving safety and security,
and enough waterpoints to get water from and
which can result in improved access’.87
so there is no crowding like it used to be before
the UNICEF support.’ - Male FGD participant,
4.2.2 Engaging with communities to
Teachers’ Village IDP camp, Borno State
strengthen acceptance, and with it,
security and access
‘Before UNICEF built this school for us, our
There is significant potential for UNICEF
children used to sit under the tree to learn
to manage risk and expand coverage by
and it was always too hot and uncomfortable.
cultivating acceptance through engaging
When it rained, they could not study, but now
with affected populations, an approach
they have classrooms with a roof, and they
that has been underused thus far because
learn even when the sun is very hot, or the
a systematic approach to community
rains are heavy.’ - Female FGD participant,
engagement has not been institutionalized,
Elmiskin Centre IDP camp, Borno State
and UNICEF staff have limited field
presence.
‘Before we had just one teacher, sometimes
FGDs with communities highlighted that
two for the entire six forms of primary school,
UNICEF has significant visibility, especially
but through the UNICEF support programme,
through its WASH interventions, but also
we now have at least one teacher per form.’
through education, nutrition and health
-Male FGD participant, Custom House IDP
programmes, as illustrated by the quotes
camp, Borno State
87 UNICEF (2020), Strengthening UNICEF’s Humanitarian Action - The Humanitarian Review: Findings and Recommendations, p.65.
92
EVALUATION OF UNICEF’S COVERAGE AND QUALITY IN COMPLEX HUMANITARIAN SITUATIONS: NIGERIA
NGO interviewees spoke of how they had access and expanding its coverage outside the
engaged in actor mapping to identify which relatively secure garrison towns (see section
stakeholders might be affected by their 4.5.2 below).
programmes and what allies they might secure
4.3 The effect of UNICEF’s
by developing acceptance with them. This was
partnerships on coverage and
used as part of a broader strategy to promote
quality
acceptance that sought to communicate
values and explain the agency’s mandate,
and in so doing, proactively project an identity UNICEF Nigeria works with two main types
as an independent and impartial provider of of partner to implement its humanitarian
assistance. The purpose was ultimately to response: government and non-governmental
strengthen acceptance of their presence and organizations (NGOs). Each of these partnerships
programming and to increase access, within has played a different role in contributing to
the humanitarian hubs, in the communities programme coverage and quality, and each has
outside them and on the roads. had different trade-offs that UNICEF has had
to manage and balance. The contributions and
UNICEF itself has not operationalized a trade-offs are summarized below, accompanied
systematic approach to engaging with by an analysis of how UNICEF has sought to
communities and accountability to affected strengthen localization and the capacity of its
populations (AAP), as discussed further in partners, as well as the transfer of risk to its
section 4.5.2 below. Staff face limitations of implementing partners. Section 5.3 discusses
travelling to the field because of security risks UNICEF’s management of partnerships from
and UNICEF’s approach to risk management, an administrative and contractual perspective.
and there is limited follow-up by staff on
the community engagement carried out by 4.3.1 Partnership with Government
partners.
Government institutions and agencies have
Although UNICEF’s TPFs provide important been UNICEF’s main implementing partners
humanitarian services, UNICEF is not currently for the humanitarian response, which has
using them strategically to build acceptance or been effective in expanding humanitarian
explore how to increase access. This fails to services in some sectors. However, the
maximize the potential of UNICEF’s workforce ability of the Government to respond to
to exploit links with communities in areas that humanitarian needs is beset by challenges
are currently inaccessible to it. UNICEF could do due to capacity, willingness and budget
more to position itself to take a more proactive constraints, all of which negatively affect
approach to managing an enabling security the quality of the response.
environment by building acceptance, gaining
93
For reasons of sustainability, UNICEF’s long- development initiatives relevant to the
standing approach to humanitarian and coverage and quality of the response, including:
development programming has been to work
with and through the Government. In Nigeria, training 375 education administrators
the CO has invested in strengthening systems on Education in Emergencies (EiE) and
to improve the coverage, quality, efficiency and developing risk-informed education plans
effectiveness of social services for a long time.
facilitating training courses for social
This approach has been maintained in UNICEF’s
workers on case management for
humanitarian response in the north-east with
gender-based violence (GBV) and child
a view to providing basic health, nutrition,
safeguarding
education and child protection services to IDP
training government, NGOs and private
and host communities. It was the primary
sector contractors on solar borehole design
partnership used for delivering humanitarian
and installation
services in the early stages of the response
until 2016–2017. providing on-the-job support and supervision
for healthcare facility staff in maternal care
UNICEF Nigeria has devoted significant and for nutrition counselling.
resources to strengthening the capacity of
government institutions and staff by providing The support is generally well appreciated by
training and hands-on implementation support partners.
through consultants or TPFs, including
specifically for the humanitarian response. This
is anchored in the Nigeria CO’s commitment to
‘UNICEF was the first partner to establish
local-level capacity development. The latter is
health facilities in camps, renovate health
one of its programme priorities in the current
facilities in communities, train health workers
country programme document (CPD),88 in
and provide drugs and commodities to provide
line with the Grand Bargain commitment to
and expand access to health services.’
‘making principled humanitarian action as local
- UNICEF implementing partner (State
as possible and as international as necessary’.89
Government agency)
UNICEF staff and partners from all sections
shared a variety of examples of capacity
88 UNICEF (2017), Country Programme Document: Nigeria, 2018–2022, E/ICEF/2017/P/L.30, 17 July 2017.
89 Australian Aid et al. (2016), The Grand Bargain – A Shared Commitment to Better Serve People in Need, 23 May 2016.
94
In the health, nutrition and child protection
sectors, UNICEF has had some success in
incentivizing government staff to work in areas
to which they have been displaced, in places
that are considered hard-to-reach or in IDP
camps, as ‘volunteers’ that receive a stipend.
This has been less successful with teaching
staff, partly because UNICEF has taken the
decision not to pay top-up stipends to teachers,
but also because of the perceived threat to
schools and staff from NSAGs. In some LGAs,
the reach of government services was said to
be very limited outside garrison towns because
of security concerns and staff not being
able or willing to work in remote locations.
The general underdevelopment of the north- through the Government. First, the high
east, linked to the lower educational standards, turnover among government staff means that,
combined with limited government capacity periodically, capacity gains are lost and training
and willingness to take responsibility for has to start again, which raises questions
service delivery have meant that it has been about the sustainability advantage of working
problematic to deliver quality standards through the Government. Second, although
through the partnership with the Government. UNICEF advocates for the Government to
Interviews with a range of internal and external make minimum budgetary commitments to
informants raised concerns about this. While basic service delivery by sector, key informants
UNICEF has sought to provide technical indicated that budget lines might be created on
support and training, it has proved difficult to paper, but are rarely met with financial allocations
entirely address these limitations, which require in practice, resulting in under-resourced or
long-term solutions. This should come as no poor-quality interventions. The interviewees for
surprise, given the difficult context under which this evaluation suggested that UNICEF should
the partnership is performing, but it does limit take a stronger stance with the Government to
the potential for effective programme delivery. fulfil its responsibilities in the response. Third,
many informants considered the willingness of
UNICEF staff, but also INGO partners some government institutions, and especially
contracted to provide capacity development the Borno State Government, to acknowledge
support to the Government raised concerns the magnitude of humanitarian needs and
about several factors that negatively affect the to allocate commensurate resources for
coverage and quality of interventions delivered an appropriate response to be limited.
95
4.3.2 Partnerships with local, national risks stretching their capacity to the limit. With
and international NGOs targeted capacity development and technical
support, interviewees suggested that local
Partnerships with local and national NGOs and national NGOs were able to deliver good-
have enabled UNICEF to expand coverage quality programmes, albeit on a limited scale.
because organizations are based in, or
willing to travel to, areas where UNICEF UNICEF has recognized the limitations that
staff cannot go. However, most of these exist when working with local and national
NGOs have had limited humanitarian NGOs. Its approach has been to focus on
experience, resulting in variable programme strengthening technical capacity and, to a lesser
quality. Initially, INGOs were relatively slow extent, project and financial management.
to establish a presence in BAY states. With Several of the NGOs interviewed spoke of
their increased presence in recent years, having received training on specific technical
they have offered UNICEF a mechanism areas, and on the CCCs and Sphere standards,
to deliver greater coverage with a level of and were familiar with UNICEF’s approach
quality that the CO has found difficult to to monitoring and reporting requirements. A
achieve through other partnerships. Overall, number have now worked with UNICEF for
there is an opportunity for UNICEF to invest several years in the north-east and therefore
more systematically in localization to have greater familiarity with its work.
strengthen response capacity and connect
to longer-term perspectives.
‘The partnership with UNICEF has been
Capacity and capacity development for
fantastic. The communication is very good, and
localization
there is a great deal of mutual understanding
and respect.’
As outlined in section 2 above, humanitarian -UNICEF implementing partner (Nigerian NGO)
experience and capacity have been limited in
Nigeria and so, while local and national NGOs
have participated in development programming,
All Nigerian NGOs interviewed considered that
they are far less experienced in humanitarian
there was considerable scope to strengthen
response. Interviews with UNICEF staff and
capacity development, with a view to obtaining
peer agencies suggested that programme
support that went beyond programme
quality was variable as a consequence, although
implementation and technical capacity.
a small number of NGOs were considered to
However, the evaluation team found little
have greater capacity. The concern here was
evidence of UNICEF investment in supporting
that the NGOs with the greatest capacity also
institutional capacity-building. The TOR for
have the greatest demand for their services,
the evaluation made specific reference to
which places an additional burden on them and
96
EVALUATION OF UNICEF’S COVERAGE AND QUALITY IN COMPLEX HUMANITARIAN SITUATIONS: NIGERIA
UNICEF’s contribution to advancing Grand INGOs’ partnership agreements with UNICEF
Bargain commitments on localization, which often include capacity development tasks for
are also a part of its Global 2018–2021 Strategy. national NGO and government implementing
While UNICEF has advanced this through partners.
its partnerships with Government, there is
significant scope to do so in its partnerships INGOs may be able to deliver quality at scale, but
with local and national NGOs. NGO partners they are also considered to be less cost-effective
also confirmed a common pattern across than their local and national counterparts. Some
UNICEF COs that was highlighted in the sub-contract the implementation of UNICEF
2020 Humanitarian Review: ‘UNICEF’s interventions to Nigerian NGOs, adding a
bureaucratic procedures often delay and further layer of administration and overhead.
complicate partnerships with local civil society Moreover, several UNICEF staff and partners
organizations and national NGOs and give the characterized the INGOs involved in the
relationship a contractual nature, leaving little response to have become ‘big and UN-like’;
space for discussions with local partners on attributes that were associated with limited
programming approaches.’90 This is discussed flexibility and a perceived level of risk aversion
further in section 5.3. that meant INGO staff rarely travelled to deep-
field locations.
With the conflict in Nigeria now in its twelfth
year, beyond UNICEF’s strategic commitments, Risk management and risk transfer
there are very practical reasons for it to engage
strategically with NGO partners that can play Regarding security and risk management,
an important role in strengthening both the INGOs can draw on support from the
coverage and quality of UNICEF’s response in International NGO Safety Organization (INSO).
future years. United Nations and INGO staff gave positive
feedback about the engagement, assistance
INGOs are generally thought to have the and analysis of INSO, which was also
capacity required to deliver good-quality considered to benefit from good networks with
services. Interviews for this evaluation the Nigerian military and other security actors.
endorsed this perception. Most INGOs have Many INGOs also have their own security staff
resources to provide training to their staff, to advise on security and risk management and
who generally have a greater awareness of who are responsible for supporting staff and
issues linked to quality standards, principled building local networks.
programming and project management. The
90 UNICEF (2020), Strengthening UNICEF’s Humanitarian Action - The Humanitarian Review: Findings and Recommendations, p.67.
97
National NGO partners said that UNICEF had 4.4 The role of programme
occasionally passed on security information, monitoring to identify and
which they found extremely helpful, but this address gaps in coverage and
did not happen systematically and there had quality
not been a focus on training or on supporting or
strengthening security and risk management.
Since UNICEF implements its interventions
NGOs felt that there was insufficient
through a wide range of partnerships, it is
space in their budgets to cover security-
imperative to monitor quality and coverage
related costs (accommodation, vehicles and
of its activities to ensure the organization
communications).
understands where and how its programmes
contribute to humanitarian outcomes. This
section discusses the use of HPM by the
‘UNICEF does not share security alerts, but
emergency team, programmatic monitoring
some of the UNICEF officers share information
by sections, and how data and information are
when necessary. But it is not systemic or
handled and used to manage the coverage and
official.’
quality of the response.
-UNICEF implementing partner (Nigerian NGO)
4.4.1 Humanitarian performance
monitoring
The evaluation found that the risks that would
have been borne by UNICEF staff have, in large
UNICEF’s emergency team has successfully
part, been transferred to local and national
institutionalized a robust HPM mechanism
NGO partners that do not have the same level
that periodically generates actionable
of resources as UNICEF to manage them.
information on challenges and gaps for
Although some local and national NGO partners
a sample of humanitarian interventions.
might have better contextual knowledge
Given the limited extent of integrated
and access to contacts with localized risk
programming, it is not surprising that HPM is
information, the evaluation shows that this is
focused on snapshots of individual sections
not the case across all partners. It is general
rather than contributing to improving cross-
UNICEF practice that the organization does
sectoral analysis or performance.
not take responsibility for partner security
management,91 which would likely overwhelm
its resources.
91 See, for example: UNICEF (2012), Remote Programming in Humanitarian Action, EMOPS. Annex 8: Engaging with Partners on
Security.
98
HPM is an approach to ensure results-based programme and multiple sectors. The HPM
management of humanitarian action. It is meant reports make reference to CCC and Sphere
to combine the most feasible data collection standards, providing balanced feedback that
mechanisms available to the CO to generate highlights achievements in addition to noting
information on UNICEF’s performance against the challenges.
targets and the quality of the response on the
ground. The data should allow programme The HPM recommendation matrix is used
managers to make effective decisions with a systematically to highlight required follow-up
view to meeting their accountability for results actions, assigning them a priority, identifying
and to the people in need. The evaluation the responsible staff member and indicating
sought to assess the effectiveness of whether remedial action has been taken or
UNICEF’s programme monitoring mechanisms not. While the evaluation team is not able to
in identifying and addressing gaps in coverage comment on the extent to which the issues
and quality. that were identified have been resolved
and the timeliness of the action taken, the
The NCO emergency team has successfully approach used in BAY states appears to
institutionalized an HPM mechanism that has be robust regarding what it can realistically
remained fully operational since the phase 1 deliver: the emergency team coordinates
evaluation in 2018 when it was last reviewed with programme sections in advance to rotate
(see Figure 7). Interviews with UNICEF staff through geographic locations and intervention
and a review of the HPM documentation (data sites, ensuring a relatively balanced coverage
collection tools, plans and reports) suggest of partners and programmes with HPM visits.
that the system of monitoring a sub-sample The type of information collected and the
of humanitarian intervention sites each month tracking of issues and follow-up actions are
continues to achieve the purpose of providing transparent and systematic.
a snapshot of output quality across a large
99
Given the limited extent of integrated The evaluation team did not observe this in
programming, it is not surprising that HPM practice and, given the significant workload
is focused on individual sections rather than of the emergency team that leads on HPM,
contributing to improving cross-sectoral it is likely to be beyond the team’s capacity
analysis or performance. Nonetheless, each as it is currently configured. UNICEF’s recent
HPM report covers all sectors visited during Humanitarian Review flagged this as a concern
a given monthly monitoring round. Therefore, across many emergency contexts: ‘UNICEF’s
it has the potential to play a role in fostering approach to humanitarian data collection has
integration, or at least in highlighting areas been less holistic, resulting in a series of
where convergence would be beneficial. snapshots rather than a full panorama.’92
FIGURE 7
UNICEF Nigeria HPM process and workflow93
Revisit the monitoring work plan
Request programme briefs for site visits from sections
Training sessions with data collection supporting staff
PREPARATION
Contact focal person on ground to support (security, accommodation, FGDs).
Service point observation (e.g. clinic, toilets, etc.)
KIIs with service providers
FGDs
DATA
Supply end-user monitoring.
COLLECTION
Field notes consolidated and draft report prepared
Draft report and recommendations shared with sections
Recommendations follow-up matrix prepared to monitor progress
DATA
ANALYSIS Final report prepared and circulated.
92 UNICEF (2020), Strengthening UNICEF’s Humanitarian Action - The Humanitarian Review: Findings and Recommendations.
93 Authors’ illustration based on: UNICEF Nigeria (2018), Nigeria Humanitarian Performance Monitoring Monthly Rounds, Framework
for Core Functions, December 2018. Unpublished.
100
EVALUATION OF UNICEF’S COVERAGE AND QUALITY IN COMPLEX HUMANITARIAN SITUATIONS: NIGERIA
While HPM, which is led by UNICEF’s (MIS) that generate data on indicators related
emergency team, is a cornerstone of results to outputs and quality.
and quality monitoring of the humanitarian
response, it can only cover a small sample The evaluation team reviewed PMV reports
of interventions and sites across UNICEF’s related to the humanitarian response for all
extensive programme portfolio. Programme sections from 2018 to 2020. For any given
monitoring is primarily the responsibility of year, between three and seven reports had
each programme section. been shared per section, putting the extent
of programmatic monitoring activities into
4.4.2 Programme monitoring and perspective, given the relatively large scale
quality assurance of the response. Since PMVs are generally
undertaken by UNICEF staff, the reach of
Overall practices on programme the monitoring visits tended to be limited
implementation and quality monitoring, to locations within Maiduguri or in the LGA
which are the responsibility of programme capitals that are accessible by helicopter, which
sections, leave room for improvement. only partially covers the programme.
Partners indicated that there was limited
follow-up from UNICEF staff on programme The majority of UNICEF staff interviewed in
quality, with field monitoring being a the evaluation, including senior management,
rare occurrence for most. Programmatic considered the current quality monitoring
monitoring visits appeared to be undertaken and assurance practices to leave room for
for only a small sub-sample of partners and improvement. UNICEF relies heavily on
intervention sites across all sections, with reporting from implementing partners for
limited or no systematic management of information on programme results and quality,
the information generated through these partly owing to the limited access and field
visits. mobility of UNICEF staff, as discussed above.
Several partners indicated that, when UNICEF
Partner reporting, routine field monitoring and followed up on reports they had submitted,
PMVs by UNICEF, an assurance activity under the conversations mostly revolved around
the Harmonized Approach to Cash Transfers quantitative targets rather than deeper
(HACT), are the main means to assess discussions on managing programme quality.
programme quality and progress towards Multiple partners appreciated the quarterly
results. TPFs have also been used to support and, for some, monthly office-based meetings
monitoring functions. Some programme with UNICEF to discuss progress, but rarely
sections, in particular health and to a lesser saw UNICEF staff who came to observe
extent child protection, can rely on well- interventions in the field. A senior UNICEF staff
established management information systems member involved in the response summarised
the dilemma as follows:
101
UNICEF’s leadership in Nigeria indicated
‘Not being able to monitor our humanitarian that a process was under way to strengthen
programmes closely is a hard reality. I think this programmatic monitoring holistically, to
is partly due to personal preference – some connect progress tracking against milestones
people have become used to not traveling and results with financial data, supplies, and
to the field very much – and partly due to an context and risk analysis. The enhanced
organizational risk aversion. We have been measures are envisaged to be in place by
over-reliant on UNDSS. They definitely have the end of 2021. The evaluation supports
a valuable advisory role, but our staff don’t this move and suggests specific measures
realize that UNDSS does not say “you can’t to strengthen quality monitoring of the
go”. It is always a managerial decision from humanitarian response, as further detailed in
UNICEF to use this information and decide to the recommendations (see section 6).
go to the field or not. So, we might be a bit too
risk averse, and this has created somewhat 4.4.3 Cross-cutting findings on programme
of a disconnection from the field. BUT it is monitoring: vast potential for
important to keep in mind that there has been digitalization
a stable pattern and trend of humanitarians
being attacked, so we cannot take this lightly! The CO has not yet utilized the potential of
But our risk analysis could be deeper.’ what modern IT solutions can offer. HPM and
- UNICEF staff member, Maiduguri programme monitoring data are handled
mostly ‘offline’, in MS Word documents
and MS Excel files. Information is not easily
UNICEF staff members suggested that accessible, analysed and visualized to inform
TPFs could play a stronger role in supporting decision-making. The CO stands to gain
implementation and quality monitoring in the significantly from investing in digitizing its
field, but that UNICEF would need to provide monitoring and reporting processes. In mid-
them with additional training and the right tools 2021, the office introduced an electronic
for this. As one interviewee put it: PMV system, which is expected to improve
this situation once in full use.
The evaluation was surprised to note that an
‘Even when our facilitators have the right
operation the size of the Nigerian humanitarian
technical background, they don’t know what
response has been run mostly offline. Large
they are meant to be looking for if we don’t
volumes of information are generated in the
equip them with the right tools.’
planning and reporting on HPM and PMVs,
- UNICEF staff member, Maiduguri
yet all of it is done in desktop MS Excel files
102
EVALUATION OF UNICEF’S COVERAGE AND QUALITY IN COMPLEX HUMANITARIAN SITUATIONS: NIGERIA
and lengthy MS Word documents, which are In mid-2021, the CO introduced an electronic
emailed around the office. Information is not PMV (e-PMV) system that is intended to
digitally geo-referenced. This means that it is digitalize the information collected during PMVs.
difficult for programme managers to access Going beyond the core HACT requirements,
and process these large amounts of data and to the e-PMV form lets UNICEF staff share their
gain a holistic understanding of the geographic first-hand impressions of the extent to which
reach and thematic coverage of monitoring the targeted beneficiaries of an intervention
activities. were reached, and enter data for supply end-
user monitoring. The e-PMV is a significant
Part of the underlying reason might be that step in the right direction towards digitizing
UNICEF HQ has continued to tell its COs that programme management, and monitoring and
its corporate ‘e-Tools’94 suite would eventually tracking follow-up of issues. However, the
cater for such functionalities, so COs have evaluation did not find evidence of the tool
held off investing in their own solutions. informing programme management, and no
However, the same indications for ‘additional interviewees mentioned it.
e-Tools functions soon to come’ have been
communicated by HQ since the 2018 phase The humanitarian response in the north-east
1 evaluation in Nigeria and, in fact, much stands to gain vastly from digital solutions that
longer than this in other COs. There is also allow for analysing, visualizing and mapping
UNICEF’s corporate hesitancy to let COs invest data automatically on dashboards, making it
in information technology (IT) solutions that easier for programme managers and staff – and,
involve online, server-based software and data if desired, even partners – to understand which
management, because of the privacy and IT interventions are not moving according to plan,
security risks. Taken together, this has resulted where pressing issues require attention, and
in COs – including in Nigeria – not considering which intervention sites have not been visited
or shying away from establishing IT-based for a long time. Data security would be of
monitoring and reporting tools. It may also be paramount importance. UNICEF implementing
partly due to CO staff not wanting to engage partners indicated that they would welcome
in the perceived administrative burden to first more IT-based monitoring solutions, but also
get permission and then procure software said that maps of their intervention sites must
solutions. not fall into the wrong hands because it would
expose their staff and make them easy targets
for NSAGs.
94 See: https://etools.unicef.org.
103
4.5 Maintaining relevance undertaken or commissioned by UNICEF. The
CO’s senior management concurred that there
had been weaknesses in collective leadership
Maintaining operational relevance in contexts
in the north-east, especially on analysis, and
of ever-changing needs requires humanitarian
limited efforts to develop a strategic vision
actors to pay attention to context, to be
for where the response was trying to go,
accountable to and shaped by the communities
given the challenging and changing context.
they serve, and to be connected to the long-
term perspective.95 These aspects of relevance Overall, there was agreement among UNICEF
and development partner interviewees who
are discussed below.
spoke on the issue that focusing on needs
4.5.1 Context, conflict and political assessment alone was insufficient to inform a
economy analysis to inform the context-sensitive response.
humanitarian response
This is not unique to the response in north-east
Nigeria. UNICEF’s 2020 Humanitarian Review
Despite UNICEF guidance emphasizing the
found that:
importance of context analysis and adapting
programmes to contextual needs, there ‘Many COs reported challenges with contextual
was no evidence of regular context analysis analysis, stating that if UNICEF cannot
of the programme in north-east Nigeria understand the context, it will not be able to
to ensure that it adapts its approaches deliver an appropriate emergency response.
and delivery mechanisms to the changing (…) As humanitarian contexts become more
context. This makes it difficult for UNICEF complex, so must humanitarians’ analysis. (…)
to have confidence that it is maximizing its With a shrinking humanitarian space, UNICEF
potential to achieve coverage and quality. A must ensure it has a robust, methodological
comprehensive analysis of the context and and rigorous analysis where specialist political
political economy would also go a long way analysis is used alongside humanitarian
towards developing a holistic strategy for analysis to help predict future humanitarian
the north-east. challenges’96
The evaluation did not find evidence of
substantial context and conflict analysis being
95 UNICEF (2013), Strengthening humanitarian action: Background paper; unpublished. See also Ramalingam, B. and Mitchell, J.
(2014), Responding to change needs? Challenges and opportunities for humanitarian action, Montreux XIII Meeting Paper; ALNAP
(2014) Montreux XIII Humanitarian Retreat, Convenors Conclusions.
96 UNICEF (2020), Strengthening UNICEF’s Humanitarian Action - The Humanitarian Review: Findings and Recommendations, p.76.
104
EVALUATION OF UNICEF’S COVERAGE AND QUALITY IN COMPLEX HUMANITARIAN SITUATIONS: NIGERIA
Over the years, UNICEF Nigeria has had to of UNICEF’s decision-making processes
adapt its response to emerging humanitarian and how its programme has changed over
needs, and the scale of displacement has time. The challenge for UNICEF now lies in
meant that UNICEF has had to continually ensuring that programme approaches remain
expand its presence and programme as the relevant in a complex context where many
situation escalated. Its history of programming parameters have changed, but humanitarian
in the north-east has meant that it is better access has completely stalled. The body of
positioned than many to contribute to context relevant external research on the north-east is
analyses. However, staff turnover has led unfortunately thin.97
to there being limited institutional memory
BOX 6
The role of cross-sectoral and sector-specific strategies to guide analysis and operations
In-depth context and conflict analyses would allow humanitarian actors to identify transformational programming
opportunities for providing life-saving assistance while connecting their interventions to more sustainable solutions
towards peace and development objectives.
In the absence of more profound analysis and strategic programme approaches, Nigeria’s three-year Humanitarian
Response Strategy (HRS) 2019–2021 for the north-east reflects a constructive and pragmatic approach to operating
under ‘status quo’ conditions. It provides a light-touch situation analysis, summarizes shared knowledge on
underlying causes of the conflict, and offers a set of priorities to guide the response, including on gender- and
age-sensitive programming, principled access through acceptance, and enhanced community engagement.
Unfortunately, the strategy does not map out knowledge gaps, and fails to identify priority areas for analysis and
research of strategic importance, a missed opportunity given the visibility of the HRS.
It is noteworthy that several programme clusters have felt the need to complement the high-level HRS with more
detailed, sector-specific strategies.
97 One of the few recent examples appears to be an FCDO-funded study on the war economy in BAY states. See: Williams, A. (2020),
War Economy in North East Nigeria, K4D Helpdesk Report 734. Brighton, UK: Institute of Development Studies.
105
The WASH sector has developed a ‘3-year WASH Response Strategy for North-East Nigeria: 2021–2023’.98 The
document presents short situation analyses, synthesizes the most relevant legal frameworks governing the sector
and sets guiding principles for all partners. The remainder of the strategy is very operations-oriented and reads as
a high-level, multi-year work plan, but it is commendable that partners have started to take a long-term view rather
than to remain in firefighting mode from year to year.
The nutrition sector has established a ‘Sector Strategy and Response Plan 2020–2022’,99 which includes a summary
of the drivers of malnutrition in north-east Nigeria and provides a synthesis of key challenges for the nutrition
response, along with a short outlook on how the situation might evolve. The document then identifies strategic
focus areas and specific operational objectives that are to be pursued depending on the type of context in which
a location is understood to be. All in all, the nutrition sector strategy is a well-developed, articulate and relatively
strong strategic guidance document.
The EiE Working Group in has started developing a ‘Localization Strategy’ and an ‘Accountability to Affected
Populations (AAP) in Education Strategy for North-East Nigeria’.100 Neither is suitable nor aims to guide overall
analysis or the strategic programme direction, but these efforts are indicative of the fact that (a) many in the
humanitarian community are looking for a common-sense strategic direction and vision for the response; and (b)
in the absence of common approaches and more detailed multi-partner strategies, clusters have begun to develop
their own.
A review of the WASH and education strategies suggests that, while they represent commendable efforts to
develop guiding documents, they leave room for improvement. This is not surprising, given that operational cluster
coordinators are not necessarily experts in strategy development and may write or commission the drafting to
consultants. Beyond these individual efforts, the HCT would be better placed to lead the development of a more
comprehensive humanitarian strategy and vision, and to prioritize, oversee and support the development of more
sector-specific or thematic strategy documents, for example on localization and AAP, which are relevant to all
sectors.
98 WASH Sector Nigeria (2021), 3-year WASH Response Strategy for north-east Nigeria: 2021–2023.
99 Nigeria Nutrition in Emergencies (2020), Sector Strategy and Response Plan.
100 Education in Emergencies Working Group Nigeria (2021), EiEWG Accountability to Affected Population in Education Strategy for
North-East Nigeria, draft for comments, November 2021. The localization strategy document was not yet available for review.
106
EVALUATION OF UNICEF’S COVERAGE AND QUALITY IN COMPLEX HUMANITARIAN SITUATIONS: NIGERIA
UNICEF’s current ‘North-East Strategy’ draft AAP is a key component in ensuring the quality
document primarily clusters locations according of UNICEF’s programming. The revised CCCs
to their status as being in a state of acute commit UNICEF to ‘ensure that all vulnerable,
emergency, protracted crisis or early recovery, at-risk and crisis-affected populations supported
and maps applicable programme approaches through its humanitarian action are able to
and partnerships across the three categories. hold UNICEF to account for promoting and
The document is not grounded in a more protecting their rights and generating effective
foundational diagnosis of contextual factors, results for them, taking into account their
which does not exist, and does not contain needs, concerns and preferences, and working
other elements one would typically expect to in ways that enhance their dignity, capacities
find in a strategy document: context analysis, and resilience.’101 Numerous new guidelines
lessons learned, guiding principles and overall and corporate procedures have recently been
goals. However, the strategic approaches by released to anchor AAP more firmly in UNICEF
key area listed in the document are, albeit operations. Most recently, the Office of
succinct, highly relevant and can be expanded Emergency Programmes (EMOPS) published
on. ‘Accountability to Affected Populations:
a handbook for UNICEF and partners’,102
4.5.2 Community engagement to which contains practical guidance on how to
strengthen accountability and integrate AAP at country level and implement
programme quality it in programmes. Community engagement is
meant to go beyond C4D to include ‘processes
UNICEF engages with affected populations for listening to and communicating with people
in its humanitarian response in a number in order to better understand their needs,
of different ways, but the patchwork of vulnerabilities and capacities, and gathering,
approaches lacks consistency, coherence responding to and acting on their feedback.’103
and follow-up, meaning that it is still some
way from meeting UNICEF’s corporate
aspirations and commitments on AAP.
This indicates that there is a significant
opportunity to strengthen accountability
and programme relevance by establishing a
systematic AAP mechanism in NCO.
101 See https://www.corecommitments.unicef.org, accessed on 30 October 2021.
102 UNICEF (2020), Accountability to Affected Populations: a handbook for UNICEF and partners, Geneva: EMOPS, June 2020.
103 Ibid., p. viii (Glossary).
107
UNICEF engages with communities it assists community members rarely or never used it.
in BAY states in several different ways: These CRM approaches can make an important
contribution to strengthening accountability
by taking account of community feedback if they are linked to a formal process of
during assessments reviewing and responding to complaints and
making changes to programmes – which they
through the interactions that UNICEF staff
are not in the case of UNICEF’s response
and consultants have with those using
in north-east Nigeria. Occasionally, UNICEF
humanitarian services
has also used its U-Report platform to solicit
through its C4D activities
feedback on specific interventions. It is worth
consulting communities in a more targeted noting that the HCT established a ‘Community
way during programme monitoring (which, Engagement Strategy and Action Plan for
outside of Maiduguri town, is most North-East Nigeria’ in 2018.104 Evidently, this
frequently undertaken by TPFs). has not translated into substantial operational
AAP mechanisms on the ground. A recent
This engagement is largely for the purposes assessment of the AAP situation in Borno
of assessing needs, disseminating information State found that, when given the opportunity,
about humanitarian services and obtaining a community members generally appreciated the
snapshot of user satisfaction with humanitarian ability to provide feedback and engage directly
assistance. with humanitarian actors.105
Interviews with UNICEF staff and Based on interviews with UNICEF staff
implementing partners in Maiduguri revealed a and implementing partners, the evaluation
mosaic of different approaches to community found no systematic efforts on the part of
engagement, a commitment to which was UNICEF to access, understand, follow up on
said to be incorporated in all partnership or use community feedback and complaints
agreements. The community engagement that partners might have received to inform
mechanisms that were shared mostly humanitarian programming. UNICEF’s INGO
pertained to some form of complaints response partners in particular appeared to have more
mechanism (CRM), such as complaints boxes robust CRM, but UNICEF staff rarely – if
and the use of a dedicated phone line – in the ever – showed any particular interest in the
majority of cases not toll-free, meaning that information generated through these.
104 United Nations (2018), Community Engagement Strategy and Action Plan for North-East Nigeria, June 2018 – June 2020,
developed with the support of the AAP Working Group and endorsed by the HCT on 9 November 2018.
105 REACH (2021), Accountability to Affected Populations Situation Overview, Borno State, Nigeria.
108
The AAP practices in NCO are reflective of
the status quo in most COs. UNICEF’s 2020
Humanitarian Review concluded that ‘UNICEF
and its partners have no systematic approach
to AAP.’106 A survey among UNICEF COs
revealed that 50 per cent had systems to
ensure community participation, while only 38
per cent had established feedback mechanisms
that could inform programme decision-
making.107 In summary, the Humanitarian
Review estimates that ‘less than half of
UNICEF’s COs manage to achieve more
than 50 per cent of the organization’s AAP
goals.’108 Regarding UNICEF’s lack of follow-
up on community feedback, the Humanitarian
Review found that:
While it is acknowledged that the complex
‘Where existing feedback mechanisms context of the response in north-east Nigeria
do cover programme-related complaints, means that even basic assistance modalities
there is seldom a system to ensure that may be difficult to deliver in hard-to-reach
feedback is acted on. In failing to engage areas, let alone more feedback-responsive
affected populations effectively, UNICEF risks approaches, UNICEF Nigeria stands to gain
implementing programming that is not well from establishing a more systematic, formalized
targeted, that is culturally inappropriate or system for gauging programme relevance as
that does not fully address the needs of the part of an approach that seeks to adapt to the
affected population.’ changing context and needs. UNICEF’s senior
- UNICEF Humanitarian Review 2020 109 leadership in Nigeria indicated that establishing
a more systematic AAP mechanism was a top
priority and is intended to be operationalized
later in 2021 or early 2022.
106 UNICEF (2020), Strengthening UNICEF’s Humanitarian Action - The Humanitarian Review: Findings and Recommendations, p.69.
107 UNICEF (2019), AAP Strategic Monitoring Questionnaire Analysis 2019, quoted in: UNICEF (2020), Strengthening UNICEF’s
Humanitarian Action - The Humanitarian Review: Findings and Recommendations.
108 UNICEF (2020), Strengthening UNICEF’s Humanitarian Action - The Humanitarian Review: Findings and Recommendations, p.69.
109 Ibid., p.70.
109
4.5.3 Connecting to the longer-term has developed over time, with programmes
perspective: humanitarian compartmentalized into humanitarian or
action, development and development interventions, with similar
peacebuilding divisions in funding cycles and narratives.
UNICEF’s internal structures and processes
All UNICEF programme sections have been that usually separate humanitarian and
attempting to ensure that humanitarian development programming mirror this division.
programmes include a longer-term
development perspective to improve LHD for UNICEF has been defined more
quality and sustainability. However, comprehensively in the glossary that
ongoing insecurity and the Government’s accompanies the revised CCC:
lack of capacity and willingness to take
responsibility for basic service delivery
remain significant challenges to achieving
long-term coverage and quality objectives ‘Fostering the coherence and
and, ultimately, peace and stability. complementarity between humanitarian and
development actions to strengthen systems
In recent years, UNICEF has undertaken that deliver essential services to the most
several corporate initiatives to strengthen the vulnerable and marginalized populations
link between its humanitarian and development (…) and [interventions that] are designed to
work globally. In 2019, a new ‘Procedure strengthen policies and programmes related
on Linking Humanitarian and Development to climate change, disaster risk reduction and
(LHD) Programming’ was issued.110 In 2020, peacebuilding.’
the Evaluation Office commissioned a - Core Commitments for Children112
‘Formative Evaluation of UNICEF Work to
Link Humanitarian and Development
Programming’.111 The latter highlighted that
UNICEF’s approach to the humanitarian, All UNICEF sections have, to varying
development and peace nexus as ‘linking degrees, attempted to use their humanitarian
humanitarian and development’ programming programmes to contribute to systems and
neglects the peacebuilding dimension. This capacity strengthening in the north-east. For
may reflect a heavily divided structure that example, education partners have begun
111 UNICEF (2021), Formative Evaluation of UNICEF Work to Link Humanitarian and Development Programming. UNICEF Evaluation\
Office, New York.
112 UNICEF (2020), Core Commitments for Children in Humanitarian Action, New York.
110
EVALUATION OF UNICEF’S COVERAGE AND QUALITY IN COMPLEX HUMANITARIAN SITUATIONS: NIGERIA
to integrate temporary learning spaces into
schools so that these can eventually be turned ‘National staff employed in public services
into additional regular classrooms, and the will not want to go to the north-east. The area
EiE programme works to connect non-formal does not attract strong staff. So, the aid sector
learning with formal education pathways. In comes in as a substitute. We need to be aware
health, nutrition and child protection, UNICEF of this. It provides no good basis for handing
builds and rehabilitates local facilities and over the response to government from a nexus
community structures and trains staff and perspective, and for building on it to achieve
volunteers to maintain services even in the development goals.’
absence of a UNICEF intervention. Similarly, - United Nations agency staff partnering with
the WASH section invests in village-level UNICEF
operation and maintenance teams, which are
local structures that are intended to help sustain
interventions even after UNICEF support has
UNICEF’s senior management indicated
ended. Moreover, capacity strengthening
a strong interest in strengthening nexus
plays an important role in system building and
programming in the north-east and was in the
sustainability (see section 4.3 above).
process of securing support from one donor
agency, the German Development Bank (KfW),
UNICEF interviewees indicated that their
to fund a €40 million resilience programme in
programmes had mostly switched back
Borno State, albeit in two already relatively
into ‘development mode’ in large parts of
stable, easy-to-access LGAs. The partnership
Adamawa and Yobe, and in some parts of
will include a political economy analysis and
Borno State that had been relatively stable for
will have a major emphasis on peacebuilding.
extended periods of time. In the twelfth year
of the conflict, the Government is evidently
keen to argue that the situation has stabilized,
4.6 Advocacy
as illustrated by the Borno State 25-Year
Development Framework (see section 2.2.3).
This section reviews how effectively UNICEF
At the same time, given the Government’s
has influenced others to strengthen protection
limitations, there was consensus among four
and to increase the quality and coverage of
out of five UNICEF staff who spoke on the
humanitarian action in north-east Nigeria.
nexus issue that UNICEF programmes were at
First, the evaluation reviews the reporting on
risk of substituting and delivering basic public
grave violations, which is one of UNICEF’s
services that the Government was unable or
main mechanisms for speaking out against
unwilling to provide. One international agency
protection concerns. Second, this section will
partner of UNICEF characterized the situation
look at the use of advocacy for humanitarian
as follows:
access (see also section 4.1 on humanitarian
access more generally).
111
4.6.1 Reporting on grave violations by UNICEF and through advocacy relays,
including civil society organizations.
The evaluation found that the process
of collecting and verifying evidence on The MRM as an advocacy mechanism is
alleged grave violations was rigorous and notable for its direct links with a range of highly
systematic, albeit limited to areas currently specialised child protection activities. In Nigeria,
accessible to humanitarian actors. Despite it informs UNICEF’s ongoing engagement
capacity and coverage constraints, the with NAF, aimed at obtaining the release of
MRM is widely thought to contribute children with alleged ties with armed groups.
meaningfully to an enabling environment It also connects with the rehabilitation of these
for child protection in north-east Nigeria. children at the Bulumkutu Transit Centre, run
The MRM draws on some of UNICEF’s by the Borno State Ministry of Women Affairs
core areas of expertise and allows it to and Social Development (MWASD) with
demonstrate its added value in the United UNICEF support. Finally, it interfaces with case
Nations response. management work done at community level
to support the reintegration of alleged former
The operational core of UNICEF’s capability for child combatants, and to arrange for their
advocacy in Nigeria is the MRM, which was reunification with their families.
established in 2012 to enable the systematic
collection of evidence on six types of grave It is worth noting that the grave violations
violations against children in situations of monitored through the MRM include sexual
armed conflict. The MRM is currently deployed violence against children. Reporting on the
in 13 countries, including Nigeria. At country sex- and gender-based dimension of these
level, the MRM is overseen by the Country violations dovetails with advocacy work on
Task Force on Monitoring and Reporting, which this thematic area, which has been the subject
is co-chaired by UNICEF and the RC/HC. of annual reports of the UNSG since 2013.
Denial of humanitarian access for children
To date, information gathered in Nigeria under also features among the six grave violations
the MRM has fed into global reports of the monitored by the MRM. This is worth noting
United Nations Secretary General (UNSG) as it potentially adds weight to advocacy and
on Children and Armed Conflict, submitted engagement work aimed at improving access
annually to the United Nations General in north-east Nigeria.
Assembly, as well as two country-specific
reports of the UNSG, released in 2017 and The evaluation found that the process
2020. Evidence gathered under the MRM of collecting and verifying evidence on
provides the basis for advocacy work alleged grave violations was rigorous and
conducted globally and in-country, both directly systematic. The overwhelming proportion of
112
EVALUATION OF UNICEF’S COVERAGE AND QUALITY IN COMPLEX HUMANITARIAN SITUATIONS: NIGERIA
the information received on these allegations According to multiple respondents, the low
is conveyed to UNICEF through community- number of allegations reported under the MRM
based child protection networks that have been also reflects one of its main limitations; namely,
established with its support. The allegations that it only covers areas accessible to its
are verified on a case-by-case basis by UNICEF monitoring personnel. There was a widely held
child protection personnel, with the assistance view among interviewees that this resulted in
of TPFs. In interviews, UNICEF staff involved systemic bias in reporting, and that the number
in data verification for the MRM displayed of violations recorded would be significantly
specific knowledge of protection monitoring higher if coverage could extend to NSAG-held
and reporting practice and referenced areas.
dedicated guidance and training material on the
subject.113 Regarding the volume of allegations processed,
another recurrent observation among UNICEF
In the 12 months preceding 2021, 250 grave respondents was that few United Nations
violations against children were recorded under or other aid actors took part in monitoring.
the MRM in Nigeria.114 Multiple interviewees A stated intention of the MRM is to rely for
noted that this number was likely well below its coverage on the field presence of other
the number of violations actually committed humanitarian actors. To that end, the MRM
and was also significantly lower than the has developed a range of support tools and
number of allegations received. In this, it is guidance aimed at enabling third-party data
reflective of the methodological rigour of MRM collection to appropriate standards.115 The
practice. Of a comparatively large volume limited participation of other aid actors in data
of allegations made, only limited numbers collection on the ground was attributed to a
were retained through the MRM’s verification lack of capacity. It was viewed as another factor
and quality control processes. UNICEF staff contributing to fewer violations being reported
involved in verification acknowledged that their than had actually been committed.
capacity was limited; in these circumstances,
priority was given to the quality and reliability Assessing results at impact level in advocacy
of the data, with the possible effect of narrowing is notoriously difficult.116 Nonetheless, despite
the range of allegations that could be verified. the limitations in scope and capacity, there was
113 UNICEF (2014), Field Manual, Monitoring and Reporting Mechanism (MRM) on Grave Violations Against Children in Situations of
Armed Conflict.
114 https://childrenandarmedconflict.un.org/
115 The MRM has a dedicated web portal leading to MRM guidelines, as well as the MRM manual and a training toolkit. See
https://www.mrmtools.org
116 See, for example, Teles, S. and Schmidt, M. (2011), The Elusive Craft of Evaluating Advocacy, Stanford Social Innovation review.
113
a clear sense among interviewees that the the United Nations of an action plan to stop the
MRM had contributed in a meaningful way to an recruitment of children and their use in armed
environment more conducive to child protection conflict.117 Specifically, the CJTF supported the
in north-east Nigeria. A view generally shared by disengagement of 2,203 girls and boys from its
non-UNICEF respondents was that the MRM ranks since its endorsement of the workplan
had served to confirm UNICEF’s credibility as in 2017.118 There was a widely held sense
a protection actor and had demonstrated its among interviewees that MRM reporting had
technical expertise and added value in a range contributed to this positive outcome, alongside
of highly specialized sub-areas of protection. active UNICEF engagement with the CJTF on
An example widely cited with reference to the basis of the action plan.
the MRM’s impact was the 2021 delisting of
the Civilian Joint Task Force (CJTF) from the Another example cited of the MRM’s
UNSG’s Report on Children in Armed Conflict. contribution to an enabling environment for
The delisting was directly linked to a sharp child protection was the generally constructive
reduction in this armed group’s recruitment of working relationship between UNICEF and
children into its ranks, following its signing with NAF, which holds an unknown number of
117 ‘An action Plan is a signed commitment that allows the United Nations to support a party to a conflict listed in the annexes of the
Secretary General’s Annual Report on Children and Armed Conflict, by laying out concrete and time-bound measures it must
take to end and prevent the recruitment and use of children, as well as other grave violations’ Source: Annex to UNICEF press
release announcing CJTF signing of Action Plan to end recruitment of children, September 2017.
118 United Nations (2020), Children in Armed Conflict in Nigeria, Report of the Secretary General, United Nations Security Council, 6
July 2020.
114
EVALUATION OF UNICEF’S COVERAGE AND QUALITY IN COMPLEX HUMANITARIAN SITUATIONS: NIGERIA
former child combatants linked to NSAGs in It must also balance its own advocacy
administrative custody.119 Divergences of view and engagement work with the RC/HC’s
remain on UNICEF’s position that all children prerogative to set the orientation of UN-
formerly linked with armed groups should be wide advocacy efforts. Although it has
treated as victims and detained only as a last balanced these competing imperatives
resort. Nonetheless, UNICEF respondents in adeptly, results on humanitarian access
the evaluation noted that the quality of dialogue remain elusive overall. At local level,
with NAF had improved markedly on matters UNICEF has registered notable successes in
relating to child protection, with some children advocating on behalf of its partners.
being referred directly to UNICEF and MWASD
in the wake of military clearance operations, As noted above, there was a widely held view
without undergoing detention. among respondents in the evaluation that
humanitarian principles in the United Nations
More generally, interviewees shared a sense response have been deprioritized in favour
that MRM reporting provided a valuable of a posture of alignment with governmental
backdrop to case management work done and military authorities. This perception was
in child protection at community level. The common among non-United Nations sources,
reintegration of ex-child combatants in their who did not differentiate markedly between
communities was aided by the MRM’s public the United Nations response and UNICEF’s
recording of the type of experience they had country programme. A frequent comment was
probably endured. In this perspective, MRM that the principles of neutrality, independence
reporting provided an element of accountability and impartiality were not being substantively
for rights violations carried out during applied to operations on the ground. Several
the hostilities, and clearly placed ex-child sources also expressed the view that some
combatants as victims. scepticism existed at senior levels of the United
Nations on the applicability of these principles
4.6.2 Advocacy for humanitarian access in the Nigerian context.
In advocating for principled humanitarian However, there was a strongly held view
access in north-east Nigeria, UNICEF must among respondents that, despite the need for
reckon with determined counterparts and hard security in a volatile context, this did not
a highly complex operating environment. take away from the centrality of humanitarian
119 More than 220 children linked to armed groups were release from administrative custody in 2020. Source: UNICEF Press
Release, March 2020.
115
principles. In particular, several sources viewed In these conditions, UNICEF’s advocacy
the principle of independence as critical to for principled humanitarian access faces
ensuring that humanitarian aid remained needs- competing imperatives. On the one hand,
based and effectively shielded from attempts UNICEF’s prominence in the response through
at instrumentalization. Their concerns revolved its leadership of five sectors, its key role in
around signs that the humanitarian response the RRM, and the youth-biased demographics
in north-east Nigeria might be drawn into a of the response’s targeted population122 gives
conflict-stabilization effort combining armed it a special responsibility to play a lead role
operations with the use of aid and economic in advocating for improved access. On the
assistance to bolster the Government’s other hand, the principles of governance that
legitimacy in contested areas.120 underpin the United Nations inter-agency
process do require UNICEF to defer to the RC/
A cause of equal concern to many respondents HC in matters relating to the United Nation’s
was a perceived reluctance on the part of the RC/ engagement with external stakeholders.
HC to assert the neutrality and independence Similarly, at operational level, there is an
of the United Nations response. When queried understanding that engagement and advocacy
on the subject, sources familiar with the RC/ on access are coordinated by OCHA.
HC’s position argued that a hardening of stance
on the United Nations side was only likely to Few respondents were fully familiar with
be reciprocated by the authorities, resulting in UNICEF’s internal efforts to influence the
a possible breakdown in dialogue. The closure collective posture of the United Nations
of multiple FOs belonging to two NGOs in on matters relating to access, and to the
September 2019,121 following charges they independence of the response. Those who
were abetting the insurgency, does show a were shared the view that UNICEF’s senior
readiness on the part of the United Nation’s management was measured yet steadfast
Nigerian counterparts to enforce stringent and consistent in its advocacy for principled
conditions on the response. humanitarian action. At operational level, the
120 The Nigerian Armed Forces’ approach to counter-insurgency and conflict stabilisation is well documented. However, the extent
to which it might undermine the UN’s humanitarian response is yet to be established. For more information, see: Brechenmacher,
S. (2019), Stabilising North-east Nigeria After Boko Haram, Carnegie Endowment for International Peace.
121 In September 2019, the Nigerian Armed Forces ordered Mercy Corps and Action Against Hunger to close several of the field
offices.
122 60 per cent the 6.4 million people targeted in the 2021 HRP are under 17 years old. Source: United Nations (2021), Humanitarian
Response Plan – Nigeria, 2021.
116
EVALUATION OF UNICEF’S COVERAGE AND QUALITY IN COMPLEX HUMANITARIAN SITUATIONS: NIGERIA
FO in Maiduguri was engaged in consultations
with OCHA’s Civil–Military Coordination Officer,
in view of agreeing a common advocacy line on
the need to achieve shorter lead times for the
military clearance of RRM deployments. There
was a sense from sources familiar with these
consultations that UNICEF staff were reluctant
to step up their direct engagement with
military authorities, for fear of overstepping
their bounds.
It is worth noting that at LGA level, three local
implementing partners independently credited
UNICEF for advocating on their behalf. In two
cases, the result was the timelier deployment
of health and nutrition workers by the Local
Government Service Commission. The third
case was described thus:
‘‘UNICEF supported us with high-level
advocacy and influenced LGA authorities’
decision about the deployment of female
teachers in project areas, who play an
important role as mentors for girls.’
- UNICEF implementing partner
117
5 . H O W D O U N I C E F ’ S I N P U T S
E N A B L E O R C O N S T R A I N
P R O G R A M M E C O V E R A G E A N D
Q U A L I T Y ?
This section examines how UNICEF’s organization and management of
its people and funds have supported or hindered the relevance and
effectiveness of UNICEF’s coverage and quality in north-east Nigeria.
This includes an assessment of human resources, resource mobilization
and policies and procedures.
118
EVALUATION OF UNICEF’S COVERAGE AND QUALITY IN COMPLEX HUMANITARIAN SITUATIONS: NIGERIA
KEY MESSAGES
UNICEF Nigeria has phased out surge deployments and invested substantially in staff well-being, which has
contributed to more continuity among staff.
Most personnel in the Maiduguri FO appear to have significantly more experience in development programming
than in humanitarian assistance. This determines the range of UNICEF’s capacity and options for conducting
context analysis, developing strategies and designing effective humanitarian interventions for coverage and
quality.
Despite significant fundraising efforts, UNICEF has seen a steady decline in ORE funding over the years, broadly
in step with the decreasing inflow of ORR programming.
There appears to be a certain level of donor fatigue, although the total volume of incoming funding is still
significant. UNICEF has been able to finance sectoral responses consistently at 50 per cent to 60 per cent of
HAC requirements, on average.
UNICEF’s inability to access USAID funding because of a conflict on principles is of concern and should be
taken up by EMOPS.
There has been no improvement in the slow pace of progress in establishing new or renewed partnership
agreements since the 2018 evaluation raised this as a significant concern for the coverage and quality of the
response. Delays in partnership processing, often between 2 and 8 months, have created frustration among
staff, partners and donors and have led to breaks in humanitarian service delivery. Three years on, there is a
pressing need to address this now.
The supply and logistics functions have generally performed well in the humanitarian response, with UNICEF
being a major contributor to the ‘common pipeline’ and procurement not having emerged as a significant
constraint.
5.1 Human resources significantly more experience in
development programming than in
humanitarian assistance, and no one
UNICEF has largely phased out surge
dedicated to LHD or peacebuilding
deployments and regularized the staffing
programmes. This determines the range
that drives the humanitarian response in
of UNICEF’s capacity and options for
north-east Nigeria. The CO and FO have
nexus-oriented analysis, strategy and
invested substantially in staff well-being.
programming. Gender balance and diversity
Overall, this has led to more continuity
among international staff have been
among programme staff. Most personnel
highlighted as issues deserving attention.
in the Maiduguri FO appear to have
119
Following the rapid scale-up of the response has generally not used surge deployments,
in 2016 and 2017, UNICEF’s staffing levels a decision that has frustrated some who
have stabilized at around 80 fixed-term and would have liked to draw on additional expert
temporary positions in the Maiduguri FO in capacity to respond to urgent needs, such as
recent years (see Figure 8). An emergency the recurring cholera outbreaks in the north-
team was only established in 2017 and has had east. However, overall, this has contributed to
a stable and slowly increasing presence ever a reduction in staff turnover, which was very
since (see Figure 9). After the deactivation of high at the time of the 2018 evaluation.
the L3 emergency status in early 2019, UNICEF
FIGURE 8
Staffing levels in the Maiduguri FO, 2015–2020123
Maiduguri FO: staff distribution by contract type
60
49
50
40
33
30
20
10
4
0
0
Incumbered Vacant Incumbered Vacant
Fixed-term Temporary
2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020
123 The evaluation team is grateful to the HR team in the Maiduguri FO for having compiled the underlying data for the 2019–2020
period. The data for previous years was provided during phase 1 of the evaluation. It should be noted that the 2018 data was
provided as of March that year, therefore the number of incumbered and vacant posts is unlikely to reflect the status at the end of
that year. The increase in incumbered fixed-term positions was likely more gradual than the ‘jump’ from 2018 to 2019.
120
EVALUATION OF UNICEF’S COVERAGE AND QUALITY IN COMPLEX HUMANITARIAN SITUATIONS: NIGERIA
The proportion of temporary appointments (TA) turnover. Yet, the turnover rate was significantly
in the Maiduguri FO, at nearly 40 per cent, is lower than that found for 2015–2018. Moreover,
still substantial. Several staff indicated that the UNICEF management indicated that the
diminished appeal of TA positions weighed on upcoming Programme Budget Review would
staff morale and constituted a disincentive for regularize 10 TA positions to fixed-term posts,
staying on, ultimately leading to higher staff further strengthening staff continuity.
FIGURE 9
Number of staff (fixed-term and temporary) by programme area, 2015–2020124
Number of staff (fixed-term & TA) by programme area, Maiduguri FO
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020
Emergency C4D Child protection Education
Health Nutrition WASH
124 It is again important to note that the 2018 data was provided as of March that year, therefore the number of incumbered and
vacant posts is unlikely to reflect the status at the end of that year. A high number of vacant child protection positions in March
2018 explains the ‘spike’ in the 2018 line for that section.
121
UNICEF Nigeria management has taken north-east. It has also been challenging to
deliberate steps to increase the appeal of find a diverse field of qualified applicants for
Maiduguri as a duty station and of working international positions, particularly from donor
on the emergency response. National staff in countries, owing to the perceived remoteness
the FO can make use of special emergency of Maiduguri as a place to live. There have
compressed time-off (SECTO): they work one also been difficulties in recruiting national and
extra hour every day for nine weeks and get to international staff with substantial experience
take paid leave in the tenth week. This ‘R&R of emergency programming.
for national staff’ is usually only available in L3
emergencies, but the NCO – with the approval
of the head of office – has instituted it in
‘Emergency skills and mindsets aren’t
Nigeria for all staff engaged in the response as
always there, perhaps because people have
a measure to enhance staff well-being. The FO
to manage emergency and development
was also said to devote considerable time and
programmes at the same time. We have lots
resources in opportunities for staff capacity and
of staff who have worked exclusively for
career development. Combined with UNICEF’s
UNICEF, and exclusively in development
investments in office infrastructure, housing
programmes. They have a different
and humanitarian hubs, this has significantly
understanding of urgency, prioritization and
contributed to creating an attractive, enabling
how to push the organization to deliver in a
work environment, so attracting staff. One
large-scale humanitarian response.’
UNICEF interview in the Maiduguri FO
- UNICEF staff member, Maiduguri FO
described the situation as follows:
The protracted nature of the crisis in the
‘National staff are excited to come here north-east has not meant that needs have
because of the extra incentives, and the become less urgent or less severe. UNICEF
environment in Maiduguri is not as bad as needs a strong body of staff with skills and
people expect.’ experience in humanitarian and development
- UNICEF staff member, Maiduguri FO and ideally nexus – i.e. LHD and peacebuilding
– programming if it wants to achieve coverage
with quality. The evaluation judges that there is
room to balance staff profiles in the Maiduguri
However, it has been more difficult to
FO, strengthening its emergency and
attract a gender-balanced cadre, with few
peacebuilding capacity across all programme
women applying for national staff positions.
sections to ensure that UNICEF can continue
Interviewees who could speak on the issue
to implement programmes that are relevant to
attributed this to the reputation of Maiduguri
context.
as being a challenging place to work, and the
culture and gender norms prevalent in the
122
5.2 Resource mobilization USAID funding because of a conflict on
principles is of concern and should be taken
up by EMOPS.
Despite significant fundraising efforts,
UNICEF has seen a steady decline in Other
Funding availability against need has varied
Resources for Emergency (ORE) over the
considerably across sections over time (see
years, which are earmarked funds for specific
Figure 11). Education and nutrition are the
humanitarian action and recovery activities.
only sectors that have been able to maintain
This is broadly in step with the decreasing
resource availability consistently above 50 per
inflow of Other Resources for Regular (ORR)
cent of the requirements that were specified
programming (see Figure 10). Underlying
in the Humanitarian Action for Children (HAC)
this trend appears to be a certain level of
appeals. Nutrition had been the best-funded
donor fatigue, although the total volume
programme until 2018, after which financing
of incoming funding is still significant and
vs. requirements started to shrink significantly,
UNICEF has been able to finance sectoral
while the child protection programme saw a
responses consistently at 50 per cent to 60
significant increase in available funding relative
per cent of HAC requirements, on average
to requirements.
(see Figure 11). UNICEF’s inability to access
123
FIGURE 10
UNICEF Nigeria funding trends for Other Resources: regular (ORR) and emergency (ORE)125
Funding trend for ‘Other Resources’ (regular & emergency)
250
200
150
100
50
0
2018
FIGURE 11
Proportion of funds available vs. requirements as defined in HAC, by programme section126
Funds available as % of HAC requirement by section
140%
120%
100%
80%
60%
40%
20%
0%
2016
125 Data provided by UNICEF Nigeria M4R section.
126 Data sources: UNICEF Nigeria end-of-year SitReps. For HRP data: OCHA Financial Tracking Service
(https://fts.unocha.org/countries/163/summary/2020). 2015 has been omitted because it constitutes an outlier year; the response
was only being established and funding requirements had been defined only for a ‘180-day plan’ as opposed to the entire year.
The average for all UNICEF sections is unweighted; that is, it does not take into account the relative magnitude of funding
requirements between sections.
124
snoilliM
ORR
ORE
2019 2020 2021 Sep.
Child protection
Education
Health
Nutrition
WASH
All UNICEF sections
average
HRP (all agencies)
2017 2018 2019 2020
EVALUATION OF UNICEF’S COVERAGE AND QUALITY IN COMPLEX HUMANITARIAN SITUATIONS: NIGERIA
However, these large swings in appeal funds Overall, the evaluation found UNICEF’s
availability vs. needs must be seen in the approach to resource mobilization for the
light of the significant year-on-year changes emergency to be systematic and generally
in requirements that have been defined successful. Regular – at least quarterly –
by programme sections. For example, the donor meetings and diligent reporting have
child protection section specified a funding contributed to positive donor relationships and
requirement of USD 18.2 million in the 2019 relatively consistent levels of support.
HAC, which was nearly cut in half, to USD 10.5
million, the following year. During the same Some of the donors interviewed for this
period, available funding tripled from USD evaluation signaled that they would appreciate
3 million in 2019 to USD 8.7 million in 2020. more qualitative, textured reporting as opposed
Therefore, the available funding relative to to the current focus that is perceived as being
need appears to have quadrupled. on quantitative achievements. The rationale
for this was that, if UNICEF were to be more
Steadier trends emerge when available HAC forthcoming in sharing achievements as well
funds are viewed in absolute USD amounts by as challenges and shortcomings, this would
section (see Figure 12). All sections consistently give the donors an enhanced understanding of
have access to substantial levels of funding, UNICEF’s operating environment, ‘take them
albeit with fluctuations, except the nutrition along’ in UNICEF’s programming and help to
programme, which has experienced an overall avoid ‘surprises’ toward the end of a given grant
reduction in resource availability by nearly 50 period. Similarly, some UNICEF interviewees
per cent in the last two years. Interviewees indicated that the quality of draft donor reports
attributed this to a certain level of frustration varied considerably by programme sections,
among donors, who saw nutrition primarily as and that more consistency and attention to
providing life-saving RUTF support, although detail were required to ensure continued
the response should have graduated to more success in resource mobilization.
systemic interventions given the protracted
crisis now in its twelfth year. UNICEF staff
countered that they perceived many donors
to be willing to finance supplies, but less
interested in providing resources to more
complicated, long-term capacity-strengthening
investments.
125
FIGURE 12
HAC appeal amounts funded in USD, by programme section, 2016–2020127
HAC funds available by section, in USD
The evaluation noted with concern that in 2019, when UNICEF turned down USAID
UNICEF’s humanitarian response in the north- funding because it would have required
east continues to face significant limitations in excluding children and families ‘formerly
accessing USAID funding, the largest provider affiliated with Boko Haram or the Islamic
of financing for the HRP by a wide margin,128 State of Iraq and Syria (ISIS)-West Africa’
because of the donor’s insistence on its from humanitarian assistance,129 which would
controversial ‘counter-terror clause’. This have been highly problematic in respect of
issue had already been reported by the media humanitarian principles. Interviewees in the CO
127 Data sources: UNICEF Nigeria end-of-year SitReps.
128 USAID provided USD 328 million to the HRP appeal in 2020, which is 52 per cent of the total HRP funding and nearly four times
the amount given by the next biggest donor, the UK government. See: OCHA Financial Tracking Service, Nigeria 2020 Appeal
Summary, available at: https://fts.unocha.org/appeals/869/summary, accessed on 29 October 2021.
129 Anyadike, O. (2019), Aid workers question USAID counter-terror clause in Nigeria, in The New Humanitarian, 5 November 2021,
available at: https://www.thenewhumanitarian.org/news-feature/2019/11/05/USAID-counter-terror-Nigeria-Boko-Haram, accessed
on 28 October 2021.
126
snoilliM
50
45
40 Child protection
35
Education
30
Health
25
20 Nutrition
15 WASH
10
5
0
2016 2017 2018 2019 2020
EVALUATION OF UNICEF’S COVERAGE AND QUALITY IN COMPLEX HUMANITARIAN SITUATIONS: NIGERIA
indicated that the CO had tried everything and WASH and nutrition sector pipelines. These are
exhausted all locally available means to central repositories of core supplies that enable
advocate with USAID, to no avail. Given the UNICEF and its partners to respond quickly
volume of funding provided by USAID and to critical humanitarian needs, while aiming
the importance of a principled response in the to harmonize the types of items used in the
north-east, the evaluation team recommends response and achieve cost-efficiency through
that EMOPS engages with USAID directly economies of scale.
at the highest level to advocate for a change
in position that will allow the NCO to access The 2021 cholera outbreak meant that the
resources. pipelines were utilized faster than expected.
Therefore, UNICEF need to procure some
5.3 Policies and procedures
WASH items internationally through its
Copenhagen-based supply division, and RUTF
The main issues that emerged in the areas of (which is not available in the Nigerian market
policies and procedures that pertain to coverage in the quality and scale required). Staff and
and quality are partnerships management and, partners expressed some frustration at the
to a lesser extent, supply and logistics. The minimum of four to six weeks that it took for
2018 evaluation raised concerns about the UNICEF to re-supply the stocks, pointing to
contractual arrangements for TPFs, which have other United Nations agencies that had been
been addressed as part of the recent overhaul able to fly in their goods faster. For supplies that
of the TPF mechanism. UNICEF procured locally, one implementing
partner raised quality concerns:
5.3.1 Supply and logistics
The NCO’s supply and logistics functions
‘The quality of relief materials is important.
have generally performed well in the
For example, the quality of non-food items
humanitarian response, with UNICEF
provided by UNICEF, especially water storage
being a major contributor to the WASH
containers, can be better. What we provide
and nutrition ‘common pipelines’ and
to beneficiaries are plastic containers and
procurement not having emerged as a
buckets which break up easily compared to
major constraint. Some concerns were
those made from aluminium or polycarbonate.
raised about the timeliness of off-shore
Unless UNICEF creates funds for water
procurement processes.
containers to be replaced every few months,
beneficiaries will not be able to use them for
Humanitarian partners in the north-east have
a long time.’
generally appreciated UNICEF’s strong role in
- UNICEF implementing partner
providing supply and logistics services to the
response. UNICEF is a major contributor to the
127
Regarding logistics, UNICEF Maiduguri- humanitarian service delivery. Three years
based staff were found to be committed on, there is a pressing need to address this
and inventive in trying to find ways to get now.
supplies to intervention sites under difficult
circumstances. Interviewees said that it has The humanitarian crises in the north-east
become increasingly difficult for UNICEF constitutes a Level 1 (L1) emergency in
to find logistics contractors to do business UNICEF’s corporate classification system,
with. Haulage companies are hesitant to meaning the CO should be able to respond
commit their trucks during the rainy season to it using its own staff, funding, supplies and
when many roads become impassable, and other resources, with ‘the usual’ support from
in the face of tangible risks to drivers being the RO and HQ. Procedural simplifications that
kidnapped or killed on the road when their are available to L2 and L3 emergency situations
vehicles are attacked, damaged or destroyed. mostly do not apply, although this will change
UNICEF staff have attempted to broaden the with the revision of corporate emergency
base of contractors, and to break up bigger procedures that is currently under way.130 The
consignments into smaller loads that can be simplified Humanitarian Programme Document
carried by lighter vehicles to accommodate (HPD) format, with a target preparation time
difficult road conditions. of 15 days, remains available for the NCO to
use. However, the NCO rightly took the position
5.3.2 Managing partnerships that, after an active humanitarian response
since at least 2015, operational requirements
There has been no improvement in the have been broadly predictable in the short
NCO’s slow-paced processes of establishing term, notwithstanding sudden spikes in need
new or renewing expired partnership owing to the influx of new IDPs. Therefore,
agreements since the 2018 evaluation for the majority of programming needs, it has
raised this as a significant concern for been assumed that programme sections are
the coverage and quality of the response. able to muster sufficient foresight to initiate
Delays in partnership processing have partnership processes quickly enough to
created frustration among staff, partners ensure that adequate response capacity is
and donors and have led to breaks in available. This has not been the case.
130 UNICEF (2021), UNICEF Emergency Procedures, /PROCEDURE/EMOPS/2021/XXX, final draft, unpublished.
128
EVALUATION OF UNICEF’S COVERAGE AND QUALITY IN COMPLEX HUMANITARIAN SITUATIONS: NIGERIA
with UNICEF had effectively reduced the time
‘Some teams implementing humanitarian available to implement a donor grant from three
programmes in COs felt that UNICEF’s years to two, but UNICEF had not communicated
bureaucratic systems and processes were the delay clearly to the donor, which created
distracting them from the humanitarian an awkward position for the implementing
response, with interviewees citing frequent partner.
meetings and the burden of administrative
work in particular as holding back their The main cause of these delays appears to
practical work in effecting a timely and be the preparation process. An analysis of a
comprehensive humanitarian response’ sample of 16 recent partnerships relevant to the
- UNICEF Humanitarian Review 2020 131 humanitarian response132 and interviews with
staff show that it took UNICEF an average of
‘only’ 15 days to review and sign a partnership
agreement once it had been submitted for
All UNICEF partners and most staff were
approval, but that it took 135 days – four months
concerned about delays of four to eight
on average – from the time of advertisement
months in establishing partnership agreements
to prepare the partnership agreement for
for the humanitarian response, irrespective of
submission. The fastest partnership needed
whether the partnership agreement document
‘only’ 59 days, while the slowest took 263 days
represented a renewal or a new engagement.
– about 9 months.
The main frustration seems to stem from
the expectation that ‘this time’ it can and will
All partners expressed frustration that
be done faster, but rarely is. UNICEF staff
UNICEF’s partnership agreement formats
struggled with administrative processes, a
were cumbersome to complete and that there
common pattern also in other emergency
was a lack of commitment to timeliness,
contexts (see quote above). Two NGO partners
clarity and guidance from UNICEF staff in
said that they had been unable to maintain
the process. Partners were not always clear
parts of their humanitarian assistance when
what was expected of them. Some partners
one UNICEF partnership agreement had ended,
had the impression that UNICEF staff pushed
and they were waiting for the next one to come
the responsibility of developing partnership
through. One INGO partner said that the nearly
documents entirely on the implementing
year-long delay in establishing the partnership
131 UNICEF (2020), Strengthening UNICEF’s Humanitarian Action - The Humanitarian Review: Findings and Recommendations, p.34.
132 The evaluation team is grateful to the M4R section in Abuja for having shared the financial and process details for 16 partnerships
relevant to the response that were signed by UNICEF between June 2020 and August 2021.
129
partner, who was given the impression of
urgency to turn things around, but then
waited for weeks or months to hear back from
UNICEF.
‘When the project ended, we were asked to
submit for an extension. Our project site was
in the highest priority area and, unfortunately,
we had no feedback after we submitted our
proposal and we couldn’t understand why.
The feedback we eventually received was
very hard to understand. About formats not
being right, but actually we used the template
that we received from that very same person.
(…) Then the next day he was calling back
with something different although we have
just done the last thing he told us. It went on
is moving towards the open selection of
over 4 weeks, with explanations changing
partners, the Management for Results (M4R)
all the time. We have had something like 35
section has prepared guidelines and a checklist
different versions. Everybody was lost in end.’
for how to prepare the call for expressions
- UNICEF implementing partner, Maiduguri
of interest and how the preparation and
approval process is intended to flow. Yet
evaluation interviews with staff revealed a
Partnerships management is still largely an potential duplication in the process with time
offline process, with documents being sent implications: partnerships with a value above
back and forth, which further complicates the USD 100,000 must be reviewed by the PRC
process. UNICEF has now begun rolling out in Abuja before being signed into force by
the electronic partnership document, together the Deputy Representative. Concurrently, the
with a digital reporting platform, which will, it Maiduguri FO maintains an ‘advisory PRC’ that
is hoped, help to standardize the process and scrutinizes partnership agreements – without
make it easier to handle administratively. decision-making authority – before they are
sent to the PRC in Abuja for the mandatory
There may also be room to speed up the review. This suggests that the advisory PRC in
review and approval mechanism for partnership Maiduguri is not required for decision-making,
agreements, although this area has already but might serve a useful coordination role to
been streamlined considerably. As UNICEF discuss new partnerships between sections.
130
EVALUATION OF UNICEF’S COVERAGE AND QUALITY IN COMPLEX HUMANITARIAN SITUATIONS: NIGERIA
It may be advisable for UNICEF to remove the The emergency team has recently started
Maiduguri advisory PRC from the process of developing contingency documents, together
establishing partnerships, while still ensuring with programme sections. The evaluation
that new partnership agreements are discussed welcomes and encourages this as a mechanism
for content between sectors at the FO level. to increase the agility of UNICEF’s response
Moreover, an upward revision of the PRC capacity. The first call for expressions of
threshold from USD 100,000 to USD 200,000 interest for partners that can deliver WASH and
partnership value can reduce the number of nutrition interventions in response to sudden
partnerships that have to go through the review crises in any of the LGAs in Borno State was
committee and increase the speed at which published in August 2021.
documents are reviewed and approved by the
M4R section with the Deputy Representative.
The evaluation is cognizant of the importance
of due diligence and that proposals must meet
quality standards, yet it is also necessary to
balance this against the need to maintain
assistance to vulnerable communities in a
dynamic displacement crisis.
131
6 . C O N C L U S I O N S A N D
R E C O M M E N A T I O N S
This section synthesizes the findings of the evaluation to
draw conclusions on the effectiveness of UNICEF in
reaching those in greatest need with programmes that meet
quality standards. Based on the conclusions, a set of
recommendations to strengthen coverage and quality are
made.
132
EVALUATION OF UNICEF’S COVERAGE AND QUALITY IN COMPLEX HUMANITARIAN SITUATIONS: NIGERIA
6.1 Conclusions needs that appear to arise periodically because
of, for example, the influx of IDPs into garrison
towns from ‘newly liberated areas’. Taken
This section presents the main evaluation
together, these steps can make coverage
conclusions. As with the findings, they are
targets and operational plans more realistic and
organized according to the three main parts of
predictable.
the analytical framework – coverage and quality
outcomes, ways of achieving outcomes, and
UNICEF’s pragmatic approach to programme
inputs.
quality has resulted in overall favourable feedback
6.1.1 Coverage and quality outcomes from UNICEF’s beneficiaries. However, in
conclusion, there are prominent opportunities
to strengthen quality management through
UNICEF has been among the largest and most
enhanced field presence of staff, follow-up
important providers of humanitarian assistance
with implementing partners, systematic quality
and protection in north-east Nigeria, at
monitoring, and data management.
significant risk to its own staff and partners. It
has mostly been successful in meeting targets,
6.1.2 How do UNICEF’s ways of achieving
but targets are set by balancing estimations
outcomes enable or constrain
of needs against a forecast of the operational
programme coverage and quality?
capacity that can realistically be mustered to
address them. Therefore, programme coverage
Although integrated humanitarian programming
relative to targets provides little indication
can deliver better outcomes and quality, UNICEF
of actual performance vis-à-vis humanitarian
has not systematically pursued programmatic
needs.
integration. The recent effort to establish multi-
sector partnerships is a promising mechanism
A conclusion to be drawn from this is that
for strengthening integration. Within UNICEF,
UNICEF Nigeria can strengthen its targeting and
several steps could be taken to incentivize
monitoring of programme coverage, as well as
staff to make integrated programming the
its accountability, by using ‘people in need’ as
norm rather than the exception: multi-sectoral
a consistent reference point. Targets should be
planning and results frameworks would ensure
set transparently and results reported against
that sections deliver together on common
total needs and their geographic distribution.
outcomes, and managers could be held
To smooth the large year-on-year variations in
accountable for implementing integration
sector targets, which cannot be explained by
through their annual performance reviews.
changes in need alone, UNICEF would be well
placed to use its role as cluster lead to factor
UNICEF has contributed significantly to the
operational risks into the planning process,
recent overhaul of the RRM in the north-east.
including partner capacity, funding shortfalls
A first activation in 2021 was only partially
and a contingency buffer for ‘unforeseen’
133
successful. Despite a significant amount of Nations and its leadership in Nigeria suggests
lead-in time, UNICEF was unable to deploy that this is unlikely to happen.
its contribution to the RRM in time with WFP.
Therefore, operational readiness and stand- Therefore, UNICEF would be well advised to
by capacity need to be assessed and internal develop its own Access Strategy. Building on
steps taken to ensure that the envisaged the evaluation findings on security and risk
timelines can be adhered to. The contingency management, community engagement and
partnerships that the emergency team is advocacy, this would entail first conducting a
currently working to establish are a welcome comprehensive analysis of actors and influence
development in this direction. in the north-east. UNICEF could then explore
where there is room for its security staff to
Beyond UNICEF, the bureaucratic impediments not only manage staff safety but to proactively
to an agile response, including cargo support programme sections in enabling
movements, would need to be addressed an increased field presence. Community
directly with the Government and military, engagement – underutilized overall – has
in coordination with other agencies. It is also not been harnessed to cultivate acceptance
advisable that UNICEF and partners critically among affected populations, which is another
review the extent to which the early warning/ enabler for keeping staff safe, and to increase
alert system – a commendable concept – programmatic coverage. There also appears to
achieves geographic coverage to detect and be potential for engaging more directly and at
raise the alarm wherever sudden needs arise a higher level in civil–military coordination with
across BAY states. Otherwise, there is a risk the objective of giving humanitarian actors
that the RRM can only respond opportunistically more elbow room, and specifically to get
to wherever a piece of analysis or information assurances for faster processing and support
emerges indicating greater needs. for rapid response deployments.
The humanitarian community in Nigeria has TPFs have been key in scaling up and
struggled to develop a common strategy to maintaining UNICEF’s humanitarian
ensure principled humanitarian access or to programmes in the north-east since 2016. In
create space for negotiation with NSAGs, to 2021, UNICEF reviewed and reorganized the
the extent that this would be feasible, given management and deployment of TPFs. The
their position. UNICEF has contributed to available evidence suggests that this has been
creating a new Access Working Group (AWG) largely successful from an administrative point
and has helped to draft a new Access Strategy of view. From the perspective of maximizing the
2021. However, implementing the Access coverage and quality of the response, UNICEF
Strategy would require challenging the Nigerian should explore strengthening the function
Government and military on long-entrenched of TPFs. Accountabilities in the field are still
positions and policies. The record of the United unclear to many, and TPFs are not empowered
134
to fulfil some of the more supervisory or coverage. However, the Government’s limited
coordination tasks that partners expect them capacity and willingness to take responsibility
to fulfil. In addition, they could be specifically for service delivery have meant that meeting
tasked with supporting quality monitoring and quality standards through this partnership has
community engagement to build acceptance. been challenging. UNICEF has been investing
in building government and national NGO
With the onset of the Covid-19 pandemic, technical capacity to some extent, but has
several UNICEF programme sections not yet fully and systematically embraced
successfully piloted remote and mobile corporate commitments on localization. This
programming approaches. Some have gone to would entail a comprehensive mapping of
scale and contributed to expanding coverage to local actors with their capacity, geographic
underserved populations. The ‘last-mile learning’ presence and connectedness to other actors
initiative of the education section stands out as in the north-east. Building on this, UNICEF
an example. While remote programming has should devise a strategy for investing in long-
limited potential to strengthen acceptance, it is term partnerships and capacity development
a pragmatic approach, given current constraints. in key sectors and technical areas of work,
but also in the institutional and management
Throughout the response, the Government of capability of local partners. This would serve
Nigeria has been UNICEF’s main partner, which the dual purpose of building response capacity
has permitted UNICEF to respond to urgent while addressing and mitigating the risks of
humanitarian needs and has helped it to achieve partners being unable to deliver against their
135
targets because of organizational or capacity UNICEF Nigeria has a strong interest in nexus-
gaps. The actor and capacity mapping, together sensitive programming in the north-east, and all
with efforts to strengthen capacity, would its programme sections have been attempting
allow UNICEF to then allocate resources and to ensure that humanitarian actions include a
responsibilities based the partners’ abilities, long-term development perspective to improve
budgets and expected delivery timelines. quality and sustainability. However, UNICEF
currently lacks the analytical foundation to
Humanitarian performance monitoring has create a strategic vision for humanitarian–
been institutionalized successfully and development–peacebuilding programming
has proved a useful mechanism to assess in north-east Nigeria, and staff with relevant
the coverage and quality of a sample of experience and profiles to implement it. The
programme outputs. It also provides structured resilience and peacebuilding partnership
feedback on gaps and challenges. However, it with KfW could be the starting point for
cannot replace systematic quality monitoring undertaking the requisite analysis and for
and follow-up by programme sections, a defining and rolling out a more systematic
practice that the evaluation found in need approach to LHD programming in north-east
of strengthening. Therefore, programme Nigeria. It should go together with an effort
sections will need to pay more attention to to strengthen the capacities and mindsets
quality monitoring and to following up with of staff in key nexus-related areas such as
partners. TPFs could be used to support this. peacebuilding, conflict sensitivity and AAP to
There was limited evidence of regular context be able to programme effectively across the
analysis that could have contributed to adapting nexus. Staff would need to be flexible enough
programmes to changing needs. Despite a to pivot between and connect development
strong corporate push for AAP, the NCO has and humanitarian approaches, including to
not pursued a systematic approach for eliciting support advocacy and resource mobilization.
feedback on its programmes from those
whom it seeks to assist. By addressing both Since the 2018 humanitarian evaluation,
shortcomings, there is the potential to be more UNICEF has significantly strengthened the
responsive to the dynamic context. It would be MRM Mechanism. The evaluation found that
advisable for UNICEF to invest in an in-depth the process of collecting and verifying evidence
context, conflict and political economy analysis on alleged grave violations was rigorous and
of the humanitarian situation in the north- systematic, albeit limited to areas currently
east, which should be updated periodically. accessible to humanitarian actors. In its wider
An understanding of actors, interests and advocacy efforts for principled humanitarian
influence forms an indispensable basis for access, UNICEF has had to balance its own
identifying allies and political or operational engagement with the RC/HC’s prerogative to set
opportunities to expand the humanitarian the orientations of UN-wide advocacy efforts.
space. Although it has balanced these competing
136
EVALUATION OF UNICEF’S COVERAGE AND QUALITY IN COMPLEX HUMANITARIAN SITUATIONS: NIGERIA
imperatives adeptly, and UNICEF senior Despite significant fundraising efforts, UNICEF
management was perceived to be measured has seen a steady decline in emergency funding
yet steadfast and consistent in its advocacy over the years. In the light of this, UNICEF’s
for principled humanitarian action, results on inability to access USAID funding – by far the
humanitarian access remain elusive overall. biggest donor to the response in the north-east
– is an important concern and should be taken
6.1.3 To what extent o UNICEF’s human and up by EMOPS. All local means for advocacy
financial resource management and and influence are said to have been exhausted.
its systems and procedures support
an effective response? While the CO uses most UNICEF systems and
procedures according to standard, the severe
UNICEF has largely phased out surge delays in processing partnership agreements
deployments and regularized the staffing that constitutes an impediment to the response
drives the humanitarian response in the north- that must be addressed.
east. The CO and FO have invested substantially
in staff well-being. Overall, this has led to more 6.1.4 Summary of findings organised by
continuity among programme staff who manage OECD/DAC criteria
the response. However, most personnel in
the Maiduguri FO appear to have significantly At the request of the CO, Table 6 provides
more experience in development programming a short summary of the main evaluation
than in humanitarian assistance, and there is findings by the OECD/DAC evaluation criteria
no one dedicated to LHD or peacebuilding of effectiveness, relevance, coherence,
programmes. This limits the range of UNICEF’s sustainability and efficiency,133 while noting
capacity and options for nexus-oriented that the analytical framework agreed for this
analysis, strategy and programming. It would evaluation was not designed in this way.
be in UNICEF’s interest to pay attention to the
skill mix of its staff in the FO and to ensure new
recruitments bring the humanitarian capacity
and experience that the situation demands.
133 See OECD-DAC Evaluation Criteria, https://www.oecd.org/dac/evaluation/daccriteriaforevaluatingdevelopmentassistance.htm,
accessed on 26 October 2021.
137
TABLE 6
Summary of findings by OECD/DAC evaluation criteria
Criteria Summary of findings
UNICEF’s humanitarian programme has been largely effective in meeting its coverage targets
(see Figure 3). However, because the targets do not directly reflect the number of people in
need, programme coverage relative to targets provides little indication of actual performance
vis-à-vis humanitarian needs.
Based on favourable beneficiary perceptions, UNICEF has effectively managed to maintain
acceptable levels of programme quality. The pragmatism of its approach to managing quality,
given the prevailing constraints, has been relevant to the context. Limited systematic quality
monitoring and follow-up with partners mean that there are risks to maintaining quality
Effectiveness standards.
UNICEF has effectively engaged in advocating against and reporting on grave violations through
the MRM. Its advocacy efforts for principled humanitarian access have been less effective,
although at local level UNICEF has registered notable successes in advocating on behalf of
its partners, for example to ensure the timely deployment of government staff to NGO partner
intervention sites.
UNICEF’s broad range of partnerships with both government and non-government partners has
enabled it to deliver an effective humanitarian programme at scale, but investments in capacity
are required to ensure quality and contribute to sustainable localization.
While UNICEF’s programme approaches and network of partners are highly relevant to
humanitarian needs and the overall context, there is limited evidence of UNICEF having invested
Relevance
systematically in context and conflict analysis and in engaging with communities to ensure the
continued relevance of its response in a dynamic context.
Coherence UNICEF has actively and persistently engaged in and contributed to operational
inter-agency mechanisms such as the RRM and the common supply pipeline, and in high-level
advocacy and strategy efforts through the HCT. In advocating for principled humanitarian access,
Coherence UNICEF has had to balance its own ambitions with the RC/HC’s prerogative to set the orientation
of UN-wide advocacy efforts. Although it has balanced these competing imperatives adeptly,
and UNICEF senior management was measured yet consistent in its advocacy for principled
humanitarian action, results on humanitarian access remain elusive overall.
Government institutions and agencies have been UNICEF’s main implementing partners for the
humanitarian response, which has been effective in expanding humanitarian services in some
sectors and is seen as a strategy to ensure sustainability. However, the ability of the Government
to respond to humanitarian needs in the future is limited by capacity and budget constraints
Sustainability and its unwillingness to take responsibility for basic service delivery. There is a risk of UNICEF’s
humanitarian interventions substituting for government services, which is unsustainable.
Therefore, UNICEF has invested in the technical capacity of local and national non-governmental
partners, but is yet to fully commit to institutional capacity development and localization of its
response.
138
EVALUATION OF UNICEF’S COVERAGE AND QUALITY IN COMPLEX HUMANITARIAN SITUATIONS: NIGERIA
Criteria Summary of findings
The evaluation question related to efficiency as defined in the TOR asks: ‘To what extent
have UNICEF’s revised humanitarian systems improved its response in complex high-threat
environments?’ While most systems appeared to be used as intended, a significant procedural
inefficiency is found in the processing of partnership agreements, which are regularly delayed
by two to eight months, costing UNICEF staff and implementing partners valuable staff time
Efficiency and goodwill. In addition, there is evidence of grant implementation periods having been
inadvertently shortened because of the delays in setting up partnerships, leaving partners
with less time to utilize UNICEF resources to implement important response activities. UNICEF
has phased out surge deployments and operates the response with a stable cadre of staff and
relatively consistent – albeit declining – levels of emergency funding. The evaluation did not find
evidence for major financial risks or inefficiencies in the response.
6.2 Recommendations
Based on the analysis of the coverage and quality of UNICEF’s humanitarian programming and the
lessons highlighted in the report, the evaluation makes 12 recommendations (see Table 7).
TABLE 7
Recommendations
Action to be
# Recommenation
led by?
Calculate targets and report coverage based on an assessment of people in need. Changes
in targets should be consistently monitored and transparently reported. This will provide the
strongest evidence for advocating adequate resources for the humanitarian response.
Emergency
1 • Systematically use ‘people in need’ as the starting point for UNICEF planning and reporting
Manager
within the Nigeria CO.
• Apply this approach in all clusters led by UNICEF to ensure consistency in the measurement
of coverage as a proportion of people in need.
139
Action to be
# Recommenation
led by?
Introduce a user-friendly digital tool and use it to monitor humanitarian programme
performance data on coverage and quality across all programme sections and implementing
partners, possibly building on the experience from the e-PMV tool introduced recently.
• The Nigeria CO should set itself a timeline: if the corporate e-Tools do not provide the
required functionality within 6 months, the CO will initiate the procurement process to have a
Deputy Rep.,
digital solution in place within 12 months.
with support
• A secure, web-based, software-as-a-service tool is recommended. Off-the-shelf solutions from Chief of
2
exist or can be customized. M4R and ICT,
in consultation
• The software must allow for decentralized data entry to ensure staff and partners can report
with EMOPS
while in the field (for example, the location of an intervention site and the number of people
served there). The tool should be suitable to digitalize humanitarian performance monitoring
processes that are currently ‘offline’.
• The tool must provide UNICEF section chiefs and staff with visual dashboards and a
community-level map of operational presence, across all sections.
Strengthen programme integration with granular cross-sectoral needs assessments and by
incentivizing programme sections to establish multi-sector interventions.
• Going beyond the high-level, inter-agency MSNAs, programme sections should routinely
undertake ‘light-touch’, localized and cross-sectoral needs and coverage assessments to
identify coverage gaps for specific beneficiary populations. For example, a child may have
3 access to SAM treatment at a nearby facility, but lack access to safe water and psychosocial Representative
support.
• Section chiefs and staff should be incentivized to make integrated programming by outcomes
the norm rather than the exception, by (a) building integration into their performance reviews;
and (b) developing multi-sectoral results frameworks for the humanitarian response as a
standard component in country programme planning and annual planning cycles.
Strengthen the CO capacity to undertake and regularly update an in-depth analysis of
the context and political economy of (a) the humanitarian operating environment in the
north-east; and (b) opportunities for principled access.
• Ensure the emergency team has at least one staff member with the analytical capacity and
time in their TOR to undertake this analysis; otherwise, engage external expertise with a
longer-term agreement to ensure regular updates of the analysis.
• The assessment must map the actors, interests, incentives, capacities and influence at
play in the humanitarian operating environment, including United Nations agencies, the
Government, armed forces, other parties to the conflict, and relevant international missions Emergency
4
present in Nigeria. To generate actionable information, the analyst(s) will require access to Manager
decision-makers and informal knowledge. This can be achieved through (a) engaging former
‘insiders’ as analysts or informants; (b) building relationships over time, which means the
analysis will take time; and/or (c) providing high-level support for this analysis from UNICEF
and other partners.
• Programme sections should participate in the analytical process to contribute their sectoral
perspectives and to ensure that they can take ownership of findings relevant to their sectors.
Periodically, sections can undertake their own ‘light-touch’ context analyses to inform
programme adaptations to context.
140
EVALUATION OF UNICEF’S COVERAGE AND QUALITY IN COMPLEX HUMANITARIAN SITUATIONS: NIGERIA
Action to be
# Recommenation
led by?
Develop a UNICEF strategic vision and plan to guide the humanitarian response and efforts to
connect humanitarian, development and peacebuilding-oriented programming.
• Based on the insights generated from recommendation #4, the CO should develop a strategic
vision for what it can and wants to achieve in Borno, Adamawa and Yobe States, given the
differences in humanitarian needs and the positions of each state government.
Representative,
• This strategy should be built on UNICEF’s understanding of how the protracted crisis in the
with support
north-east is likely to develop under different scenarios, and what can realistically be achieved
from the Chief
5 given present capacity levels.
of Maiduguri FO
• It should also include a definition of UNICEF’s guiding principles and strategic approaches and Emergency
regarding humanitarian service delivery, contributions to development outcomes, and Manager
peacebuilding. Programme approaches in these three strands would ideally be integrated, and
should at a minimum be coordinated.
• The development of this strategy constitutes a moment of reflection for UNICEF to take
a position on its programme boundaries, with a view to avoiding long-term substitution of
government service delivery.
Secure a more direct role alongside OCHA in the United Nation’s operations-level engagement
in the civil–military coordination with the Nigerian Armed Forces (NAF) in Maiduguri, geared
specifically to advocacy in support of easing the bureaucratic impediments to the response
and enabling faster RRM deployment.
• UNICEF should leverage its prominent position in the response as multiple sector lead and RRM
participant to secure a more direct role in the engagement and negotiations with the NAF and
the Government of Nigeria.
• This engagement should be geared specifically to advocacy in support of the joint drafting,
Representative,
with the NAF, of RRM Standard Operating Procedures (SOP), allowing for significantly more with support
6 rapid deployment lead-in times than the current 4–6 weeks, while also enabling the RRM to from Chief of FO
conform fully with the NAF’s security requirements. Using the RRM as an entry point, the SOP and Emergency
could be extended with the aim of tackling the inefficiencies in the humanitarian cargo Manager
notification system and bureaucratic impediments more broadly.
• In pursuing this objective, UNICEF should seek to engage the good offices of one or more
bilateral actors enjoying close security cooperation with the NAF, such as the defence sections
of the UK or US embassies in Abuja.
• The CO should also bring on board dedicated independent civil–military expertise to advise on
its engagement with the NAF on the joint drafting of the RRM SOP, and to network defence
circles in support of this.
UNICEF Nigeria should develop its own access strategy that identifies opportunities and
specifies roles and responsibilities for the organization, while continuing to use its influence Representative,
and advocacy through the HCT and other coordinated United Nations mechanisms. with support
7 from Emergen-
• While recommendation #6 focuses on an immediate operational requirement, this
cy Manager
recommendation seeks to ensure that UNICEF strengthens its overall position for
and Chief of FO
expanding access.
141
Action to be
# Recommenation
led by?
• To confirm its commitment to inter-agency processes, UNICEF should use its position on the
HCT and its relationship with the Government to support and endorse the draft HCT
Humanitarian Access Strategy and to advocate for an approach that leaves space for
humanitarian negotiations with all parties to the conflict, as enshrined in International
Humanitarian Law.
• UNICEF’s own access strategy should build on the UNICEF Access Field Manual (still in draft)
and take stock of opportunities for strengthening access through (a) security management and
field presence; (b) community engagement; (c) advocacy; (d) civil–military coordination; and (e)
relationship management with government and other stakeholders.
• UNICEF should define strategic objectives in each of these areas and assign roles and
responsibilities to its staff for operationalizing them. For example, enabling access through
building acceptance with communities will involve specific accountabilities from multiple
functions across the CO, and all programme sections.
Establish a systematic mechanism for AAP.
• In the new UNICEF emergency procedures, expected to be released soon, a robust AAP
approach is no longer optional but should be systematically applied in all UNICEF programming.
• UNICEF should implement corporate global guidance on AAP (see ‘Accountability to Affected Representative
Populations Handbook for UNICEF and partners, 2020’) and should ensure that effective with support
8 mechanisms for two-way communication with affected populations are established. from
Emergency
• The evaluation has shown that there is currently limited follow-up from UNICEF Nigeria on
Manager
community engagement by its implementing partners. Therefore, the CO must take special care
to ascertain that the new AAP mechanism has a feedback loop into programme
decision making.
• TPFs can be used systematically to play an enabling role in this.
Strengthen localization by (a) mapping actors, their capacity and presence; and (b) defining a
capacity development strategy for local and national implementing partners.
• With a view to identifying potential implementing partners and reassessing existing ones,
undertake a systematic mapping of local and national actors. Assess their institutional and
technical capacity, gaps, operational readiness and their geographical footprint in the
north-east.
Chief of Maidu-
• Define a capacity development strategy that prioritizes required capabilities by sector and guri FO with
9 geographical location and maps key partners to capabilities by sector and across sectors support from
and areas. Emergency
Manager
• Define and budget for commitments to strengthening institutional, operational and technical
capacities of key partners with a view to building localized response capacity for the long term.
• Given the Government’s constraints in capacity and willingness, it is recommended that
UNICEF aims for the right mix of partners to deliver coverage and quality across its
humanitarian programmes, being clear about the reasons for choosing particular partners and
checking assumptions about their ability to deliver in periodic reviews.
Streamline the process for establishing and renewing partnership agreements and set a
10
maximum target duration (for example 60 days from advertisement to signature by UNICEF).
142
EVALUATION OF UNICEF’S COVERAGE AND QUALITY IN COMPLEX HUMANITARIAN SITUATIONS: NIGERIA
Action to
# Recommenation
be led by?
• Review the SOP for developing partnership agreements for all partnerships, with special
attention paid to those relevant to the response. Define a maximum duration for each step,
including for turnaround times of UNICEF staff providing feedback to partners when drafting
partnership documents and budgets.
• Orient all staff and all current and potential future partners on their accountabilities in the process
and on common document formats.
• Restructure the role of the ‘advisory’ Partnership Review Committee (PRC) in the Maiduguri FO; it
should serve a coordination role but – since it is without decision-making power – not hold up the
approval process. Therefore, partnership documents should be sent to the CO in Abuja for
processing without delay.
• If possible, the CO should consider revising the budget threshold for PRC reviews upward,
from currently USD 100,000 to double this amount or even more. This would result in partnership
agreements being reviewed and approved faster by the M4R section and the Deputy Representative
while submitting only higher-value partnership documents for PRC scrutiny.
Consider the establishment of an internal contingency funding facility to enable small but rapid and
unconditional disbursements to pre-selected partners on a ‘no-regrets’ basis, to support responses
to localized sudden-onset emergencies.
• The new emergency procedures will allow for start-up funding to be transferred to new partners
with a one-page start-up letter. In an L1 emergency, the Nigeria CO will be authorized to release
Deputy Rep-
USD 10,000 up front, with a limit of USD 50,000 for L3 contexts.
resentative,
• Irrespective of the new procedures, the Nigeria CO should set up a mechanism to enable with sup-
11
small-scale, rapid action by partners to respond to localized sudden-onset emergencies, which port from
frequently occur in the north-east. Chief of
Operations
• Pre-selection should follow established best practice typically adhered to by country-based pooled
funds. It should aim to balance risk by recruiting well-capacitated partners alongside smaller but
more agile grant-holders.
• The proposed contingency funding facility should be designed to support and
complement the RRM.
Ensure that UNICEF staff involved in the humanitarian response have the requisite skills and
experience in humanitarian action.
• Make experience in humanitarian programming a core requirement when recruiting for staff
positions involved in the response, irrespective of programme sector or operational area of Chief of
responsibility. People and
Culture,
• Establish mentoring arrangements so that experienced humanitarian staff are paired with less
with support
12 experienced colleagues for the first 6–12 months of their deployment.
from Chief
• Offer periodic refresher training and orientation on systems and processes relevant to the of FO and
response. This should be mandatory for all new staff and other staff who have not participated in Emergency
a refresher for two years or more, covering critical areas including (a) establishing and managing Manager
partnerships; (b) humanitarian access; (c) accountability to affected populations; (d) nexus
programming; and (e) risk management, with a view to expanding access while ensuring
staff safety.
The evaluation team suggests treating all 12 recommendations with equal priority, given that each
one has significant potential to strengthen the quality and coverage of the response.
143
A N N E X E S
Annex 1: Summary of terms of responded to 301 humanitarian situations in
reference for the evaluation 102 countries, of which 63 were socio-political
crises, including in countries such as Syria,
South Sudan, Yemen, Burundi, Central African
1. Background
Republic, Iraq, Afghanistan, Somalia, Ukraine
and Nigeria.
Complex high-threat environments (CHTEs)
refer to humanitarian contexts that are
Children in countries affected by armed conflict
multidimensional in nature, where multiple
face grave threats and are affected in various
complexity factors converge and most are
ways, ranging from direct killings and injuries,
political and politicized. This includes (but
of becoming victims of sexual violence, of being
is not limited to) armed conflict, restricted
separated from their families, of being recruited
access to affected populations, civil or
and used by parties to conflict, and suffering
political upheaval, and large-scale violations of
extreme distress, to more subtle, yet persistent
International Humanitarian Law and Human
and irreversible effects on schooling, health,
Rights Law. While programme interventions
nutrition, future opportunities and overall well-
for all humanitarian situations have their fair
being. In CHTEs, the most vulnerable people
share of challenges, the general consensus
are often located in hard-to-reach or the most
is that humanitarian response in CHTEs
insecure locations. Humanitarian response
has some unique challenges vis-à-vis risk
in these settings is conducted in a difficult
management and principled humanitarian
political and highly insecure environment.
action (which comprises assistance, protection
As a result, the coverage and quality of
and advocacy). Many of these CHTEs are
humanitarian assistance have been a significant
characterized by fragile or failing political and
challenge in most CHTEs, since insecurity
social institutions, weak governance, limited
and inaccessibility have limited organizations’
state capacity or will to respond to needs, and/
capacity to implement, manage and adequately
or affected populations living in areas under the
monitor the humanitarian response.
control of non-state entities.134 In 2015, UNICEF
134 Harmer, A. and J. Macrae (eds) (2004) Beyond the Continuum: The Changing Role of Aid Policy in Protracted Crises, Humanitarian
Policy Group (HPG) Report 18. London, Overseas Development Institute (ODI). (see: https://www.odi.org/sites/odi.org.uk/files/
odi-assets/publications-opinion-files/279.pdf).
144
EVALUATION OF UNICEF’S COVERAGE AND QUALITY IN COMPLEX HUMANITARIAN SITUATIONS: NIGERIA
UNICEF aims to meet humanitarian needs in allocations and expenditure. Where UNICEF’s
a timely, appropriate, effective and efficient humanitarian access is hindered due to a
manner, in adherence with the humanitarian CHTE or as a result of restrictions imposed
principles of humanity,135 neutrality, impartiality by authorities or other actors, it has become
and independence, and in line with UNICEF’s critical to adopt innovative approaches in
Core Commitment for Children (CCC)136 and order to fulfill UNICEF’s mandate and the
equity approach, endeavouring to reach the CCCs. For example, remote programming
most vulnerable and marginalized. CHTEs pose and third-party monitoring have been options
significant challenges to these principles and used in various locations, in order to avoid the
objectives, including in working with other negative consequences of suspending UNICEF
humanitarian partners to provide humanitarian activities.
assistance to affected populations. Under
Humanitarian Reform, sector coordination 2. Objectives of the evaluation
among the wider Humanitarian Country
Team is guided by the Inter-Agency Standing The overall purpose of the evaluation is to
Committee (IASC) cluster approach. The aim of generate practical solutions for the improvement
the cluster approach is to strengthen system- of the coverage and quality of UNICEF’s
wide preparedness and technical capacity response to humanitarian crises in CHTEs. It
to respond to humanitarian emergencies by aims to provide a deeper, more systematic and
ensuring that predictable leadership in the objective analysis across country contexts, of
main sectors leads to predictable and effective the extent to which UNICEF is succeeding or
humanitarian response. UNICEF is the global failing to reach affected populations with high-
and country cluster lead agency for nutrition quality programming in CHTEs, and how this
and WASH, and, with Save the Children, co- is attributable to the limits of humanitarian
lead agency for education. UNICEF is also the action vis-a-vis political spheres and the
lead agency for the child protection, which falls conflict dimension (where applicable). This, in
under the protection cluster. turn, should enable UNICEF to innovate and
introduce alternative approaches and mitigation
Coverage is important in reflecting UNICEF measures that will improve the coverage and
activities in terms of geography and reach, quality of UNICEF’s action in such challenging
sectoral or thematic focus, and in resource contexts.
135 For definitions of humanity , neutrality, impartiality, and independence please refer to: https://docs.unocha.org/sites/dms/Docu
ments/OOM-humanitarianprinciples_eng_June12.pdf.
136 https://www.unicef.org/publications/files/CCC_042010.pdf.
145
This evaluation has three specific objectives:
Thematic focus (UNICEF and partners):
1. To assess UNICEF’s performance in The evaluation focuses on the coverage and
achieving coverage and quality in its quality of UNICEF’s humanitarian response in
humanitarian action in a sample of CHTEs, CHTEs:
using both desk- and field-based studies.
• Coverage is defined as: ‘The extent to
2. To identify the internal and external which major population groups facing life-
enabling factors and challenges to UNICEF’s threatening suffering are being (or were)
performance in responding to humanitarian reached by humanitarian action’.138 For
crises in CHTEs. UNICEF, the concept of coverage also
includes the extent to which UNICEF
3. To provide the analysis required to
is identifying and reaching the most
allow UNICEF to clarify how it fulfils its
vulnerable, and is addressing differences in
role in CHTEs as a United Nations agency
vulnerability due to, for example, age and
with a protection mandate, including its
gender and disability.
designated role in the monitoring and
reporting mechanism137 derived from • The quality of humanitarian response does
United Nations Security Council resolutions not have a unified definition in UNICEF.
on children affected by armed conflict. For the purposes of the evaluation, the
assessment of quality is based on an
3. Scope of work understanding of the degree to which
UNICEF is adhering to the benchmarks set
Period to be covered: the evaluation will out in its Core Commitments for Children in
assess the coverage and quality of the UNICEF Humanitarian Action (CCCs) in CHTEs, and
humanitarian response in selected, ongoing also the supplementary commitments the
CHTEs for the period from January 2015 to organization has made to:
the present. With respect to past responses,
1) the Core Humanitarian Standard;139
the evaluation will only rely on evidence from
2) technical standards for humanitarian
evaluations and reviews.
programming (primarily the Sphere
standards140 and INEE minimum
standards141);
137 For further information on MRM, click here.
138 Evaluation of Humanitarian Action Guide, ALNAP/ODI, 2016, p114.
139 https://corehumanitarianstandard.org/the-standard.
140 http://www.sphereproject.org/.
141 http://www.ineesite.org/en/minimum-standards.
146
3) Accountability to Affected Populations
(AAP); and
4) commitments made by UNICEF at the
World Humanitarian Summit, especially
within the Grand Bargain.142 In assessing
performance, the evaluation will recognize
that this list represents a mixture of well-
established and new commitments.
Sectoral coverage: The evaluation has
no specific sector focus and will assess
performance in all sectors where UNICEF plays
a leading role in CHTEs.
Geographic coverage: This is a global evaluation
and aims to generate learning and proposals for
the enhancement of UNICEF’s performance in
all the CHTEs in which UNICEF operates. The
evaluation will generate evidence using a case
study approach, with a total of 12 case studies
covering four to five UNICEF regions.
142 https://interagencystandingcommittee.org/working-group/documents-public/grand-bargain-shared-commitment-better-serve-peo
ple-need.
147
Annex 2: Evaluation matrix
Presented overleaf is the evaluation framework, consisting of evaluation questions, sub-questions, indicators, data sources and analytical
methods.
Evaluation questions/Sub-questions Indicators Data collection methods & sources Analytical methods
OUTCOMES
EQ1: To what extent is UNICEF achieving coverage and quality in humanitarian action in an equitable way and what good practice, lessons and practical solutions can be
identified to inform improvements across UNICEF’s response in complex humanitarian situations?
Evidence of overall humanitarian needs and coverage as
1.1 How successful has UNICEF outlined in the Humanitarian Needs Overview, Humanitarian
been in achieving and maintaining Response Plan and RC/HC annual report Document and literature review
coverage (geographic and including Humanitarian Needs
Evidence of the coverage achieved by UNICEF against its Humanitarian
demographic) in its humanitarian Overview, UNICEF country reporting
targets and the total population in need for nutrition, health, coverage
assistance and protection documents and sectoral programme
WASH, education, HIV and AIDS, and child protection and quality
response? reports, good practice case studies
Evidence of disaggregated data on UNICEF’s coverage and evaluations analysis tool
Which factors have enabled or targets and results (age, gender, disability) and of Cross-country
Interviews and focus groups at field
constrained coverage? vulnerability analysis based on disaggregated data or case
level, including with UNICEF staff,
localized analysis of vulnerability patterns stydy analysis.
To what extent has UNICEF been United Nations agencies, INGOs,
able to overcome the constraints? Evidence of use of disaggregated data and analysis of donors, and affected communities and
disaggregation to reach the hardest-to-reach, most populations.
What good practice, lessons
marginalized, and most vulnerable
and practical solutions could be
applied in other contexts? Evidence of factors that have influenced coverage and
approaches that have been taken to improve coverage.
1.2 To what extent is UNICEF aware
Document and literature review Humanitarian
of, and meeting, its CCC and other Evidence of the knowledge, use of and results from the
including UNICEF country reporting coverage and
commitments and international implementation of the CCC for each of UNICEF’s programme
documents and sectoral programme quality analysis
humanitarian programme sectors
reports tool
standards?
148
Evaluation questions/Sub-questions Indicators Data collection methods & sources Analytical methods
OUTCOMES
EQ1: To what extent is UNICEF achieving coverage and quality in humanitarian action in an equitable way and what good practice, lessons and practical solutions can be
identified to inform improvements across UNICEF’s response in complex humanitarian situations?
To what extent is UNICEF
contributing to the programming
results outlined in the CCC in
a way that is relevant to the
context?
Which other humanitarian
Evidence of the knowledge and use of other quality standards Interviews and focus groups at field Cross-country
programme quality standards are
(Sphere, Core Humanitarian Standard, INEE Minimum level, including with UNICEF staff, case
applied in practice by COs?
Standards, Child Protection Minimum Standards, Harmonized United Nations agencies, INGOs stydy analysis.
Which factors have enabled or Approach to Cash Transfers) and affected communities and
constrained quality? populations.
Evidence of factors that have influenced quality, and
To what extent has UNICEF been approaches that have been taken to improve it.
able to overcome the constraints?
What good practice, lessons
and practical solutions could be
applied in other contexts?
1.3 How does UNICEF balance
coverage and quality in complex
humanitarian situations where it is
hard to maintain high quality across
hard-to-reach areas? Humanitarian
Evidence of a systematic analysis of coverage (against a Document review, including UNICEF
Does UNICEF have a systematic disaggregated vulnerability assessment) and assessment of country reporting documents and coverage
way of assessing the level of quality standards sectoral programme reports and quality
quality that can be achieved analysis tool
Evidence of a decision-making process weighing up Interviews with UNICEF staff,
against coverage (geographic and Cross-country
trade-offs implementing partners and cluster
demographic) that needs to be case study
achieved? Evidence of routine re-assessment of trade-offs. members. analysis.
What are the challenges, lessons,
good practice and practical
solutions that could be applied in
other contexts?
149
Evaluation questions/Sub-questions Indicators Data collection methods & sources Analytical methods
WAYS OF ACHIEVING OUTCOMES
EQ2: In what ways and how effectively has UNICEF influenced others to strengthen protection and increase the quality and coverage of humanitarian action?
2.1 How actively is UNICEF speaking
out against grave violations against
children in situations of armed
conflict and conflict-related sexual Document and literature review
violence against children and women, Evidence of the knowledge and use of child protection including previous reviews/ Context analysis
and advocating for the protection monitoring and reporting mechanism (MRM) evaluations
Cross-country
of civilians and compliance with
Evidence of the effect of the MRM on the lives of children Interviews and focus groups at field case study
International Humanitarian Law
Evidence of where and how UNICEF has successfully level, including with UNICEF staff, analysis.
(IHL)?
United Nations agencies, INGOs,
advocated and influenced decision making on issues relating
What lessons do successful donors, RC/HC, government officials.
to protection of civilians and compliance with IHL.
examples of humanitarian
advocacy provide for the
organization?
2.2 In what ways, to what extent
Interviews with UNICEF HQ, RO
and with what success has
Relevance of UNICEF’s guidance on Advocacy in
and CO staff
UNICEF been able to influence the
Emergencies Cross-country
government, implementing partners, Interviews with HCT members,
Evidence that UNICEF has used advocacy to improve case study
the Humanitarian Country Team RC/HC, United Nations Integrated
access in complex humanitarian situations at the agency or analysis.
(HCT) and Integrated Missions at Mission staff, government officials
inter-agency level.
country level to improve principled
Document and literature review.
humanitarian access?
EQ3: What programme approaches and partnership strategies has UNICEF employed at the field level to gain principled access and improve coverage and quality, and
with what success?
3.1 To what extent has UNICEF’s
engagement in complex humanitarian Evidence that staff have an understanding of UNICEF’s
Document and literature review
situations been guided by the humanitarian principles Cross-country
Interviews with UNICEF HQ, RO,
humanitarian principles of humanity, Evidence that a principled approach has guided case study
CO staff; RC/HC, cluster members,
impartiality, neutrality and decision-making to support improvements in coverage and analysis
donors, implementing partners
independence, and what effect have quality
these had on coverage and quality?
150
Evaluation questions/Sub-questions Indicators Data collection methods & sources Analytical methods
WAYS OF ACHIEVING OUTCOMES
EQ3: What programme approaches and partnership strategies has UNICEF employed at the field level to gain principled access and improve coverage and quality, and
with what success?
Analysis of
How successfully has UNICEF
decision-making
been able to manage constraints
Evidence that the application of principles has had positive Identification, review and criteria around
imposed by the application of the
impacts on coverage and quality. documentation of case studies. application of,
principles, as well as any trade-
approaches to,
offs between the principles?
improved access.
3.2 What partnership strategies
has UNICEF adopted to deliver
Evidence of initiatives to engage and support national and
assistance in complex humanitarian
local first responders (2018–2021 strategy, WHS)
situations, and to what extent have
these strengthened the coverage and Evidence of partnership approaches that have improved Document and literature review
quality of humanitarian action? coverage and quality in UNICEF’s humanitarian action
Interviews with UNICEF HQ, RO,
To what extent, and to what effect, Evidence that UNICEF is strengthening the capacity of its CO staff; RC/HC, cluster members,
Cross-country
is UNICEF building national and local/national partners that are delivering humanitarian donors, implementing partners,
case study
local systems and capacities for assistance government officials, Integrated
analysis.
humanitarian coordination and Mission staff
Evidence that UNICEF is routinely engaging with its partners
rapid scale-up or maintenance
to assess and manage risk Identification, review and
of life-saving services and
documentation of case studies.
Evidence of the use of relevant guidance from the Enhanced
protection?
Programme and Operational Support for Fragile Contexts
How well is UNICEF managing the
initiative.
transfer of risk to its implementing
partners?
Relevance and use of UNICEF and inter-agency guidance
3.3 To what extent has UNICEF on programming in CHTEs (inc. EMOPS Guidance on Civil–
successfully employed relevant military Coordination, Programming Guidance on Engagement Document and literature review Cross-country
approaches to strengthening with Non-State Actors, Engaging Effectively with United Identification, review and case study
programme coverage and quality in Nations Integrated Presences, UNICEF Guidance on documentation of case studies analysis
complex humanitarian situations? Remote Programming, UNICEF Integrated Programming in
Humanitarian Action, IASC Stay and Deliver Strategy)
151
Evaluation questions/Sub-questions Indicators Data collection methods & sources Analytical methods
WAYS OF ACHIEVING OUTCOMES
EQ3: What programme approaches and partnership strategies has UNICEF employed at the field level to gain principled access and improve coverage and quality, and
with what success?
Application of remote
programming, or alternative
programming approaches
Integrated sector programming
Interviews with UNICEF staff at HQ,
The use of rapid response RO and CO level, United Nations
Evidence of the effect that different approaches have on the
mechanisms (RRM) in selected agencies, NGOs, implementing Analysis of
quality and coverage of humanitarian action in CHTEs
countries partners and other donors, decision-making
Evidence of new and innovative approaches being taken by government ministries and officials criteria around
Access negotiations and
UNICEF to improve the quality and coverage of humanitarian application of,
engagement with parties to the Interviews and focus groups at field
action (UNICEF’s approach to humanitarian innovation). approaches to,
conflict on issues of humanitarian level, particularly with communities
improved access.
assistance and protection and affected populations.
Implementation of the inter-agency
‘Stay and Deliver’ strategy
The use of other innovative
approaches for programming.
Evidence that UNICEF at CO level routinely analyses
3.4 To what extent do risk and manages risks and receives high-quality and timely Cross-country
management and security systems managerial support for this Review of financial risk and case
and approaches enable or constrain other documentation, financial
Evidence that UNICEF has a risk tolerance that permits it to study analysis
UNICEF’s humanitarian coverage data and United Nations security
and access in complex humanitarian work effectively in complex humanitarian situations management systems Context analysis
situations? Evidence of the use and relevance of UNICEF’s financial Identification, review and Analysis of
What internal UNICEF capacity systems and procurement/logistics procedures in complex documentation of case studies decision-making
humanitarian situations criteria around
exists to analyse risk and manage Interviews with UNICEF staff at
security for access? Evidence that financial and logistics procedures incorporate HQ, RO and CO level (including application of
effective risk management and anti-corruption measures approaches to
How well is UNICEF managing the finance staff)
improve access.
financial risks associated with its Evidence that UNICEF proactively adopts a range of
humanitarian programming? strategies to reduce risk, which include acceptance through
community engagement
152
Evaluation questions/Sub-questions Indicators Data collection methods & sources Analytical methods
WAYS OF ACHIEVING OUTCOMES
EQ3: What programme approaches and partnership strategies has UNICEF employed at the field level to gain principled access and improve coverage and quality, and
with what success?
To what extent is UNICEF using
multi-dimensional risk mitigation
approaches, including mitigating
Evidence of the relevance and use of the United Nations
risks and increasing access by
Programme Criticality Framework Interviews with United Nations
building ‘acceptance’ within
communities/through acceptance- Evidence of the relevance and use of UNICEF’s risk agencies, NGOs, implementing
based approaches? management guidance (including Risk-Informed partners and donors.
Programming, 2018–2021 strategy).
What role has the UN’s security
management system played in
enabling or hindering access?
3.5 How well is UNICEF using
Evidence of the relevance and use of UNICEF’s humanitarian
programme monitoring to identify Review of programme monitoring
performance monitoring approach and information
and address gaps in coverage and management (IM) approaches data and systems Analysis of M&E
quality? Review of information management and reporting
Use of AAP approaches and community engagement to
What challenges do complex mechanisms mechanisms
strengthen programme monitoring
humanitarian situations present to Interviews with UNICEF staff at HQ, Cross-country
Evidence of challenges in implementing robust monitoring in
programme monitoring and how is RO and CO level case study
complex humanitarian situations
UNICEF seeking to address these? analysis.
Field-level interviews with
Availability of documented good practice and case studies for
What are the trade-offs in community members.
monitoring.
strengthening this monitoring?
153
Evaluation questions/Sub-questions Indicators Data collection methods & sources Analytical methods
WAYS OF ACHIEVING OUTCOMES
EQ4: To what extent is UNICEF’s humanitarian response designed to be relevant and adapted to ensure its ongoing relevance to evolving needs and priorities?
4.1 How well does UNICEF’s context,
Evidence of ongoing context analysis in complex
conflict and political economy Review of needs assessments and
humanitarian situations
analysis (PEA) underpin the relevance conflict and PEA analysis
of its humanitarian response strategy Availability of updated context, conflict and PEA, and Cross-country
Programme and strategy
and its programme design, and to evidence that these are linked to programme strategies case
document review
what extent does UNICEF adjust Existence of actionable preparedness plans at CO level (and study analysis
these as situations evolve? relevance of the UNICEF Preparedness Guidance Note) Review of recent evaluations Analysis of
of UNICEF humanitarian
How well prepared is UNICEF Evidence of the effective use of UNICEF’s corporate UNICEF policies
action in CHTEs
at HQ, RO and CO levels for new emergency activation procedure and strategies.
humanitarian crises in situations at Interviews with UNICEF staff at HQ,
Evidence of the effectiveness of humanitarian surge in case
risk of becoming complex high- RO and CO level.
study countries.
threat?
4.2 How well has UNICEF engaged Evidence that UNICEF has adopted AAP and community Focus groups with affected
with communities to ensure that engagement strategies in complex humanitarian contexts communities
Cross-country
programmes are designed and that routinely elicit input and feedback on its programmes Review of accountability
case study
adjusted to meet communities’ own (2018–2021 strategy, AAP Checklist for the CCCs) mechanisms
analysis.
perceptions of their humanitarian Evidence of the relevance and use by UNICEF of the IASC Interviews with UNICEF staff at HQ,
needs and priorities? AAP Operational Framework. RO and CO level.
Evidence of coherent programme planning in
humanitarian contexts
Programme and strategy Analysis of
4.3 To what extent is UNICEF’s Evidence that UNICEF’s programmes are consistent document review UNICEF policies
with UNICEF’s emerging guidance (Draft Humanitarian–
humanitarian programming coherent Identification, review and and strategies
Development Nexus paper)
with or link to long-term development documentation of case studies Cross-country
programmes and strategies? Evidence that programme links have strengthened the Interviews with UNICEF staff at HQ, case study
quality and coverage of UNICEF’s assistance in complex
RO and CO level. analysis.
humanitarian situations (Study on Linking Development and
Humanitarian Programming).
154
Evaluation questions/Sub-questions Indicators Data collection methods & sources Analytical methods
INPUTS
EQ5: To what extent do UNICEF’s human and financial resource management and systems and procedures support an effective response in CHTEs?
5.1 How appropriately are UNICEF
Evidence that UNICEF is able to recruit people with the right
COs staffed by technical experts and
skills and competencies for CHTEs and fill staff positions
senior management for delivering
Evidence that UNICEF is meeting CCC commitments on Interviews with UNICEF staff at HQ,
humanitarian coverage and quality? Cross-country
HR for rapid deployment (commitment 1) and well-being RO and CO level
How well have COs been supported case study
(commitment 2) Identification, review and
by senior management and analysis.
Evidence that high-quality and relevant managerial and documentation of case studies.
technical specialists from ROs
technical support is available to UNICEF Representatives and
and HQ in improving coverage and
programme staff in CHTEs.
quality?
5.2 How successful has UNICEF been
in mobilizing flexible resources and
other innovative financing modalities
Evidence of donor engagement by UNICEF at HQ, RO and CO
for CHTEs?
level to leverage funding for CHTEs Review of presentations, speaking
To what extent has UNICEF Cross-country
notes and other documents
succeeded in advocating with Evidence of UNICEF adopting innovative financing modalities case study
prepared for donors
donors to address funding for complex humanitarian situations analysis
Interviews with UNICEF staff at
shortfalls affecting humanitarian Evidence of UNICEF ensuring flexibility of funding Analysis of
HQ, RO and CO level, and United
action? Evidence of a decision-making process to prioritize funding decision-making
Nations agencies and other donors
To what extent does UNICEF allocations. criteria.
in-country.
apply programme criticality or
other criteria to prioritize limited
financial resources for complex
humanitarian contexts?
Evidence of the relevance and use of UNICEF’s systems and Analysis of
5.3 To what extent have UNICEF’s procedures including: resource
systems and procedures improved Review of procedures and systems allocation and
Enhanced programme and operational support for
its response in complex humanitarian fragile contexts Interviews with UNICEF staff at HQ, management
situations, and could these be further RO and CO level. Cross-country
UNICEF simplified standard operating procedures
adapted to improve performance? case study
Supply Division’s ‘no regrets’ policy. analysis.
155
EVALUATION OF UNICEF’S COVERAGE AND QUALITY IN COMPLEX HUMANITARIAN SITUATIONS: NIGERIA
Annex 3: List of interviewees Pricilla Bayo, Nutrition Specialist
Ifeanyi Maduanusi, Nutrition Specialist
Abraham Chirakadavil, HR Business Partner
Listed below are the key informants who
Stella Okugbeni, HR Associate
participated in the evaluation in phase 1 and
Aminu Usman, Nutrition Specialist
phase 2.
Lonis Salihu, WASH Specialist
Yusuf Ismail, Education Specialist for EiE and
UNICEF, Abuja
Learning Outcomes
Phase 2:
Levi Eze, Emergency Specialist
Peter Hawkins, Representative
Emeka Ebo, Supply & Logistics Associate
Rushnan Murtaza, Deputy Representative
Mollen Chareka, Supply & Logistics Specialist
Jane Bevan, Chief of WASH
Robyn Savage, Education Specialist
Claes Johannson, Chief of M4R
Patrick Kwame Amihere, Child Protection
Nemat Hajeebhoy, Chief of Nutrition
Specialist, MRM
Ibrahim Sesay, Chief of Child Protection
Elizabeth Onitolo, C4D Specialist
Eliana Drakopoulos, Chief of Communication
Beshir Elegbeded, C4D Data Consultant
Rudranarayan Sahoo, Education Manager
Carina Prakke, C4D Manager
Olayinka Afolabi, Emergency Specialist
Jerry Abubakar, Security Officer
Bai Ajoku, Donor Relations Specialist
Jimo Mohammed Musliudin, Health Specialist
Oumar Doumbouya, WASH Specialist
Kingdom Joseph Iyla Alexander, Child
David Kungu Gitau, HACT Specialist
Protection Officer
Miatta Abdulai, Child Protection Specialist
Phase 1:
(Mental Health/PSS/GBV)
Isiye Ndombe, Deputy Representative
Monday Johnson, Child Protection Officer
Jonathan Addo, Security Officer
Peter Simon Aturia, Education Manager
Wilberforce Tengey, Chief of Operations
Samuel Bayo Sesay, Child Protection Manager
Nicola Bennett, Emergency Chief
Passy Amani, Education Sector Coordinator
Olayinka Afolabi, Humanitarian Specialist
Bob Bongomin, WASH Cluster Coordinator
Michael Zanardi, Chief Supply Section
Sanjana Bhardwaj, Chief, Health Section
Phase 1:
Maher Farea, Child Protection Specialist (MRM)
Esther Van De Woert, Emergency Coordinator
Alfred Kana, Information Management
UNICEF, Borno State
(Humanitarian Programme Monitoring)
Phase 2:
Specialist
Phuong Ngyen, Chief of Field Office
Geoffrey Ijumba, Head of Field Office
Andrea Malatesta, Emergency Manager
Asta Kone, Health Specialist
Henry Chukwuemeka Okoli, Planning &
Dr Hassan Saidu Malgwi, Health Specialist
Monitoring Specialist
Mohammad Ibrahim, Immunization Officer
Clement Adams, Health Manager
156
EVALUATION OF UNICEF’S COVERAGE AND QUALITY IN COMPLEX HUMANITARIAN SITUATIONS: NIGERIA
Gerida Birukila, Communication for United Nations agencies and donors
Development Specialist Phase 2:
Dr Danjuma Almustafa, Planning Monitoring Edward Kallon, United Nations Resident
and Evaluation Specialist Coordinator/ Humanitarian Coordinator
Geoffrey Ijumba, Chief, Borno Field Office Ernest Mutanga, Resilience/Transition Advisor,
Sanjay Kumar Das, Nutrition Specialist UNDP
Senathirajah Ravindran, Child Protection Trond Jensen, Head of Office, OCHA
Officer Rachel Agelou, Head of Access and
Essau N’Gatta, Supply Specialist Humanitarian–Civil–Military Coordination,
Souleymane Sow, WASH Sector Coordinator OCHA
Dr Yusuf Ismail, Education Specialist Victor Lahai, Coordinator, Inter-sector
Kabuka Banda, WASH Specialist Coordination Group, OCHA
Denis Siljegovic, Chief a.i. Security Information
Third-party facilitators, Borno State and Operations Cell, Field Security Coordination
Phase 2: Officer, UNDSS
Baba Gana Tuja, Third-party facilitator Kevin Tokkar, Counsellor and Head of
Rosina Amos, Third-party facilitator Development Cooperation, Canadian High
Shadrach Adawara, Third-party facilitator Commission
Bart Witteween, Head of Office, ECHO
Phase 1: Melanie Mason, Bureau of Humanitarian
Dr Nwokedi Barth Onyekochi, Third-party Affairs, USAID
consultant Nicholas Martin-Achard, First Secretary, Swiss
Dr Franklyn Nnakwue, Third-party consultant Development Cooperation
Dr Jimoh Mohammed Muslmdeen, Third-party Sefunmi Oluwole, Programme Officer, Swiss
consultant Development Cooperation
Dr Amara Ebere-Ashagba, Third-party
consultant, Phase 1:
Dr Elisha Joseph, Third-party consultant Emma Massey, Humanitarian Advisor, DFID
Ishaku Usman, Logistician and third-party Charles Wanjue, DART Team Leader, Senior
consultant Humanitarian Advisor, USAID
WASH facilitator, Gwoza, Third-party Marianna Franco, Technical Assistant, European
consultant Commission Humanitarian Office
Health officer, Gwoza, Third-party consultant Crispen Rukasha, Deputy Head of Office,
Nutrition facilitator, Gwoza, Third-party OCHA
consultant Steve McGrory, Civil–Military Coordination and
Access Officer, Logistics Cluster
157
UNICEF partners, government, Borno State Benjamin John, Executive Director,
Phase 2: Restoration of Hope Initiative (ROHI)
Muhammed Musa Aliyu, General Manager, Lucy Usen, Executive Director, Centre for
Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Agency Community Health and Development (CHAD)
(RUWASSA) Nafees Khan, Programme Manager, Centre
Hyelni Mshelia, Director, State Primary Health for Integrated for Development and Research
Care Board (SPHCDA) - Health (CIDAR)
Amina Ali, State Nutrition Officer, State Hamsatu James, Programme Manager,
Primary Health Care Board (SPHCDA) - Ekklesiyar Yan’uwa a Nigeria (EYN)
Nutrition Christopher Chinedumuije, Executive Director,
Shettima Bukar Kullma, Executive Chairman, Goal Prime
Borno State Universal Basic Education Board Yusuf Abba, Executive Director, Grow Strong
(SUBEB) Foundation
Umar Lawan, Desk Officer, State Agency for Ibrahim Bukar Wulo, Executive Director,
Mass Education (SAME), Vocational Training Kanem Borno Human Development
for Out of School Youths Association (KABHUDA)
Muhammed Ali Mustapha, Focal Person for Tayo Fatinikun, Executive Director, Life
UNICEF programmes, University of Maiduguri Helpers’ Initiative (LHI)
UNICEF NGO partners, Borno State Phase 1:
Phase 2: Programme Coordinator, Intersos, Maiduguri
Emmanuel Ihemezue, Emergency Programme Health and Nutrition Officer, Intersos,
Manager, Solidarites International Maiduguri
Erica Niel, Programme Coordinator, Street Health and Nutrition Programme Manager,
Child Intersos, Maiduguri
Eunice Muchilwa, Programme Coordinator, Saba Rahman, CIDAR
Street Child Nafees Khan, CIDAR
Alison Oswald, Education Specialist, Andrew Asaph Rufi, Psychological Support
Norwegian Refugee Council Officer, Centre for Community Health and
Mary Hwyere, Programme Manager, Development (CHAD)
Northeast, International Alert Elkannah Sani, Community Capacity Building
Guillaume Bernardeau, Head of Mission, Terre Officer, CHAD
des Hommes Shadrack Adoura, Case Management Officer,
Thibault Bayard Grants Manager, ALIMA CHAD
Traore Mamadou, Education in Emergencies Rhoda Bello Wakirwa, Nutrition Coordinator,
Specialist, Plan International EYN
Simon Waba, Project Coordinator, Plan Mubwa Viyasu Chama, Programme Manager,
International EYN
158
EVALUATION OF UNICEF’S COVERAGE AND QUALITY IN COMPLEX HUMANITARIAN SITUATIONS: NIGERIA
Lami Jinatu Wamdeo, Nutrition Officer, EYN
Emmanuel Bello, M&E Officer, EYN
Andy Aitkin, Security Officer, Norwegian
Refugee Council
Mustafa Lawan, Assistant Humanitarian Field
Officer, Norwegian Refugee Council
Mohammed N. Usman, Access Advisor,
Norwegian Refugee Council
159
Annex 4: Bibliography
Listed below are the key documents and reports that were reviewed during the evaluation mission.
UNICEF documents
Fisher, Benjamin S. (2020), Use of field facilitators: a review. Unpublished.
UNICEF (2012), Remote programming in humanitarian action, EMOPS programme guidance, New
York.
UNICEF (2013), Strengthening humanitarian action: Background paper; unpublished.
UNICEF (2014), Field Manual, Monitoring and Reporting Mechanism (MRM) on Grave Violations
Against Children in Situations of Armed Conflict.
UNICEF (2014), Study on Integrated Programming in UNICEF Humanitarian Action, February 2014.
UNICEF (2015), UNICEF Procedure for Ethical Standards in Research, Evaluation, Data Collection
and Analysis, 1 April 2015.
UNICEF (2017), Country Programme Document: Nigeria, 2018–2022, E/ICEF/2017/P/L.30, 17 July
2017.
UNICEF (2018), Access Field Manual, draft 0, UNICEF, EMOPS, August 2018.
UNICEF (2018), More than 1,000 children in northeastern Nigeria abducted by Boko Haram since
2013, Press Release, 13 April 2018.
UNICEF Nigeria (2018), Nigeria Humanitarian Performance Monitoring Monthly Rounds,
Framework for Core Functions, December 2018. Unpublished.
UNICEF Evaluation Office (2019), Evaluation of the Coverage and Quality of the UNICEF
Humanitarian Response in Complex Humanitarian Emergencies: Volume One, Main Evaluation
Report, January 2019.
UNICEF (2019), AAP Strategic Monitoring Questionnaire Analysis 2019, quoted in: UNICEF
(2020), Strengthening UNICEF’s Humanitarian Action – The Humanitarian Review: Findings and
Recommendations.
UNICEF (2019), UNICEF Procedure on Linking Humanitarian and Development Programming, PD/
PROCEDURE/2019/001, effective 3 May 2019.
UNICEF Nigeria (2019), Humanitarian Situation Report, December 2019.
UNICEF Nigeria (2019), Humanitarian Situation Report, February 2019.
UNICEF Nigeria (2019), Humanitarian Situation Report, July 2019.
UNICEF Nigeria (2020), Humanitarian Situation Report N. 12, January–December 2020.
UNICEF (2020), Strengthening UNICEF’s Humanitarian Action – The Humanitarian Review:
Findings and Recommendations.
UNICEF (2020), Accountability to Affected Populations: a handbook for UNICEF and partners,
Geneva: EMOPS, June 2020.
160
EVALUATION OF UNICEF’S COVERAGE AND QUALITY IN COMPLEX HUMANITARIAN SITUATIONS: NIGERIA
UNICEF (2020), Core Commitments for Children in Humanitarian Action, New York.
UNICEF (2020), U-Report North-East Nigeria Humanitarian Evaluation, analysis by A.O. Toasa,
September 2020, re-analysed and updated by C. Gros, September 2021.
UNICEF (2020), Evaluation of UNICEF’s coverage and quality in complex humanitarian situations:
Afghanistan. UNICEF Evaluation Office, New York.
UNICEF Nigeria (2020), Presentation on use of field facilitators. Unpublished.
UNICEF (2021), UNICEF Emergency Procedures, /PROCEDURE/EMOPS/2021/XXX, final draft,
unpublished.
UNICEF/WFP/NRC (2021), NE Nigeria RRM Approach, internal approach paper dated 7 October
2021.
UNICEF Nigeria/RRM Nigeria (2021), NE Nigeria Rapid Response Mechanism (RRM) Regular
Meeting, 21 September 2021, meeting minutes, unpublished.
UNICEF Nigeria (2021), Terms of Reference: Third Party Management of Field Staff (Facilitator) in
Nigeria. Unpublished.
UNICEF Nigeria (2021), Job Descriptions for LGA and State Level Facilitators. Unpublished.
UNICEF Nigeria (2021), SOP for the Management of Facilitators – Updated August 2021.
Unpublished.
UNICEF (2021), Formative Evaluation of UNICEF Work to Link Humanitarian and Development
Programming. UNICEF Evaluation Office, New York.
External documents
ALNAP/ODI (2016), Evaluation of Humanitarian Action Guide.
Anyadike, O. (2019), Aid workers question USAID counter-terror clause in Nigeria, in The
New Humanitarian, 5 November 2021, available at: <www.thenewhumanitarian.org/news-
feature/2019/11/05/USAID-counter-terror-Nigeria-Boko-Haram>, accessed 7 January 2021.
Australian Aid et al. (2016), The Grand Bargain – A Shared Commitment to Better Serve People in
Need, 23 May 2016.
Brechenmacher, S. (2019), Stabilizing Northeast Nigeria After Boko Haram, Carnegie Endowment
for International Peace.
Education in Emergencies Working Group Nigeria (2021), EiEWG Accountability to Affected
Population in Education Strategy for North-East Nigeria, draft for comments, November 2021.
Graham, A., Powell, M., Taylor, N., Anderson, D. & Fitzgerald, R. (2013), Ethical Research Involving
Children. Florence: UNICEF Office of Research - Innocenti.
Harmer, A. and J. Macrae (eds) (2004) Beyond the Continuum: The Changing Role of Aid Policy in
Protracted Crises, Humanitarian Policy Group (HPG) Report 18. London, Overseas Development
Institute (ODI).
Human Rights Watch (2020), Nigeria: Army Restrictions Stifling Aid Efforts, 4 March 2020.
161
IASC (2008), Operational guidance on the concept of ‘provider of last resort’.
IASC (2013), IASC non-binding guidelines on the use of armed escorts for humanitarian convoys.
IASC (2016), Safety and Security: Creating an Enabling and Conducive Environment for
Humanitarian Assistance. White Paper circulated at the IASC Principals Meeting, 24 November
2016.
McIlreavy, P & Schopp, J. (2017) A collective shame: the response to the humanitarian crisis in
north-east Nigeria, in Humanitarian Exchange, Issue 70, October 2017, Humanitarian Practice
Network/Overseas Development Institute (ODI).
Nigeria Logistics Cluster (2021), Standard Operating Procedures (SOP), Humanitarian Cargo
Movement Notifications, WFP, published 12 February 2020.
Nigeria Nutrition in Emergencies (2020), Sector Strategy and Response Plan.
Okular Analytics (2018), Basic Needs Assessment Guidance and Toolbox, Part 1: Background and
Concepts.
Okular Analytics (2021), Technical Review of 2020 MSNAs in Protracted Crises.
Ramalingam, B. and Mitchell, J. (2014), Responding to changing needs? Challenges and
opportunities for humanitarian action, Montreux XIII Meeting Paper; ALNAP (2014) Montreux XIII
Humanitarian Retreat, Convenors Conclusions.
REACH (2021), Accountability to Affected Populations Situation Overview, Borno State, Nigeria.
Roiron, V. (2017) A Square Peg in a Round Hole: The Politics of Disaster Management in North-
east Nigeria, in Humanitarian Exchange, Issue 70, October 2017, Humanitarian Practice Network/
Overseas Development Institute (ODI).
Sorensen, C. (2019), Review of 2018 MSNAs, ECHO, 2018.
Teles, S. & Schmidt, M. (2011), The Elusive Craft of Evaluating Advocacy, Stanford Social
Innovation Review.
UNDP (2020), Assessing the impact of conflict on development in north-east Nigeria.
UNDSS (2020), DO and SMT Handbook: A guide for Designated Officials for Security and Security
Management Teams, new edition.
UNEG (2008), UNEG Ethical Guidelines for Evaluation, March 2008.
UNEG (2008), UNEG Code of Conduct for Evaluation in the United Nations System, March 2008.
UNHCR (2021), Operational Data Portal: Nigeria Situation, available at: <https://data2.unhcr.org/en/
situations/nigeriasituation>, accessed 27 October 2021.
United Nations (2015), 2016 Humanitarian Response Plan: Nigeria.
United Nations (2017), 2018 Humanitarian Response Plan: Nigeria.
United Nations (2018), Community Engagement Strategy and Action Plan for North-East Nigeria,
June 2018 – June 2020, developed with the support of the AAP Working Group and endorsed by
the HCT on 9 November 2018.
United Nations (2018), HCT Humanitarian Access Strategy for North-East Nigeria.
162
EVALUATION OF UNICEF’S COVERAGE AND QUALITY IN COMPLEX HUMANITARIAN SITUATIONS: NIGERIA
United Nations (2018), Humanitarian Response Strategy: Nigeria, January 2019–December 2021,
published December 2018.
United Nations (2019), North-East Humanitarian Operational Presence, October–December 2019.
United Nations (2020), Humanitarian Situation Update, January 2020 edition.
United Nations (2020), North-East Humanitarian Operational Presence, October–December 2020.
United Nations (2020), Terms of Reference: Humanitarian Access Working Group, endorsed by
HCT 2020.
United Nations (2020), Children in Armed Conflict in Nigeria, Report of the Secretary General,
United Nations Security Council, 6 July 2020.
United Nations (2021), Access Strategy 2021, AWG Draft 1, 2021, unpublished.
United Nations (2021), North-East Humanitarian Operational Presence, March–June 2021.
United Nations (2021), Humanitarian Needs Overview: Nigeria, February 2021.
United Nations (2021), Humanitarian Response Plan, issued February 2021.
United Nations (2021), Northeast Nigeria violence forces 65,000 to flee, humanitarians targeted by
armed groups, United Nations News, 14 April 2021.
United Nation (2021), Nigeria: North-east Humanitarian Presence, April–June 2021, published 5
August 2021.
WASH Sector Nigeria (2021), 3-Year WASH Response Strategy for North East Nigeria: 2021–2023.
Williams, A. (2020), War Economy in North East Nigeria, K4D Helpdesk Report 734. Brighton, UK:
Institute of Development Studies.
World Bank (2014), Nigeria Country Partnership Strategy 2014–2017.
163
Annex 5: Phase 1 evaluation recommendations, management response and
follow-up
The phase 1 evaluation report was submitted in January 2019. In April of the same year, the Nigeria
CO prepared an internal management response indicating the status of follow-up actions as ‘under
way’ or ‘completed’. All actions were planned to be completed by 31 May 2019.
2021 evaluation
Management
# Phase 1 recommendation Actions to be led by? assessment of
response 2019
status
Review current partnerships to maximise Led by Chief of Field
1 the potential to achieve coverage and Office with support from Agree. Not done.
programme quality. Emergency Coordinator
Completed but
superseded. The
Support and advocate for the
2 Representative Agree. strategy was never
endorsement of the HCT Access Strategy.
fully implemented
after endorsement.
Engage robustly with DO for security and
UNDSS on issues of access and use the
Representative and
3 UNICEF Security Officer in a strategic role Agree. Not done.
Chief of Field Office
to support and strengthen humanitarian
access.
Build in regular contextual analysis to
4 Representative Agree. Not done.
inform programme adaptation.
Clarify UNICEF’s accountability to
5 communities and ensure a mechanism is Representative Agree. Not done.
in place to routinely deliver this.
Establish an overall approach and
Agree with caveat:
6 advocacy strategy in support of the New Representative Not done.
depends on HCT.
Ways of Working.
Review and revise the SOP for the LTA for Completed
7 the third-party consultants and ensure Representative Agree. successfully in
strict adherence. 2021.
164
EVALUATION OF UNICEF’S COVERAGE AND QUALITY IN COMPLEX HUMANITARIAN SITUATIONS: NIGERIA
165
Photo credits
Cover © UNICEF/UN0269866/Knowles-Coursin
Page 6 © UNICEF/UN0269826/Knowles-Coursin
Page 12 © UNICEF/UN0391087/Esiebo
Page 17 © UNICEF/UN0592917/Tibaweswa
Page 21 © UNICEF/UN0469951/Ojo
Page 23 © UNICEF/UN0376940/Esiebo
Page 26 © UNICEF/UN0377218/Esiebo
Page 31 © UNICEF/UN0396241/Owoicho
Page 34 © UNICEF/UN0270204/Knowles-Coursi
Page 43 © UNICEF/UN0269869/Knowles-Coursin
Page 46 © UNICEF/UN0270208/Knowles-Coursin
Page 49 © UNICEF/UN0270176/Knowles-Coursin
Page 50 © UNICEF/UN0270124/Knowles-Coursin
Page 57 © UNICEF/UN0396210/Owoicho
Page 60 © UNICEF/UN0444007/DSC_0482
Page 64 © UNICEF/UN0270200/Knowles-Coursin
Page 72 © UNICEF/UN0269893/Knowles-Coursin
Page 77 © UNICEF/UN0269869/Knowles-Coursin
Page 90 © UNICEF/UN0270262/Knowles-Coursin
Page 95 © UNICEF/UN0377163/Esiebo
Page 99 © UNICEF/UN0376908/Esiebo
Page 109 © UNICEF/UN0557404/Esiebo
Page 114 © UNICEF/UN0270162/Knowles-Coursin
Page 114 © UNICEF/UN0270162/Knowles-Coursin
Page 118 © UNICEF/UN0557455/Esiebo
Page 123 © UNICEF/UN0469943/Ojo
Page 130 © UNICEF/UN0469955/Ojo
Page 132 © UNICEF/UN0269851/Knowles-Coursin
Page 135 © UNICEF/UN0269866/Knowles-Coursin
Page 164 © UNICEF/UN0376821/Esiebo
166
EVALUATION OF UNICEF’S COVERAGE AND QUALITY IN COMPLEX HUMANITARIAN SITUATIONS: NIGERIA
For further information, please contact:
Evaluation Office
United Nations Children’s Fund
Three United Nations Plaza New York, New York 10017
evalhelp@unicef.org
www.unicef.org/evaluation
© United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF)
December 2021
167