EXTERNAL EVALUATION
KOICA SUPPORTED ACTIVITIES
“Better Life for Girls: Full Realization of Vulnerable Girls
and Boys Rights to Health, Protection and Education in Jordan”
2017-2021
LRPS-2021-9164785
UNICEF Jordan Country Office
MENA Region
2021
FINAL EVALUATION REPORT
Submission date
06/12/2021
Evaluation Team
Vincent Mudry, Chief Programme Officer / Senior Consultant / Team Leader
Marie Lefevre Saadoun, Senior Consultant / Team Member
Marwa Ershaidat, Consultant / Team Member
Abdulsalam Amoush, Consultant / Team member
DISCLAIMER
The views presented in this report are those of the authors and do not necessarily represent the views
of UNICEF.
1
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The evaluation team would like to express their gratitude to those who participated in the evaluation
process. We would firstly like to thank UNICEF Jordan, the Government of Jordan, the Ministry of
Education, the Ministry of Health, the Royal Health Awareness Society and the Jordan River Foundation
for their support and availability during the evaluation and for taking the time to hold discussions with
Philanthropy Advisors.
A special thank you to the other key respondents, parents and caregivers, school and health staff, for
sharing their very good insights and overview of the KOICA supported activities. They patiently
answered our questions and made themselves available for in-person discussions to help us grasp the
core findings for the purpose of this evaluation.
ةيندرلأا ةموكحلاو ، ندرلأا يف فسينويلا ةمظنم ركشن نأ ًلاوأ دون. مييقتلا ةيلمع يف اوكراش نيذلا كئلولأ هنانتما نع برعي نأ مييقتلا قيرف دوي
ىلعو مييقتلا ءانثأ مهدجاوتو مهمعد ىلع ندرلأا رهن ةسسؤمو ةيحصلا ةيعوتلل ةيكلملا ةيعمجلاو ، ةحصلا ةرازوو ، ميلعتلاو ةيبرتلا ةرازوو ،
. تلاباقملا ءارجلإ تقولا صيصخت
ةديجلا مهراكفأ مهتكراشمل ، ةحصلاو سرادملا يف نيلماعلاو ، ةياعرلا يمدقمو روملأا ءايلوأ ، نيرخلآا نييسيئرلا نيكراشملل صاخ ركش
اذه ضرغل ةي ساسلأا جئاتنلا زاربإ ىلع انودعاسو انتلئسأ ىلع ربصب اوباجأ دقل KOICA. اهمعدت يتلا ةطشنلأا ىلع ةماع ةرظن مهئاطعاو
.مييقتلا
2
ACRONYMS
CP Child Protection
CHC Comprehensive Health Centers
ESC Evaluation Steering Committee
ET Evaluation Team
FGD Focus Group Discussion
FPD Family Protection Department
GoJ Government of Jordan
KII Key Informant Interview
KOICA Korea International Cooperation Agency
IP Implementing Partners
JHF Jordan Humanitarian Fund
JRF Jordan River Foundation
JRP Jordan Response Plan
M&E Monitoring and Evaluation
MoE Ministry of Education
MoH Ministry of Health
MoWI Ministry of Water and Irrigation
NGO Non-Governmental Organisations
OECD Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development
PCA Programme Cooperation Agreement
RHAS Royal Health Awareness Society
SGBV Sexual and Gender Based Violence
ToC Theory of Change
ToR Terms of Reference
UNEG United Nations Evaluation Group
UNHCR United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
UNICEF United Nations’ Children Fund
UNOCHA United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
3
Table of contents
1 Executive Summary 6
2 Introduction to the evaluation 12
2.1 Overview of the Context 12
3 Object of the evaluation 14
3.1 Overview of KOICA supported activities 14
4 Purpose and objectives of the evaluation 16
4.1 Scope of the evaluation 16
4.2 Stakeholders and audience of the evaluation 16
4.3 Governance and management of the evaluation 17
5 Framework of the Evaluation 17
5.1 Logic Model and Theory of Change 17
5.2 Conceptual framework and approach 18
5.3 Evaluation criteria and evaluation matrix 18
6 Methodology of the Evaluation 20
6.1 Phases of the Evaluation 20
6.2 Analysis and Quality Assurance 23
6.3 Ethical Considerations 24
6.4 Risks and Limitations of the Evaluation 25
7 Evaluation Findings 26
7.1 Key findings and rating System 26
7.2 Relevance 26
7.3 Coverage 30
7.4 Effectiveness 34
7.5 Efficiency 42
7.6 Impact 47
7.7 Sustainability 49
8 Conclusions and Lessons Learned 52
8.1 Relevance 52
8.2 Coverage 52
8.3 Effectiveness 52
8.4 Efficiency 53
8.5 Impact 53
8.6 Sustainability 54
9 Recommendations 54
10 List of Annexes 56
10.1 Annex 1: Terms of References 56
10.2 Annex 2: Phases of the evaluation 56
10.3 Annex 3: Stakeholder Matrix 56
4
10.4 Annex 4: Evaluation Matrix 56
10.5 Annex 5: Data Collection Tools 56
10.6 Annex 6: Field Mission Agenda 56
10.7 Annex 7: Field Mission PPT presentation 56
10.8 Annex 8: List of respondents 56
10.9 Annex 9: Bibliography 56
10.10 Annex 10: Evaluation Team 56
5
1 Executive Summary
Context
Jordan has suffered from the spillover of the conflict in Syria which resulted into a prolonged regional
crisis and is acknowledged by the United Nations (UN) as the worst displacement crisis of this century.
The Government of Jordan is confronted with the pressure of maintaining the same quality of services
for both Syrian refugees and vulnerable Jordanians impacted by the Syria crisis. As of today, Jordan is
hosting 664,4141 Syrian refugees who are registered with UNHCR and constitute a large community in
the Jordanian demographics. According to the 2019 Vulnerability Assessment Framework, needs in the
Health, WASH, Education and Child Protection sectors remain extremely high. With children making up
a high proportion of refugees2 and being at high risk, they suffer from early marriage, Sexual and Gender
Based Violence3 (SGBV), dropping out of school, child labor, and this has led to high protection
concerns. In addition, access to health facilities and services and WASH have also been identified as
key concerns. Jordan still relies on international funding to respond to the protracted refugee crisis, and
a large number of actors are involved in the response. For this, the Jordan Response Plan (JRP) which
is led by the Government of Jordan (GoJ), serves as the main guide providing key principles of a
coordinated response with a high emphasis on the coordination and partnership between international
donors, international Non-Governmental Organisations (NGO), Jordanian NGOs and Jordanian
institutions. The Government of Jordan has developed several plans and programs to address the
health and socioeconomic impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic, including the launch of the COVID-19
vaccination program in January 2021. Prior to the pandemic, Jordan made notable improvements in
narrowing its current account deficit, however the slowing down of the world’s economy following the
pandemic, seems to have reversed this trend. On the social level, the pandemic had a disproportionate
impact on women and girls, with the increase of domestic violence4. Those amongst the most deprived
communities are at greater risk of sexual and gender-based violence (SGBV), with a hindered access
to sexual and reproductive health services as well.
Object and Scope of the Evaluation
The Korea International Cooperation Agency (KOICA) invested USD 4.5 million in 2017 to support
programmes to fulfill the rights of girls and boys in Jordan. Under the KOICA supported activities,
UNICEF engaged in three core sectors, Health, WASH and Child Protection.5 The following
interventions were the focus of this evaluation:
Box 1: KOICA supported activities per sector
SECTOR HEALTH WASH CHILD PROTECTION
KOICA supported ● Integrated School ● National Standards for ● Helpline services:
activities Health (ISH) WASH in Schools; Counseling & Case
Programme; ● Three Star Approach; Management
● Support to Primary ● Environment Action
Health Care Centers Clubs
The key stakeholders of the evaluation were UNICEF, KOICA, the Ministry of Education (MoE), the
Ministry of Health (MoH), the Family Protection Department (FPD), the Jordan River Foundation (JRF),
1 UNHCR. UNHCR Fact Sheet Jordan, Feb. 2021
2 46,7% of refugees are children, UNHCR Operational Update October 2021
3 UNFPA Study on child marriage rising among most vulnerable Syrian refugees, 2017 http://www.unfpa.org/news/new-study-
finds-child-marriage-rising-among-most-vulnerable-syrian-refugees#
4 Increase in domestic violence, poor access to family planning, Plan International, May 20, 2020,
https://plan-international.org/news/2020-05-20-covid-19-jordan-domestic-violence-poor-access-family-
planning
5 Outcome 2 of the project is not covered by this evaluation
6
the Royal Health Awareness Society (RHAS), school directors, teachers, children and their
parents/caregivers.
Purpose and Objective of the Evaluation
The main purpose of the assignment was a summative evaluation of KOICA supported interventions
and activities focused on Health, WASH and Child Protection in Jordan. More specifically, the evaluation
aimed at understanding (1) how funds were managed, (2) gain knowledge on the programmatic
achievements to fulfill the needs of children and women providing them with appropriate assistance,
and (3) how the capacities of government and national actors were strengthened.
In addition, the objectives of the summative evaluation were as follow:
- Accountability: Assess the relevance, coverage, effectiveness, efficiency, sustainability, and
impact of KOICA supported interventions.
- Lessons learned: Identify good practices and lessons learned from KOICA supported
interventions (including intended and unintended outcomes) in order to build on general
knowledge;
- Forward-looking: Inform strategic thinking and provide concrete recommendations that will be
considered for future UNICEF interventions and its implementing partners as UNICEF moves
into the new country programme document starting in 2023.
Framework of the Evaluation
The main approach to the evaluation of the KOICA supported activities was based on the result
framework “Better life for Girls: Full realization of Vulnerable girls’ and boys’ rights to health, protection
and education in Jordan” provided by UNICEF to the evaluation team (ET) at the start of the evaluation.
Based on the revised result framework above and the desk review conducted by the team, the logic
model implied is a response to the overall protracted refugee crisis and the realization of girls
and boys rights to health, protection and education in Jordan. According to the original Problem
and Solution Tree Diagram6, the intervention sought to provide better conditions for girls and women in
terms of health, WASH and protection, with a strong focus on children with disabilities7 as well as girls
and women who are at risk of violence and suffering from protection issues. Based on the terms of
reference for this evaluation focusing on specific KOICA supported activities, the team was able to
reconstruct the implicit Theory of Change (ToC) that was used as a tool to support the evaluation
process. The ToC is based on an in-depth review of the programmes and sections’ documents,
especially the result framework, the logical framework and the Problem and Solution Tree Diagram.
The implicit ToC was revised and refined by the evaluation team (ET) to create a useful tool to fine-tune
the assignment and more specifically to assess the sustainability and impact of the intervention.
6 KOICA-UNICEF Project Document 2017 Jordan
7 Outcome 2 of the result framework is not part of this evaluation
7
Conceptual framework and approach to the analysis of the relevance
In order to better assess the relevance of the programme against a solid conceptual framework, in
complementarity with the logic model, the team for the evaluation defined the hereunder a framework
applicable to the KOICA supported activities. Throughout the evaluation, the ET provided an
assessment of the relevance of the activities against the indicators and the core principles of the
framework in the graph below . However, this framework does not necessarily prove useful to the
assessment against the other OECD criteria. The team focused on the extent to which the
intervention has worked towards achieving an integrated approach that fits with regional and
international standards. In addition, this approach helped the team contextualise the activities
implemented and their relevance towards a human rights-based approach.
8
Methodology of the Evaluation
The evaluation of the KOICA supported activities was guided by the purpose, the objectives, the ToC
and the key evaluation questions to inform what has been achieved, lessons learned and provide
recommendations. PA’s team used the OECD/DAC evaluation criteria in addition to the UNEG Norms
and Standards for Evaluation to support the methodology and the process of the evaluation. Throughout
the assignment, PA ensured the assessment of the relevance, coverage, effectiveness, efficiency,
impact, and sustainability of the KOICA supported activities.
➢ Relevance: to analyze how the programme was designed in light of the problems it intends to
respond to then,
➢ Coverage: to understand if it targets the right beneficiaries.
➢ Effectiveness: to understand what was effectively delivered.
➢ Efficiency: to understand how these achievements were made in terms of resource use.
➢ Impact: to understand the effect it had on the beneficiaries and beyond.
➢ Sustainability: to understand how these changes are likely to be maintained over time.
PA suggested that the principal and overarching research question of the evaluation is the extent to
which the KOICA supported activities have contributed to the realization of children’s rights to
health, protection and adequate school environment.
Findings
Relevance
The KOICA supported activities benefited from a strong situation analysis supported by UNICEF’s
presence in Jordan and understanding of the challenges triggered by the Syrian refugee crisis. The
intervention was relevant to the dire needs of boys and girls but also their families and provided them
with adequate services in terms of health and child protection, notably in regard to the consequences
of the COVID-19 crisis. The WASH component enhanced the possibility for children to access a healthy
school environment and acquire better hygienic behaviors. Additionally, the intervention was well
integrated in the national priorities and UNICEF worked towards supporting the Government of Jordan
in strengthening its strategies and developing policies.
In the midst of the COVID-19 context, UNICEF adapted the intervention with the support to the helpline
to provide help to isolated mothers and children at risk. However, for health and WASH, the activities
were for most interrupted.
Coverage
Despite the high relevance of the activities, gaps were identified in targeting areas and locations that
were the most vulnerable and left-out. Some supported schools had already been integrated in previous
similar interventions; and others appeared as being in a fairly favorable environment in comparison to
other areas in Jordan. The vulnerability of the target location remains debatable and a lack of efforts
was noted in reaching out to remote areas and schools that did not receive support in the past for the
Health and WASH interventions.
The KOICA supported activities were fairly compliant with a human rights-based approach (international
standards, equity, gender equality & participatory approach) and responded adequately to the priorities
of the Sustainable Development Goals. Efforts were made by UNICEF in mainstreaming gender
equality, , and equity through the programme and implementation of the activities. Nonetheless, the
evaluation showed gaps in “leaving no one behind”, children with disabilities (CWD) hardly benefited
from the activities, with only a few cases reported. This finding can largely be explained by the
unfavorable context in public schools in Jordan for the integration of CwD, however this gap was not
placed at the heart of this specific intervention when working with schools and national authorities.
Additionally, while the helpline enabled access to remote support for vulnerable children and mothers,
9
it was not designed, from the onset of the programme, to be made available for refugees living in camps.
This design choice, supposedly addressed by other protection mechanisms within camps, proved
problematic with the covid-19 related halt of such protection mechanisms. Therefore, refugees in camps
faced lack of information, leaving them with important protection concerns, especially during the
lockdowns .
Effectiveness
Based on the programme documents and review, UNICEF effectively worked towards supporting a
quality health system to meet the needs of the most vulnerable, especially children and supporting a
protective environment that prevents vulnerable girls, boys and women from exploitation, violence,
abuse and neglect and responded to their needs. For this, UNICEF and its partners provided services
to the most vulnerable and bolstered national capacities and pre-existing systems.
Nevertheless, the evaluation showed a lack of clarity in the implementation timeline leading to
uncertainties on what was achieved in which period. Complementing this, gaps were identified in the
reports of data on the level of achievement, and results could not be triangulated. Moreover, the ET
lacked the possibility to consult a comprehensive results framework based on the actual activities
implemented. If such tools were designed and used during the lifetime of the programme, their quality
or granularity failed in informing the ET with a full picture of output and outcome generation. T his
le d to the inability to understand what was effectively delivered.
The effectiveness of the activities was largely impacted by the Covid-19 lockdowns; activities for health
and WASH implemented in schools were on hold while the ‘project’ was still on-going.
Efficiency
The results of the intervention were largely made possible with UNICEF’s partnership with national civil
society organisations, responsible for the direct implementation of the activities. Additionally, UNICEF
was able to leverage internal inputs and invest in additional human resources when required.
The evaluation showed that the efficiency of the activities were affected by the lack of an ‘overall
project manager’ assigned to the KOICA activities or fund. Indeed, the intervention rather functioned as
a set of different activities undertaken by different programme sections and was not able to mutualise
or articulate some of the activities (for instance school interventions for WASH and Health) to enhance
its coherence and thus its efficiency. This has led to considerable gaps in assessing how funds were
used against the generation of outputs, as the necessary information was not all made available.
Impact
The evaluation showed that the intervention had a direct impact on children: providing them with health
services, enhancing their well-being, contributing to a safer and hygienic school environment. Parents
and caregivers largely reported that their children have a better awareness of the school environment,
coupled with hygiene knowledge and new hygiene habits. However, the evaluation highlighted
weaknesses in the monitoring system regarding the choice and design of relevant and measurable
qualitative indicators able to inform on and capture the outcomes. Therefore the monitoring system
failed at measuring the real impact of the provided services.
Sustainability
The sustainability of the intervention is supported by the engagement of national partners, civil society
and authorities that were fully engaged in the activities. Both have built strong ownership over the three
sectors supported by KOICA, i.e. health, WASH and child protection. UNICEF supported the national
strategies and policies, now adopted by the relevant ministries, but also the technical capacities of its
partners, creating a stronger system in place that will lead future national priorities and responses
While Jordan is well-equipped to maintain the strategy of the KOICA supported activities at a larger
scale, the limited financial resources at national level may hinder the capacity of GoJ to pursue the
10
intervention. Jordan still relies largely on international funding and this raises concerns over the
sustainability of an intervention, funded by international donors or agencies.
Conclusion
The KOICA supported activities were strongly in line with UNICEF’s strategy in Jordan, providing
services to the most vulnerable children and bolstering national capacities. The intervention provided
children with the necessary means and opportunities to enhance their rights to health and protection in
response to long existing needs in Jordan. The activities have also worked towards reinforcing the
national existing system for access to health and hygiene in schools, and the national child protection
system. The intervention benefited from partnering with strong national NGOs that are well established
among the communities with strong ties to the Government of Jordan that could be leveraged in the
future to pursue the work in favor of children’s rights and well-being.
The evaluation showed that large targets can be achieved reaching vulnerable children and their
families, however the intervention would have benefited from a stronger centralized programme
management team, to better inform on the activities implemented, strengthen accountability, and
measure the impact.
Recommendations
PA’s team developed a detailed set of recommendations that are strategic, programmatic and
operational. These are provided in the evaluation report and include the assigned entity as well as
priority of the action. The overarching strategic recommendations are proposed here:
1. KOICA and UNICEF should sustain financial support to nationally owned and
implemented programmes (by the GoJ through relevant Ministries) and, for sustainability
purposes, all stakeholders should be involved in the identification of future long-term
funding through diversifying the financing landscape including development banks, the
Jordanian private sector and other philanthropic actors.
2. KOICA and UNICEF should continue to technically support the GoJ in fully owning and
implementing programmes that are aligned and supported by national policies for full
realization of intended results.
3. For the programmes features fully embedded into the routine activities of the MoE and
MoH within schools, KOICA should consider, with careful monitoring and accountability
mechanisms, transitioning the funding of operational activities to bilateral support to
reinforce ownership and sustainability on national strategies.
4. The donor community and the implementing actors should align and enhance synergies
in the Health and WASH sectors for better coherency and coverage, to avoid duplication
of activities (and efforts), transparency and accountability and thus allowing for
comprehensive school interventions rather than siloed sectoral interventions.
11
2 Introduction to the evaluation
2.1 Overview of the Context
Jordan has suffered from the spillover of the conflict in Syria which resulted into a prolonged regional
crisis and is acknowledged by the United Nations (UN) as the worst displacement crisis of this century.
The Government of Jordan is confronted with the pressure of maintaining the same quality of services
for both Syrian refugees and vulnerable Jordanians impacted by the Syria crisis. As of today, Jordan is
hosting 664,4148 Syrian refugees who are registered with UNHCR and constitute a large community in
the Jordanian demographics. The highest proportion of refugees are registered in the Amman and
Mafraq governorates but the Irbid and Zarqa governorates are also important hosting communities9.
The relations between host and refugee communities were strained by the fact that the vast majority of
refugees live in host communities, in urban settings rather than in camps10. The needs of Syrian
refugees have been transformed by the protraction of the crisis, transitioning from a humanitarian crisis
to a permanent situation. As a consequence, the pressure on schools, hospitals, resources,
infrastructure, and jobs has become a chronic issue rather than a temporary crisis.
According to the 2019 Vulnerability Assessment Framework, needs in the Health, WASH, education
and child protection sectors remain extremely high and Syrian refugee communities resort to negative
coping mechanisms that put the lives of women and children (girls and boys) in danger. With children
making up a high proportion of refugees and being at high risk, they suffer from early marriage, Sexual
and Gender Based Violence (SGBV), dropping out of school, child labor, and this has led to high
protection concerns. In addition, access to health facilities and services and WASH have also been
identified as key concerns.
Jordan still relies on international funding to respond to the protracted refugee crisis, and a large number
of actors are involved in the response. For this, the Jordan Response Plan (JRP)11 which is led by the
Government of Jordan (GoJ), serves as the main guide providing key principles of a coordinated
response with a high emphasis on the coordination and partnership between international donors,
international Non-Governmental Organisations (NGO), Jordanian NGOs and Jordanian institutions.
Jordan’s economy has been weakened by the increase in population growth, followed by the COVID-
19 pandemic which hit hard amid low growth, high unemployment and growing debt.12 Youth
unemployment has reached an unprecedented rate of 50% and both the existing structural weakness
and unresolved social challenges have been exacerbated by the pandemic outbreak. The Government
of Jordan has developed several plans and programs to address the health and socioeconomic impacts
of the pandemic, including the launch of the COVID-19 vaccination program in January 2021, as well
as special loan programs for small and medium-sized enterprises.13 Prior to the pandemic, Jordan made
notable improvements in narrowing its current account deficit, however the slowing down of the world’s
economy following the pandemic, seems to have reversed this trend.14 The deficit expanded from 2.1%
of GDP in 2019 to 8% of GDP in 2020, due to the hard hit on tourism and travel-related key sectors of
growth for the Jordanian economy, with the decline in travel receipts.15
8 UNHCR. UNHCR Fact Sheet Jordan, Feb. 2021, last accessed on 10 Sept 2021.
9 UNHCR. “Operational Data Portal.” Situation Syria Regional Refugee Response,
data2.unhcr.org/en/situations/syria/location/36.
10 UNHCR. UNHCR Fact Sheet Jordan, Feb. 2021, last accessed on 10 Sept 2021.
11 Government of Jordan. Jordan Response Plan Website, www.jrp.gov.jo/.
12 World Bank, Jordan Overview, Context, accessed on 28 July 2021, https://www.worldbank.org/en/country/jordan/overview
13 Ibid
14 Ibid
15 Ibid
12
On the social level, the pandemic had a disproportionate impact on women and girls, with the increase
of domestic violence16. Those amongst the most deprived communities are at greater risk of sexual and
gender-based violence (SGBV), with a hindered access to sexual and reproductive health services as
well.17
Health and WASH gaps in Jordan
The increased water demands, due to the growth in population and industrial and agricultural capacity
have exacerbated the water challenges in Jordan18, with a 40% increase in water demand in Northern
governorates in recent years19 and declining water levels in some main aquifers, at a rate exceeding
20m/year.20 More than 98% of Jordan’s population have access to an improved water source, however
only 86% have access to a safely-managed source and 89% to a piped network.21 There is a gap
between urban and rural areas, the latter having water available less than once every two weeks and
with a reduced availability of water during the summer for rural areas. In particular, the Northern
Governorates of Irbid and Mafraq have been affected by the influx of Syria refugees where the
population increase has caused a significant additional demand for water, resulting in local water
shortages and, ultimately, enormous pressures on the sewage network and wastewater treatment
plants.22
Only a third of the schools have basic sanitation services.23 Although key hygiene norms, including
handwashing, are well-practiced in Jordan, there remain gaps in access to basic hygiene items for
vulnerable households.24 In terms of health and WASH in schools, both the Ministry of Education (MoE)
and the Ministry of Health (MoH) have shared responsibilities over the mandate. Schools are under the
authority of the MoE, although the MoH’s mandate includes the provision of: “preventive health services
to children in public schools, kindergartens and nurseries” as well as providing and extending “health
services to non-government schools, kindergartens and nurseries”.25 Additionally, the establishment
and maintenance of school buildings fall under the MOE’s mandate, including licenses for buildings,
when opening a new school.
Teachers strike
In 2019, Jordan witnessed its longest-ever public sector strike that disrupted schooling for more than
1.5 million students.26 Most teachers in schools have a second or even third job in the informal sector,27
and demanded a 50% salary increase presented by the Teachers’ syndicate to the government. The
country’s economic state and restrictions imposed by the IMF led the government to refuse to honor
this salary increase demand.
The strike lasted 4 weeks, thus becoming the longest strike of the public sector in the kingdom’s history.
As a result of the strike, many students did not attend classes for one month, thus disrupting their
education. Jordan’s government reached a pay deal with the teachers’ syndicate to end the strike, and
16 Increase in domestic violence, poor access to family planning, Plan International, May 20, 2020, https://plan-
international.org/news/2020-05-20-covid-19-jordan-domestic-violence-poor-access-family-planning
17 Ibid
18 https://www.unicef.org/jordan/water-sanitation-and-hygiene
19Jordan Water Sector Facts and Figures, Ministry of Water and Irrigation 2019
20 Ibid
21 Joint Monitoring Program (JMP), 2021 https://washdata.org/data/household#!/table?geo0=country&geo1=JOR
22 Breulmann M., Müller R.A., Al-Subeh A. and van Afferden M. (2021) Influx of Syrian Refugees in Jordan – Effects on the
Water Sector. https://reliefweb.int/report/jordan/influx-syrian-refugees-jordan-effects-water-sector
23 Joint Monitoring Program (JMP), 2021, https://washdata.org/data/school#!/table?geo0=country&geo1=JOR
24 Ibid
25 The Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan, The Official Site of the Jordanian Ministry of Health, accessed on 28 July 2021
26 Jordan teachers end four-week strike in pay deal with government, Al Jazzera, 6 October 2019,
https://www.aljazeera.com/news/2019/10/6/jordan-teachers-end-four-week-strike-in-pay-deal-with-government
27 Teachers on strike in Jordan demand higher income, ‘dignity’, AlJazeera, by Marta Vidal, 26 September 2019,
https://www.aljazeera.com/features/2019/9/26/teachers-on-strike-in-jordan-demand-higher-income-dignity
13
agreed to a 35-75 % increase in salaries, based on teacher’s qualifications. However, in April 2020, the
government froze all public sector pay increases until the end of 2020 due to COVID-19 outbreak.28
All schools, public and private, closed in March 2020 and children had access to remote and online
learning29, and reopened in September 2021. Following a year and a half of online schools, with an
ongoing pandemic and interruptions of several international and national projects for schools and
students; moving forward, addressing these gaps have to be considered as a priority, at the educational
and health levels.
3 Object of the evaluation
3.1 Overview of KOICA supported activities
The Korea International Cooperation Agency (KOICA) invested USD 4.5 million in 2017 to support
programmes to fulfill the rights of girls and boys in Jordan. Under the KOICA supported activities,
UNICEF engaged in three core sectors, Health, WASH and Child Protection.30 The following
interventions were the focus of this evaluation:
Box 1: KOICA supported activities per sector
SECTOR HEALTH WASH CHILD PROTECTION
KOICA supported ● Integrated School ● National Standards for ● Helpline services:
activities Health (ISH) WASH in Schools; Counseling & Case
Programme; ● Three Star Approach; Management
● Support to Primary ● Environment Action
Health Care Centers Clubs
In 2017, UNICEF and the Ministry of Health (MoH) launched the Integrated School Health
Programme supporting access to essential health services, support to health workers, providing
medical supplies, awareness-raising materials on healthy behaviors as well as inspection of school
environments with the Ministry of Education (MoE).
In 2017, through the WASH in Schools Programme, UNICEF supported the National WASH in
Schools Standards focusing on establishing the groundwork for schools in Jordan to align with basic
international standards for providing students with a clean and hygienic learning environment i.e: access
to clean running water and adequate sanitation facilities. In 2018, UNICEF supported the Three Star
Approach31 in partnership with Jordanian local NGO called Royal Health Awareness Society (RHAS)
and MoE focusing on WASH activities in schools in Jordanian host communities. The intervention
focused on a soft WASH approach supporting behavior change and awareness on hygiene and water
conservation and rehabilitation of WASH infrastructure in schools. UNICEF also launched a Knowledge,
Attitudes and Practices (KAP) survey in 2018 in order to identify the gaps and needs in terms of
accessibility, functionality, privacy and cleanliness standards which resulted in better guiding the
intervention32. The Three Star Approach also aimed at establishing the Environment Action Clubs in
each supported school, a platform promoting environmental and climate literacy involving children and
28 Jordan : Teacher’s Syndicate Closed ; Leaders Arrested, Human Rights Watch, 30 July 2020,
https://www.hrw.org/news/2020/07/30/jordan-teachers-syndicate-closed-leaders-arrested
29 “Schools Suspended, Borders Closed, Gatherings Banned as Gov't Responds to Continued Coronavirus Spread.” Jordan
Times, 14 Mar. 2020.
30 Outcome 2 of the project is not covered by this evaluation
31 UNICEF’s Three Star Approach for WASH in Schools is designed to improve the effectiveness of hygiene behavior change
programs. The approach ensures that healthy habits are taught, practiced and integrated into daily school routines. The Three
Star Approach helps schools meet the essential criteria for a healthy and protective learning environment for children as part of
the broader child-friendly schools’ initiative. It aims to address the bottlenecks that block the effectiveness and expansion of
current WASH in Schools programmes.
32 The mentioned KAP survey refers to a larger exercise led by UNICEF and differs from the KAP survey conducted by RHAS
in 2019
14
students’ participation; additionally, the Environment Action Clubs were established to address the
environmental gaps in schools.
In 2020, UNICEF started supporting the helpline created by the Jordan River Foundation (JRF) in
2007, a key intervention in regard to the consequences of the COVID-19 pandemic and the lockdown
in Jordan which resulted in high domestic violence33. The helpline provided remote services through
community based outreach to vulnerable communities. In addition, UNICEF along with UNHCR created
two Guidance Notes addressing the shifting situation due to the pandemic to enhance better case
management, support and protection.
Based on the desk review conducted during the inception phase, the evaluation team was able to
compile into the table below the outcomes and specific activities that constitute the object of the
evaluation.
Box 2: Compiled activity list as understood by the ET
Outcome 1 : A quality health system meets the needs of a vulnerable population, especially
children
HEALTH
➢ School Health Package for Students: Integrated health education and services in schools provided
○ Health Promotion (Education & Awareness)
○ Prevention Services (Immunization; Medical examination; Vision, dental and nutrition
checks)
○ Medical & dental treatment at Health Centers
➢ 1 school health clinic furnished in each 20 most vulnerable schools
WASH
➢ Implementation of the National Standards for Water Sanitation and Hygiene (WASH) in Schools
programme in selected schools in Jordan, in tandem with the Three Stars Approach
○ Three Stars Approach training for schools’ health focal points at the Education Directorates
and the selected schools
○ School health teachers support promoting behavior change for hygiene through hygiene
awareness-raising activities, Menstrual Hygiene Management (MHM) water conservation,
sanitation, solid waste management, and environmental protection activities
○ Schools support to address environmental hazards, operate and maintain safe and usable
WASH facilities
○ Orientation and mobility training for schools’ janitors
○ Water testing, cleaning, and disinfection of water storage tanks
○ Regular (monthly) follow-up and monitoring visits
➢ WASH environmental clubs in targeted schools
○ Establishment of environmental clubs in schools
○ Clubs facilitators trainings on the Environmental curriculum, and activities
○ Support the clubs to organise environmental initiatives at the schools
Outcome 3 : A protective environment prevents exploitation, violence, abuse and neglect
and responds to the needs of vulnerable girls, boys and women
Child Protection
➢ Helpline services provided to vulnerable children and families
○ Counseling services for women and children for the following areas:
■ Violence reporting and victims’ psychological care
■ Parenting
■ Case management
33 Increase in domestic violence, poor access to family planning, Plan International, May 20, 2020, https://plan-
international.org/news/2020-05-20-covid-19-jordan-domestic-violence-poor-access-family-planning
15
4 Purpose and objectives of the evaluation
The main purpose of the assignment was a summative evaluation of the UNICEF Jordan KOICA
supported intervention and activities focused on Health, WASH and Child Protection. More specifically,
the evaluation aimed at understanding (1) how funds were managed, (2) gain knowledge on the
programmatic achievements to fulfill the needs of children and women providing them with appropriate
assistance, and (3) how the capacities of government and national actors were strengthened.
In addition, PA understood that the objectives of the summative evaluation as follow:
- Accountability: Assess the relevance, coverage, effectiveness, efficiency, sustainability, and
impact of KOICA supported interventions;
- Lessons learned: Identify good practices and lessons learned from KOICA supported
interventions (including intended and unintended outcomes) in order to build on general
knowledge;
- Forward-looking: Inform strategic thinking and provide concrete recommendations that will be
considered for future UNICEF interventions and its implementing partners as UNICEF moves
into a new country programme document starting in 2023.
4.1 Scope of the evaluation
The evaluation was structured under the three different sectors of intervention (Health, WASH and Child
protection) and focused on the activities as outlined in the ET reconstructed theory of Change of the
intervention (see above). The evaluation covered the activities implemented in primary and secondary
schools as well as comprehensive health centres in the following governorates: Amman, Zarqa, Irbid,
and Mafraq; in 2017, 2018, 2019 and 2020.
4.2 Stakeholders and audience of the evaluation
The key stakeholders of the evaluation were UNICEF, the Ministry of Education, the Ministry of Health,
the Family Protection Department (FPD), the Jordan River Foundation (JRF), the Royal Health
Awareness Society (RHAS), school directors, teachers, children and their parents/caregivers. During
the inception phase, the evaluation team developed a stakeholders’ matrix (Annex 3) compiling all users
of the evaluation with interest and utility of the evaluation (Annex 4). However, below is a summary
table of the intended target audience and the foreseen interest and use per stakeholder.
Box 3: Stakeholders, interest and use of the evaluation
Stakeholders and users of the Interest in the Use of the evaluation
evaluation evaluation
Duty Bearers UNICEF-JCO Direct, fully engaged, Summative, Learning
consulted Accountability
Duty Bearers UNICEF-MENA Regional Office Direct, fully engaged, Summative, Learning
consulted Accountability
Duty Bearers Implementing Partners Direct, consulted Summative, Learning
Duty Bearers MoE, MoH and FPD Direct, consulted Summative, Learning
Right Holders Schools, Beneficiaries Indirect and consulted Accountability
Duty Bearers UN Agencies Indirect Summative, Learning
Duty Bearers KOICA Direct, consulted Learning, Accountability
Duty Bearers 3RP and JRP Partners Indirect Summative, Learning
16
4.3 Governance and management of the evaluation
The evaluation was managed and led by the UNICEF planning monitoring and evaluation section and
PA’s evaluation team directly reported to the Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) Officer. The evaluation
team was technically supported by the WASH, Health and Child Protection specialists involved in the
evaluation process.
Furthermore, the Evaluation Steering Committee (ESC) included UNICEF Partnership, Health, WASH,
Child Protection specialists, a representative from the Ministry of Health and KOICA. PA adhered to the
responsibilities of the ESC as stipulated in the ToR: provide technical guidance and review the inception
report and the draft final report. As part of the inception phase, the evaluation team and the members
of the ESC held a kick-off meeting in order to introduce the members of the ESC and the evaluation
team.
5 Framework of the Evaluation
5.1 Logic Model and Theory of Change
The main approach to the evaluation of the KOICA supported activities was based on the result
framework “Better life for Girls: Full realization of Vulnerable girls’ and boys’ rights to health, protection
and education in Jordan” provided by UNICEF to the evaluation team at the start of the evaluation.
Based on the revised result framework above and the desk review conducted by the team, the logic
model implied is a response to the overall protracted refugee crisis and the realization of girls
and boys rights to health, protection and education in Jordan. According to the original Problem
and Solution Tree Diagram34, the intervention sought to provide better conditions for girls and women
in terms of health, WASH and protection, with a strong focus on children with disabilities35 as well as
girls and women who are at risk of violence and suffering from protection issues.
Based on the ToR for this evaluation focusing on specific KOICA supported activities, the team was
able to reconstruct the implicit Theory of Change (ToC) that was used as a tool to support the evaluation
process. The ToC is based on an in-depth review of the project documents, especially the result
framework, the logical framework and the Problem and Solution Tree Diagram. The implicit ToC was
revised and refined by the evaluation team (ET) to create a useful tool to fine-tune the assignment and
more specifically to assess the sustainability and impact of the intervention.
The ToC has helped the team to create assumptions and hypotheses that were verified during the
evaluation process and the tool has been used to understand what the enabling factors were to achieve
the outcomes. In addition, the hypothesis of the ToC suggests that UNICEF, in partnership with the GoJ
and their implementing partners, worked towards achieving the grounds for a better life for girls;
realizing rights to health and education; protecting women and children at risk. The assumed change
and impact was made possible by the enunciated inputs and activities and these composed the core of
the evaluation exercise.
Box 4: KOICA supported activities ToC
34 KOICA-UNICEF Project Document 2017 Jordan
35 Outcome 2 of the result framework is not part of this evaluation
17
5.2 Conceptual framework and approach
In order to better assess the relevance of the programme against a solid conceptual framework, in
complementarity with the logic model, the team for the evaluation defined the hereunder framework
conceptual framework applicable to the KOICA supported activities. Throughout the evaluation, the ET
provided an assessment of the relevance of the activities against the indicators and the core principles
of the framework in the graph below was applied. However, this framework does not necessarily prove
useful to the assessment against the other criteria. The team focused on the extent to which the
intervention has worked towards achieving an integrated approach that fits with regional and
international standards. In addition, this approach helped the team contextualise the activities
implemented and their relevance towards a human rights-based approach.
5.3 Evaluation criteria and evaluation matrix
For this evaluation, PA’s team used the OECD/DAC evaluation criteria in addition to the UNEG Norms
and Standards for Evaluation to support the methodology and the process of the evaluation. Throughout
the assignment, PA ensured the assessment of the relevance, coverage, efficiency, effectiveness,
sustainability and impact of the KOICA supported activities.
➢ Relevance: The extent to which activities reflected the priorities and needs of the target group.
➢ Coverage: Did the KOICA supported activities reach all major groups in the population,
including women, those most vulnerable, and in need?
18
➢ Efficiency: The degree to which the KOICA supported activities realized value for money and
maintained the resource levels required to attain intended results and quality.
➢ Effectiveness: The extent to which the KOICA supported activities achieved their intended
results.
➢ Sustainability: The potential for the KOICA supported activities’ benefits to persevere over the
long-term.
➢ Impact: The extent to which the KOICA supported activities have generated change for the
beneficiaries and within communities as well as generated changes in the health and education
national systems.
For coherence reasons, and to have a logical flow of analysis of the intervention, the ET decided to
analyze the KOICA supported activities using the following order of criteria:
➢ Relevance : to analyze how the program was designed in light of the problems it intends to
respond to then,
➢ Coverage : to understand if it targets the right beneficiaries.
➢ Effectiveness : to understand what was effectively delivered.
➢ Efficiency: to understand how these achievements were made in terms of resource use.
➢ Impact : to understand the effect it had on the beneficiaries and beyond and lastly.
➢ Sustainability: to understand how these changes are likely to be maintained over time.
PA suggests that the principal and overarching research question of the summative evaluation is the
extent to which the KOICA supported activities have contributed to the realization of children’s
rights to health, protection and adequate school environment. While key questions were proposed
in the ToR and refined in the proposal, the team worked towards refining the key questions as well as
in depth sub-questions for each criteria during the inception phase. Below are the 18 key questions
revised for each criteria.
Box 5: Key evaluation questions
Key Evaluation Questions
Relevance 1. Are the KOICA supported activities consistent with beneficiaries’ needs?
2. How relevant is the intervention in regard to overall international and national priorities, policies?
3. To what extent has UNICEF been able to adapt the intervention to the evolving context?
Coverage 1. To what extent are the most vulnerable populations targeted through the intervention?
2. Have the KOICA supported activities been taking into account relevant standards for equity, gender equality and
human rights-based approach, including the participatory approach to include beneficiaries?
Efficiency 1. Have the KOICA supported activities generated the intended outputs through the most efficient use of inputs,
including financial, human resources and partnership approaches?
2. M&E: How efficient were the systems put in place to monitor progress of the KOICA supported activities?
Effectiveness 1. To what extent were the objectives of the KOICA supported project achieved or likely to be achieved, in a timely
and systematic manner?
2. What were the major factors influencing the achievement or non-achievements of the objectives?
3. How effective was the coordination between UNICEF and the different stakeholders involved in the KOICA
activities and beyond?
4. To what extent have the KOICA supported schools and centers improved the approach to Health & WASH better
than schools not directly supported?
Sustainability 1. To what extent do relevant ministries have the capacity to take full ownership of the KOICA project without
UNICEF’s upstream support and donor funding?
2. How will relevant ministries evolve when the supported activities end, will they adopt the intervention strategy in the
long term?
3. Could other stakeholders be involved in sustaining the intervention and its results? (youth, volunteers, NGOs)
Impact 1. What differences can be observed in children’s behavior as a result of the intervention?
2. What change has the intervention brought into the life of beneficiaries?
3. What happened as a result of the project? (capacity, knowledge, behavior...)
4. To what extent did the intervention have an impact on girls and boys during the pandemic (in 2020)?
19
PA developed the evaluation matrix that includes all elements of interest to respond to the framework
and rationale of the evaluation. The evaluation matrix can be found in Annex I of the evaluation report.
6 Methodology of the Evaluation
The summative evaluation of the KOICA supported activities was guided by the purpose, the objectives,
the ToC and key evaluation questions to inform what has been achieved, lessons learned and provide
recommendations.
6.1 Phases of the Evaluation
To conduct the evaluation and produce the expected deliverables, PA used a mixed-method approach
to collect both quantitative and qualitative data with a particular attention to gender and disability. The
proposed tools supported the evidence-based research for the evaluation and provided understanding
on the results and achievements, use of funds and impact of the supported intervention. The
methodology for this evaluation included the below phases and a detailed table of the phases for the
evaluation can be found in Annex 2.
➢ Inception Phase
During the inception phase, the team worked on the desk review of documents made available by
UNICEF. The team read through the reporting documents between KOICA and UNICEF including bi-
annual reports, expenditures, communication, and social media presence regarding the activities
implemented. The team also accessed the WASH component reporting from UNICEF’s implementing
partner the Royal Health Awareness Society (RHAS); Health related documents used in schools
including the national standards for WASH in schools; Child protection documents from the Jordan
River Foundation (JRF), the partner in charge of the helpline implementation. In addition, the team was
able to refine the methodology and approach adopted for the evaluation and prepare the evaluation
matrix, the data collection tools and its protocols with questionnaires for KIIs and FGDs targeted for
each respondent. The inception report was validated by UNICEF and the Ethical Review Board prior to
the data collection phase.
➢ Data collection mission
As part of the inception phase, the evaluation team developed a tentative agenda for the field mission
that took place from Sunday 4 July 2021 to Tuesday 13 July 2021. The proposed agenda was
consolidated in coordination with UNICEF and implementing partners. PA’s evaluation team conducted
the following, also summarized in the chart below. The list of respondents to the evaluation can be
found in Annex 7 and the data collection mission agenda in Annex 6. Below is a summary of the data
collected
20
● 35 Key Informant Interviews (KIIs): KIIs were one of the main information sources for the
evaluation, including with UNICEF staff at Jordan Country Office, implementing partners (IPs),
beneficiaries (parents), Ministries and government interlocutors (MoH) at Amman and
governorates level, UN agencies and the donor. During the inception phase, PA developed
interview guides that were adapted to each respondent (It can be found in Annex III of the
report). PA conducted KIIs on the basis of the non-attribution of specific comments so as to
prevent the source to be identified.36
● 17 Focus Group Discussions with parents & caregivers and school staff (FGD): FGDs
were used to gain insight from beneficiaries of the KOICA supported activities, parents,
caregivers and the communities. PA believes FGDs are a unique platform for beneficiaries to
share their point of view, experience and stories to ensure that the community fully participates
and takes part in the evaluation assignment and its process.37
● When conducting the FGDs, PA complied with the Do No Harm principles and ethical
requirements; in addition, PA was sensitive to the methodology and content used when
participating in FGDs with beneficiaries (parents and caregivers) according to safeguarding
36 Chatham House rule
37 UNICEF framework for the Participation of Children
21
principles. Lastly, PA made sure that FGDs were conducted to encourage active and equal
participation of women and men. For this, PA divided the team between two male evaluators
and 2 female evaluators. The data concerning the number of respondents per gender can be
found in the graph below:
● Specific locations for the data collection: While the team was not able to visit all locations
supported by UNICEF through the KOICA fund, the evaluators were able to reach 10 public
schools and 8 health centers. Below is a map showing the locations reached for the purpose of
this evaluation.
● End of field mission workshop: A presentation of the field mission, data collected and
preliminary findings was organized online with UNICEF staff. This was an opportunity to
address gaps and validate the preliminary findings to support the analysis phase. The
presentation is available in Annex 7.
22
6.2 Analysis and Quality Assurance
➢ Qualitative data management and analysis
● Data was first translated from Arabic into English and cross-checked by a second reviewer for
accuracy. The team for the evaluation worked together for the analysis and triangulation of
collected data from which evidence was constructed and jointly validated in order to harmonize
findings, reach in-depth conclusions, lessons learned and provide recommendations. The team
used the evidence matrix approach where data was associated with each key evaluation
question and criteria. While the team ensured that all data were complete and accurate, efforts
were placed to identify trends, patterns, and categories from which emerged key themes and
factors of attribution. Data was disaggregated per respondent category and location as well as
per sector of the KOICA supported activities in order to capture different information.
● The end of the field mission workshop was an opportunity for UNICEF and the evaluation team
to discuss the preliminary findings and ensure a participatory approach for larger triangulation
of data. The evaluation team worked together to triangulate the data to seek validation,
accuracy and harmonize the findings and eliminate bias within the team. During this process,
the team compared the data collected from different sources and stakeholders, for each tool,
interview or focus group, with a particular focus on the geographical locations. Additionally, the
team met with the UNICEF M&E focal point at the end of the third day of data collection, to
clarify some of the findings of the first three days.
● Using the evidence matrix, the team built a solid analysis of evidence to respond to the
objectives of the evaluation to build conclusions and recommendations. Gender sensitivity was
applied when selecting the respondents and a special attention was given to the local context.
For an adequate gender perspective, the evaluation ensured that all at-risk parties, including
women and men, girls and boys, were heard and their views expressed, and that the analysis
used sex and age disaggregated data whenever possible. The notes of the interviews were not
shared with UNICEF.
● The team for this evaluation used a rating system for each of the findings, based on a qualitative
assessment by the ET. Each finding was rated using the following scale “+” and “-”. The rating
system is a form of judgmental assessment used in qualitative evaluation and draws on
expertise and experience of PA’s team. It was defined as standard practice for evaluations
within the company and has been used in over 80 evaluations over ten years time. The rates
are attributed according to the knowledge, experience and benchmark of the evaluators on
similar interventions and aims at providing an understanding of the qualitative analysis. As
factors influencing the performance on different criteria are too varied and numerous to be listed
exhaustively, the rating is left to the appreciation of the evaluators with a rationale explained
thereafter. It is to be noted that calculation or aggregated criteria cannot be used for a qualitative
understanding or rating of a programme as a single element. This could jeopardize the ability
of the programme to perform on any of the criteria and thus no weighting of elements could
thereof be used. This approach remains therefore a part of subjectivity from the evaluator,
counterbalanced by the data and facts observed during data collection, triangulated information
and voices of all stakeholders of the evaluated intervention. The professionalism, neutrality,
independence, experience and ability to compare with similar programmes, situations or
contexts of the evaluator is also a guarantee of a fair analysis and rating. It is worth also pointing
to the fact that these ratings are established in an analysis internal workshop in which
appreciations of all members of the ET, local consultants as well as internationals, are reaching
consensual views on the elements.
23
Findings scoring legend
VERY POOR POOR GOOD VERY GOOD
- - - + + +
Very poor rating applies for Poor rating applies for Good applies for what is Very good applies for what
what is judged to be very what is judged to be judged to be correctly is judged to be best
problematic, irrespective of below standards or executed, in line with practices or areas of
standards or against common common practices and standards and common excellent performances
best practices, creating thus should be amended practices of the sector. that should be leveraged or
blockages or failures to the to ameliorate the replicated as adding extra
program and thus would need program. value or quality to the
immediate attention and program.
correction.
PA was responsible for the supervision of the evaluation process and carried out the assignment
according to the ToR and guidance from the UNICEF evaluation manager and ESC. To ensure quality
assurance, PA cooperated with UNICEF in terms of needs and requirements. PA was committed to
ensure an in-depth evidence-based analysis, fair conclusions and transparent process. In line with
UNICEF evaluation requirements, PA provided results and recommendations that are applicable in
terms of policy and practical terms. PA committed to the timeline of the assignment to ensure that
deliverables were submitted in a timely manner. In addition, PA worked with UNICEF to comply with
the requirements of the ethical review applied to this evaluation. PA understands the importance of
these reviews and adjusted the assignment and deliverables accordingly.
6.3 Ethical Considerations
PA adhered to the norms and standards of the United Nations Evaluation Group. PA also followed the
UNICEF Procedure on Ethical Standards in Research, Evaluation, Data Collection and Analysis.38 In
addition, the evaluation process was guided by UNEG Guidance on Integrating Human Rights and
Gender Equality in Evaluation as well as the standards of Ethical Research Involving Children39 and the
Independent Review Board (IRB) to protect the rights and welfare of human subjects participating in an
evaluation.
PA understood that ethical considerations refer to the confidentiality of the respondents and data
gathered, and this will be strictly respected. During KIIs and FGD, PA’s team ensured that respondents
understood that participation was voluntary, and that the information shared remained confidential and
anonymous. Special attention was also dedicated to UNEG guidance and principles of ‘do no harm’.
The team explained confidentiality and sought the informed consent (verbal) of each interviewee
through a verbal introduction. Interviewees also had the opportunity to suspend the interview or opt-out
of specific questions for any reason they felt necessary.
The evaluation was conflict sensitive and ethical considerations were respected in all cases and with
particular sensitivity when undertaking field visits in Jordan. Considering the vulnerability of the affected
populations, specific considerations to the local context were anticipated by the team, including potential
assessment fatigue of the affected population, vulnerable groups.
PA also adhered to the ethical principles and standards of ERIC which include:
● Commitment to producing an evaluation of developmental and practical value for the users;
● Commitment to avoid harm to participants;
● Respect for cultural norms;
● Commitment to an inclusive approach ensuring access and participation of women and socially
excluded groups;
38 http://www.unicef.org/supply/files/ATTACHMENT_IV-UNICEF_Procedure_for_Ethical_Standards.PDF
39 UNICEF, Ethical Research Involving Children: http://www.unicef-irc.org/KM/ERIC/
24
● Commitment to ensure participation in the evaluation is voluntary and free from external
pressure;
● Commitment to confidentiality and anonymity of participants.
Throughout the evaluation process, PA ensured a participatory approach and was committed to the
following standards:
➢ Human Rights Responsive: According to the human rights international framework, there are
agreed rights, standards and targets on which the UNICEF intervention is based upon. By
analyzing these rights, PA sought elements and highlighted how UNICEF committed to a
Human Rights Based Approach (HRBA) and the Gender Equality and Equity Strategy
➢ Age, Gender and Diversity (AGD) Sensitive: During the evaluation, PA ensured that an AGD
sensitive approach was used. This was supported by a combined use of quantitative and
qualitative data. This included considering whether and how UNICEF’s work took into
consideration the specificity of each group. PA also strived to ensure that all data was
disaggregated by age and gender, to allow gender-sensitive analysis and identification of gaps
and recommendations. In addition, a particular attention was given to the ethnicity and disability
for which disaggregated data and analysis was also provided
➢ Accountable to Affected Populations (AAP): The principle of accountability requires that
actors (duty bearers) actively involve the affected people (rights holders) meaningfully in key
decisions and processes that impact them. This includes involving persons of concern in the
evaluation and ensuring that the response takes due account of the needs, views, and
capacities of affected people. Efforts to link the perceptions and knowledge of the affected
population to a wider strategic and policy process theory has the potential to add significant
value to UNICEF’s work in this area. It also functions as a form of empowerment of the affected
population by taking children, youth and the community’s views seriously.
6.4 Risks and Limitations of the Evaluation
PA was conscious that this evaluation assignment would have limitations and was committed to ensure
quality and bring the evaluation to the lowest risks. PA adjusted the risks and limitations after the data
collection phase and the mitigation strategy adopted
Box 7: Risks and Limitations
Risk and Limitations Mitigation Strategy
Partnership Cooperation Agreement with MoH was The ET worked with the available documents listed in the bibliography
not shared with the ET, as well as monitoring
reports
The ET was not introduced to MoE to conduct a The ET used other sources to assess the KOICA supported activities
KII
Unavailability of a focal point at UNICEF level for The ET worked directly with the M&E Unit to mitigate the gaps in
the KOICA supported activities information provided for the evaluation. The ET developed a matrix of
necessary documents submitted to UNICEF to obtain additional data
however, only documents related to the WASH component were
provided
School holidays & Tawjihi exam As the data collection mission was conducting during the school holidays
and tawjihi exam, the ET had to adjust the agenda accordingly
COVID-19 pandemic The data collection mission was conducted smoothly despite the health
and social distancing measures in place. The ET paid attention to respect
the protocol in place
Relatively short period for qualitative data PA mitigated this risk by splitting the team to ensure that the largest
collection phase in Jordan geographical areas were covered and to reach out to the highest number
of respondents possible. 2 teams of evaluators conducted data collection
to also fit the gender requirements
25
Data collection depended on the availability of the A strong coordination and communication process was agreed with
respondents but also the multiplicity of sites and UNICEF to inform respondents in due time and a facilitated access to the
locations of the intervention areas of the intervention.
Potential fatigue of the respondents due to the PA ensured that the purpose of the assignment was shared prior to
multiplicity of similar assignments conducting KIIs or FGD and abided by the ethical considerations to make
sure that respondents were informed and protected.
Language and communication challenges PA proposed a multi-cultural team (French and Jordanian) to ensure that
direct communication was done in Arabic
Ethical concerns on working with children and PA ensured mainstreaming of the Do No Harm approach and ethical
vulnerable persons safeguards during the data collection process according to UNICEF
standards.
Potential security concerns PA remained aware of the situation and complied with UNICEF and
UNDSS security standards. Furthermore, PA monitored the security
situation in the areas covered by the evaluation.
Staff turnover at UNICEF, GoJ and IPs PA’s team did not have access to some staff that were previously
involved in the KOICA supported activities. PA used the available
sources and documents to mitigate lack of access to former staff and
focused on the available respondents
7 Evaluation Findings
7.1 Key findings and rating System
The following section presents the findings of the evaluation structured per the OECD-DAC criteria. The
findings respond to the key evaluation questions.
7.2 Relevance
The extent to which the KOICA supported activities reflect the priorities and needs of the target group.
KEQ 1. Are the KOICA supported activities consistent with beneficiaries’ needs?
Key Findings Rating
➔ The KOICA supported activities responded properly to the needs of ++
beneficiaries
➔ The intervention is based on a strong situation analysis (macro level ++
assessment; understanding the broad needs and vulnerabilities)
➔ Evidence of a gap in precisely assessing the needs on intervention sites --
(micro level assessment for the decision of which site to support)
➔ The intervention was relevant to the needs of beneficiaries in terms of ++
practice and behavior gaps
➔ The support provided to the helpline was highly relevant to the rising ++
needs of beneficiaries during COVID-19
Health
The KOICA supported activities form an integral part of the global response to the protracted
humanitarian refugee crisis in Jordan that has weakened the country’s capacity and progress towards
a better education and health system. While Jordan had placed strong efforts into supporting a national
public health system focusing on health in school, schools were shaken by the sudden overload of
26
incoming students as a result of the Syrian crisis. With efforts to open public schools to Syrian refugee
children during the afternoon shift, the school environment became unable to cover for the larger needs
in terms of health prevention, promotion and education. In addition, the Comprehensive Health Centers
(CHC) which are part of the holistic approach to health have also suffered from an overload of referred
cases that would impact the quality of services provided.
The existing comprehensive package for school health services led by the MoH has largely contributed
to improving healthier lifestyles among the Jordanian host communities and refugee communities. With
prior support from UNICEF to the MoH for the implementation of the Integrated School Health
programme in refugee camps and three public schools in Jordan, the KOICA supported activities have
contributed to the scaling up of the experience in thirty-two public schools40 in host communities, 20
CHC in host communities and three refugee camps (Zaatari, Azraq and EJC).
“UNICEF started supporting the Integrated School Health Programme when we were unable to continue what
we had started. The intervention improved the health conditions for students in need.”
A Staff at MoH
The KOICA supported activities’ design was based on the priorities formulated by the MoH and
responded to public health needs. Within the scope of the intervention, the MoH identified the schools
and health centers to be supported for the implementation of the health component. According to
respondents of the evaluation, schools and health centers were not consulted on their needs prior to
the intervention even though the services provided to beneficiaries in terms of health seemed to respond
to the needs.
WASH
Complementing the health in schools programme, the KOICA intervention included the identification of
gaps related to WASH in schools. In Jordan, it is estimated that only 1 in 3 schools has access to basic
sanitation services. Due to the overload of school attendees, Water and Sanitation facilities have
become largely unusable for children, especially for girls; and schools also faced shortages in water
access. The KOICA supported activities were designed to respond to this shortcoming, scaling up prior
KOICA supported WASH intervention which would now include hygiene education (part of the
evaluation). The MOE was in charge of identifying the schools for the implementation of the activities.
Based on the KAP survey conducted by RHAS in 2019, a large majority of the participants to the
baseline survey attended schools that had already benefited from health and hygiene related activities.
This may affect the ability to measure the results and impact when conducting the endline assessment
(ongoing KAP survey), however this does not affect the relevance of the intervention. In addition, the
gap in assessing the needs may have affected the early design of the intervention. The ET was able to
identify duplication of WASH and hygiene activities: hygiene education in schools had been previously
provided in the targeted schools, as reported by school staff during FGD and KII.
According to the KAP survey conducted by RHAS in 2019, knowledge of participants was reported to
be high in terms of hygiene behavior; however, the survey did not inform on the practices and behaviors
associated with the knowledge. Some obstacles related to the environment may undermine the ability
of students to adopt hygienic and healthy behaviors: deteriorated WASH facilities, lack of access to
running water, lack of essential materials in schools’ bathrooms such as trash bins and soap access.
The evaluation has evidenced the relevance of the WASH holistic approach in schools embodied by
the Three Star Approach and specifically the enabling environment and supply provided to the schools.
The intervention in schools focusing on WASH was relevant in terms of enabling children to adopt new
practices and change their behaviors.
40 Based on the list provided by UNICEF to the evaluation team
27
Despite the results of the KAP survey, the data collected during the evaluation highlights the relevance
of hygiene education activities conducted as school staff report a general lack of knowledge, particularly
in regard to menstrual hygiene.
“Many girls didn’t know how to use menstrual pads, how to fold them and place them in the trash.”
A school teacher, and parent
The relevance of the intervention was also marked by the training provided by RHAS to school staff
who are also parents of children attending the school. The evaluation has evidenced the
appropriateness of the topics covered during the training.
“I used to be hesitant to speak about personal hygiene and menstruation, I was embarrassed and girls as well.
With the training, we learned how and were encouraged. I now dare to speak about and I explain in detail how
to use menstrual pads.”
A school teacher, and parent
Child Protection
The support provided by UNICEF to JRF’s existing helpline came as a response to the COVID-19 crisis,
which resulted in a significant increase (33%) of family violence cases reported to FPD. Children and
families have suffered from multiple lockdowns in Jordan and schools have been closed for over a year
and a half. The protection concerns associated with the crisis were extremely high and stress was
largely prevalent within families. While children have reached out to the helpline, parents and caregivers
were the main callers, thus the intervention was relevant in mitigating the risks for children by providing
support to parents and caregivers, such as psycho-social support but also referral to specialized
services.
Providing support to a helpline service is particularly important during a crisis period when outreach to
the community through case management was nonexistent, especially in a society where multiple topics
are taboo and difficult to address in a close circle of family members. The helpline was relevant in
providing a safe space to respond to the needs of beneficiaries.
“I was facing problems at home with my husband and suffered from a lot of stress. I called the helpline many
times and they have helped me feel better and overcome the situation.”
A Helpline beneficiary
In addition, the data collected highlights the relevance of the in-kind support provided: distribution of
cell phones and computers to enable helpline staff to work remotely. At the beginning of the COVID-19
crisis, staff from the helpline reported working from home, often on their personal cell phones. The
KOICA supported activities have largely contributed to provide the necessary means to relevantly
respond to the needs.
KEQ 2. How relevant is the intervention in regard to the overall national priorities and
policies?
Key Findings Rating
➔ The KOICA supported activities are highly relevant to national ++
priorities and policies in Jordan
Health
28
The intervention is pertinent to the country’s priorities and was designed in support of already existing
policies. The KOICA activities are consistent with the GoJ’s National School Health Strategy41 (2018-
2021) and works towards promoting student’s health and their well-being in schools. The supported
activities provided specific services that are stated in the strategy: provision of periodic medical
screening, increased health education and awareness, improved health information system, and
address dental health problems. In addition, the supported activities are consistent with the MoH’s
Health in Schools Strategy in covering the previously mentioned services but also the immunization
campaign in schools from refugee camps and host communities.
“The MoH had already started working on this approach in 2018, and UNICEF supported us with developing the
guidelines for health in schools, which were published in 2019.”
A Staff at MoH
WASH
The WASH supported activities are in line with the GoJ’s National School Health Strategy and the
National Water Strategy (2016-2025) which identifies the holistic approach to WASH in schools as a
priority. The KOICA supported activities and the Three Star Approach supported by UNICEF have
contributed to providing a comprehensive package to improve school hygiene, promote children’s health
and hygiene education. The MoE has also adopted the National WASH in schools standards which was
key in the implemented activities.
Child Protection
The support provided to the helpline is pertinent to the JRP (2018-2022) and the specific objective on
Resilience: promote a protective environment that prevents exploitation, abuse and neglect and
responds to the needs of vulnerable children. In addition, strong linkages can be made between the
helpline and Jordan’s guiding principles for prevention and response to violence; NCFA procedure
manual for CP, domestic violence and GBV within families. Additionally, case management supported
through the broader KOICA funding and by UNICEF are consistent with the national SOPs for case
management and referral.
KEQ 3. To what extent has UNICEF been able to adapt the intervention to the evolving
context?
Key Findings Rating
➔ UNICEF adapted its global approach to respond to the changing ++
context in Jordan
➔ UNICEF worked towards adapting the intervention during the COVID- -
19 pandemic
UNICEF Jordan Country Office (JCO) is currently working under the Jordan Country Programme 2018-
2022.42 Based on the lessons learned from the response to the Syria refugee crisis, UNICEF has
adapted its approach from a humanitarian response to a development approach stepping away from
emergency funding providing short term support under which the main focus was the needs of the
refugee population in Jordan, particularly Syrians. UNICEF, guided by GoJ’s policy on addressing the
needs of all children, Jordanians and non-Jordanians, developed a new strategy based on
vulnerability: the vulnerability-based approach: “To Achieve the GoJ’s two-year plan and National
Vision Jordan 2025, and in support of the JRP, UNICEF is prioritizing actions that will impact on the
lives of beneficiaries. Based on the strategy, UNICEF is focusing on three core areas:
1) Targeting the most vulnerable children;
41 MoE, MoH & UNICEF joint strategy
42 https://www.unicef.org/jordan/media/371/file/Jordan-Reports.pdf
29
2) Growing opportunities to promote social cohesion;
3) Bolstering national capacity and resilience of national systems.
The KOICA supported activities are well integrated and in line with GoJ’s priorities and UNICEF’s latest
Country Programme. According to the planned activities and based on the programme documents, the
intervention is coherent with the changing context and realities as guided by the GoJ and the
implemented activities have worked in favor of building national capacities and strengthening the
already existing system in place as well as targeting the most vulnerable.
Health (vaccination campaign)
At the start of the COVID-19 pandemic and when Jordan entered its first lockdown, health and medical
referral activities targeting children in schools had not started. This component was implemented when
lockdown measures were lifted in June 2020. Since then, schools have not re-opened and the medical
services provided to students were not provided through school referrals but rather by word of mouth
throughout the community. In addition, as a result of the pandemic, the vaccination campaign supported
by UNICEF 2020 was not conducted.
The sudden COVID-19 restrictions measures have disrupted access to schools and CHC and the ability
for the MoH to implement the UNICEF supported component. UNICEF faced limitations in adapting the
intervention in a relevant manner due to the unfavorable context.
WASH
According to the data collected by the ET, UNICEF and its implementing partner RHAS were able to
adapt the activities by pursuing the intervention online; awareness raising continued remotely through
online accessible social media (whatsapp, facebook) as well as activities for the environment club.
However, due to the lack of internet access, connectivity and appropriate material, it was reported that
a high number of students could not participate in the activities.
“We do not have a computer or internet at home, my children followed the activities on my cell-phone.”
A school teacher, and parent
Child Protection
As a response to the rising needs due to the lockdown and isolation of vulnerable families, UNICEF
provided support to JRF’s helpline in order to expand its existing services. As case management was
largely altered during the COVID-19 crisis, but however provided by other partners, the helpline came
as a relevant mitigation measure to the risks and protection concerns on the rise during the lockdown.
UNICEF supported JRF with hiring additional staff and the provision of essential materials to work
remotely. According to the data provided by JRF, callers of the helpline are ultimately parents and
caregivers as children are not comfortable to call the helpline. However, the presence and support
provided to parents and caregivers have had positive effects on children themselves. The response
provided at the time by UNICEF was pertinent to the rapidly and drastically changing context.
7.3 Coverage
Did the KOICA supported activities reach all major groups in the population, including women, those
most vulnerable, and in need?
KEQ 1. To what extent are the most vulnerable populations targeted through the intervention?
Key Findings Rating
➔ Lack of system in place to identify the most vulnerable beneficiaries -
30
➔ Presumption of vulnerability: lack of clear identification of -
vulnerabilities
➔ Health services targeted vulnerable families but the targeted schools +
did not appear as the most vulnerable
➔ The helpline enabled access to remote support for the most vulnerable +
population during COVID-19 restriction measures, however the
helpline was not available for the populations in the camps due to a
lack of information.
Health
The areas of intervention, schools and CHC were identified by the MoH. CHC were chosen in highly
refugee-populated and vulnerable areas surrounded by a large network of schools, public and double
shifted schools. The original strategy for the health intervention was based on a referral system for
identified students in need at school by medical and health focal points; however, based on the data
collected, the beneficiaries benefiting from the health services provided at the CHC were rather based
on daily needs and word of mouth throughout the community. While it is assumed that vulnerable
beneficiaries have been targeted due to environment and the geographical locations, there is a gap in
the lack of an outreach and identification system in place for the most vulnerable. This shortcoming can
largely be justified by the closure of schools during the implementation of direct provision of health
services to students during which families were informed of the availability of free check ups and
services available in nearby clinics, which however led to a gap in purposive targeting. A FGD with MoH
staff has nonetheless confirmed that families in need were considered as beneficiaries to the supported
activities.
“Families who were not able to afford the medical services were covered by the KOICA fund”
A Staff at MoH
WASH
Under the WASH component, targeted schools were identified by the MoE and the ET evidenced a lack
of vulnerability assessment of the environment and targeted beneficiaries prior to the implementation
of the activities. The targeted schools were for the vast majority the object of prior WASH intervention
as well as activities focusing on hygiene and awareness of the environment (clean schools project).
Previous interventions were most likely supported by other agencies and UNICEF had not been
involved in the targeted schools previously, however, PA’s team was not able to verify this information.
The assumption of vulnerability was validated by the geographical environment, rural and poorer socio-
economic conditions in the vast majority of the schools; however schools were qualified as in “fairly
good conditions in comparison to other public schools in Jordan with a proactive and sensitive school
staff team engaged in the topic matter”. The selection criteria at ministry-level remained unclear to the
ET and no respondent to the evaluation was able to clarify the identification process.
Child Protection
As mentioned under relevance, by essence, the helpline is a service responding to some of the needs
of the most vulnerable population, particularly during the pandemic lockdowns when outreach to the
communities was on hold and families were isolated. The risks of violence within families and against
children reported to national institutions and FPD were extremely high at that time. The helpline brought
a strong contribution in terms of covering for the needs of the most vulnerable.
“We face so many cases that are in need and there are only few services available in Jordan. Calls are
anonymous and confidential and that makes it more accessible.”
A helpline staff
31
However, it is important to note that the helpline was a service provided based on the willingness and
the ability of beneficiaries to call and that no services were structured to respond to the most isolated
cases and children at risk.
KEQ 2. Have the KOICA-supported activities been taking into account relevant standards for
equity, gender equality and human rights-based approach, including the participatory
approach to include beneficiaries?
Key Findings Rating
➔ The KOICA supported activities are compliant with a human rights based +
approach (international standards, equity, gender equality & participatory
approach)
➔ Lack of integration and inclusion of Children with Disabilities (CwD) --
The evaluation framework had suggested integrating the consistency of the KOICA supported activities
with international standards. The intervention is strongly aligned with KOICA priorities of the Better Life
for Girls Initiative and worked towards enhancing girls’ health and protection and gender equality. Below
is a table of the integration of HRBA principles of the three sectors of intervention against international
standards’ indicators.
Box 8: Integration of HRBA principles
Sectors International Indicators
frameworks
Health & Sustainable SDG 3: Good Health and Wellbeing; SGD 6: Clean Water and Sanitation;
WASH Development Goals SDG 5: Gender Equality; SDG 16: Ending all forms of violence against
children
No Lost Generation Girls’ Right to Health will be realized through the School Health and WASH
Initiative in Schools interventions targeting Syrian refugee girls and boys with a
specific attention to the specific needs of girls
UNCRC Education: Article 28; Stay Healthy: Article 24 and Article 39
Child Sustainable SDG 16: Ending all forms of violence against children
Protection Development Goals
No Lost Generation Girls and women affected by violence against children including gender-
Initiative based violence, early marriage, and other protection issues affecting girls
will be referred and managed through UNICEF’s network of partners
UNCRC Article 19 on protecting children from violence
The KOICA supported activities aimed at leaving no one behind
UNICEF works toward leaving no one behind and covering the needs of all children: Jordanians, Syrians
and all refugees with equal access to services provided. The intervention was designed to cover the
needs of all children: the immunization campaign was implemented in refugee camps and double-
shifted schools; the health and WASH activities were implemented partly in double-shifted schools; and
the helpline was accessible to beneficiaries living in host communities. In regard to WASH and health,
the ET did not find evidence on the extent to which the activities targeted all children in an equitable
manner; the data collected did not provide the necessary information to illustrate the coverage; and the
partnership documents did not provide the detailed enough information to show the achievement
32
against the originally stated target (80% of Syrian refugee children).43 In addition, partners’ monthly
reports made available to the ET did not provide properly disaggregated data. With the helpline, under
the child protection component, JRF monthly reporting showed that Syrians and other refugees
represented only a few cases who have either called the helpline, received counseling or referral.
Gender Equality: The intervention is designed to provide equal access to services for boys and girls
Based on the programme documents, KOICA supported activities were gender sensitive with a
particular focus on girls and boys’ rights. Gender equality was cross-cutting throughout all originally
designed activities, and it was mainstreamed in all aspects of the activities : from service delivery to
capacity building as well as data disaggregation in reporting from partners and UNICEF. Based on the
available documents, girls and boys have had equal access to services provided in terms of health and
child protection; while originally integrated in the original proposal for the intervention, boys public
schools were not part of the WASH activities that are the object of this evaluation although the WASH
activities were implemented in mixed primary schools for boys and girls. Hygiene and healthy behavior
education was only implemented in schools for girls and specific mixed primary schools, data reported
by RHAS highlights that boys were also beneficiaries of this specific component. It is expected that
these beneficiaries were part of mixed primary schools however the ET did not interview parents of
boys beneficiaries.
The ET noted that the design of the KOICA-supported activities were in line with gender-responsive
programming standards and gender was mainstreamed throughout all components of the activities and
implementation. Generally, UNICEF focuses on multiple aspects to implement gender-mainstreaming,
through advocacy, supporting gender-specific programmes targeting women and girls or capacity
building. The evaluation has evidenced gender-sensitiveness in all aspects of the intervention. First of
all, by the core nature of the KOICA supported activities targeting girls and the realization of their rights;
secondly, the team was able to verify that all data are systematically disaggregated by gender and that
relevant information related to gender is captured.
Participatory Approach
The participation of involved stakeholders, notably duty bearers, was quite consistent within the
supported activities. GoJ and IPs have been strongly involved in the design of the intervention, from a
technical perspective to the provision of services. For Health and WASH, the two relevant ministries
participated in the ‘project cycle’ in which they have had ownership over drafting the key strategies for
health and WASH in schools. For CP, it is noteworthy to mention that a national organisation was able
to build on its strong link with the GoJ to leverage on its network to adapt support towards a targeted
intervention to respond to urgent needs. With this dynamic in place, the participatory approach of
stakeholders was fairly strong. The ET raised some nuance on the participatory approach when it
comes to beneficiaries involvement (rights holders) as direct and indirect beneficiaries are yet to be
considered: children and families but also school and health staff. The data collected evidenced a gap
in the inclusion of direct and indirect beneficiaries (children, school and health staff) in the process
design of the activities, as well as the role of school and health staff in delivering the services, and the
role of children within their communities.
Inclusion of Children with Disabilities (CwD)
Disability still suffers from high stigma and judgment in Jordan, which resulted in a large
institutionalization of persons with disabilities, particularly children. It is important to note that only 3%
of CwD in Jordan receive education services44 (public or alternative) which reveals that CwD are usually
not integrated in the public schooling system and remain excluded from national policies targeting
schools. Although the statistics from the MoE showed that 1.9%45 of enrolled children in primary
43 UNICEF-KOICA Final Report, March 2021
44 Thompson S. 2018. The current situation of persons with disabilities in Jordan. K4D Helpdesk Report. Brighton, UK: Institute
of Development Studies.
45 Ministry of Education (2018). Education Strategic Plan 2018 – 2022
33
education are CwD, many reports evidenced the high dropout rate related to an unsuitable environment
in school. In general, only a few schools are equipped to support and maintain the enrollment of CwD.
“There are no CwD in our school, the environment is not suitable for them, they usually attend other schools for
CwD”
A school teacher, and parent
Throughout the evaluation, the ET was not able to consult consistent disaggregated data on targeting
CwD for all three components of the supported activities. With school staff interviewed reporting the
absence of CwD enrolled in the schools, CwD have barely been beneficiaries of the Health and WASH
components of the KOICA supported activities. The ET was able to compile the data provided by RHAS
and evidenced that 9 CwD were beneficiaries benefited from the WASH activities and 2 are part of the
environmental club46.
In addition, while some visited schools for this evaluation provided accessible installations for PwD, a
school health clinic was noted to be on the first floor of the school facility making it inaccessible for CwD
in need of services at the clinic. In other schools, the toilet facilities were also not accessible for CwD.
7.4 Effectiveness
The extent to which the KOICA supported activities achieved its intended results
The team for this evaluation placed efforts into analyzing the effectiveness of the KOICA supported
activities by looking at the level of achievement against the planned targets. The ET also integrated the
level of achievement of the activities per key areas of focus based on UNICEF strategy.47
KEQ 1. To what extent were the objectives of the KOICA supported project achieved or likely
to be achieved, in a timely and systematic manner?
Key Findings Rating
➔ UNICEF effectively worked towards supporting a quality health system to +
meet the needs of the most vulnerable, especially children
➔ UNICEF effectively worked towards supporting a protective environment +
that prevents vulnerable girls, boys and women from exploitation, violence,
abuse and neglect and responds to their needs
➔ Provision of services to the most vulnerable +
➔ Bolstered national capacities and systems ++
➔ Lack of clarity on implementation timeline --
➔ Data reported under the health component could not be triangulated with --
the MoH reports
➔ Effectiveness was altered by the COVID-19 and activities for health & -
WASH implemented in schools were put on hold
The ET raised a real concern about discrepancies between the reported figures for Health and WASH
to the donors and those reported by the implementing partners or other internal reporting. Indeed the
distribution of output over the years was stable and consistent with the targets in the reporting to the
46https://app.powerbi.com/view?r=eyJrIjoiODUwZGEyY2ItNmRkMC00NGQ2LWIyYzUtZWMwZTgzNWU0OWVjIiwidCI6ImJhYT
BlNGNkLTQ3ODEtNDc3Ny05ZWZkLTE1NzU3N2FlN2E0YiIsImMiOjl9
47 Jordan Country Programme, 2018-2022, https://www.unicef.org/jordan/media/371/file/Jordan-Reports.pdf
34
donor (1/4th of the target being met every years) when the reported timeline of activity by the
implementers and other internal reporting showed that activity implementation had been greatly
fluctuating over the years (preparation period, slow launch of activity the initial years and COVID-19
related suspensions the last one year). This discrepancy between activity implementation and reported
outputs raised concerns about the ability of the UNICEF tracking system to report on a programme built
by the addition of several activities, all of them embedded in larger programmes. This undocumented
gap between figures proved hard for the ET to reconcile funding and outputs and understand the
attribution of the produced outputs to the given activities . In absence of further verification methods
and access to data from the ministries, the ET thus analyzed effectiveness in light of these numbers for
the following section, with concerns and lack of understanding over the real attribution to activity.
Health
The ET used the reports to the donor48 to identify the level of achievement for each activity implemented
according to the planned target. It is reflected in the table below:
Outcome 1 (HEALTH & Indicator Planned Target Level of achievement
WASH): A quality
health system meets
the needs of a
vulnerable population,
especially children
HEALTH Number of boys and girls at 80,000 children (40,000 of 39,964 children (20,169
School Health Package for schools received vaccines whom to receive Td, OPV girls) (99.9% achieved)
Students - Integrated (Td, OPV) at targeted and 80,000 of whom to
health education and schools receive medical check-ups)
services in schools
provided: Number of students (boys 78,411 children (39,682
➢ Health Promotion and girls) with increased girls) (98% achieved)
(Education & access to regular medical
Awareness) check-ups and referrals (if
➢ Prevention necessary) at targeted
Services schools
(Immunization;
Medical
examination;
Vision, dental and
nutrition checks)
➢ Medical & dental
treatment at
Health Centers
1 school health clinic
furnished in 20 most
vulnerable schools
48 Final Report to KOICA, March 2021
35
Provision of services to the most vulnerable
Based on the information available in the supported activities’ reports, health activities were
implemented and achieved according to the original target. However, the evaluation identified a number
of gaps in the data provided in the reports:
➢ Health Promotion (Education & Awareness): 77,927 children participating in education and
awareness activities are reported in the logical framework of the final report. However, the ET
was not able to collect data on this activity. There are uncertainties over who conducted the
trainings and when these were delivered to children.
➢ Medical examination (vision, dental and nutrition checks) in schools and health centers:
The evaluation did not evidence consistency in medical examination conducted in schools but
rather in CHC where families came spontaneously after hearing of the free services within the
community.
○ Only 1 of the schools visited by the ET was able to mention that children benefited from
medical checkups and that vulnerable students were referred to the closest CHC for
free medical service. There is a lack of clarity on whether this has happened as a result
of the UNICEF/KOICA supported activities or through the regular MoH activities, as
reported by the school staff.
36
○ The ET was not able to collect evidence on the data provided for medical checkups, as
documents from the MoH were not made available. However, when interviewing the
CHC, the ET was informed that access to free medical services activities were
conducted from June 2020 to November 2020. The ET was able to collect data on
the numbers of children who benefited from medical checkups at the following CHC:
■ Al Hosn Comprehensive Health Center: 517 children
■ Wadi Al seer Comprehensive Health Center: 1835 children
○ Additionally, the data collected largely informs the evaluation on a confusion over the
services provided as a response to the consequences of COVID-19 rather than being
part of a national health campaign by MoH supported by UNICEF and KOICA.
Respondents to the evaluation shared that enabling free access to health services
came at the right time with the economic COVID-19 economic consequences; families
were not able to afford basic services anymore.
➢ Training of health and school staff: CHCs visited and interviewed by the ET did not receive
specific training but rather additional equipment, materials and vaccines.
➢ On furnishing school health clinics: Effectively, the schools visited by the ET all had a room
arranged as a health clinic. However, the timeline for this activity is unclear, some of the clinics
had been recently furnished as reported by school directors.
○ The respondents to the evaluation mentioned that health clinics have so far not been
in use due to the closure of schools since the beginning of the pandemic.
○ In addition, school and health centers have raised concerns over the functioning of the
health clinics and the extent to which medical staff would be assigned
○ There is no sustainable plan for supply of the medical consumable needed for the
running of such clinics (bandages, disinfectant etc.)
○ The awareness material associated with the clinic (posters on health and hygiene best
practices etc.) was distributed and posted on the wall for a large part of it, only a few
days before the evaluators visit.
Bolstered national capacities and systems
Complementing the direct delivery of health services by the MoH, the KOICA supported activities have
also worked in favor of strengthening the national capacities and existing system in place. UNICEF
supported the MoH and MoE in developing the following guidelines that were effectively adopted at
national level and implemented during the KOICA supported activities:
➢ Jordan National School Health Strategy 2018-2021
➢ Integrated School Health Programme (MoH)
➢ School Health Guidelines produced in 2019
➢ School Health-Promotion Manual in 2020
WASH
The ET used the internal reporting documents between UNICEF and RHAS to identify the level of
achievement per each activity implemented according to the planned target. Additionally, the team
collected information in order to formulate the indicator and planned target. It is reflected in the
table below:
Outcome 1 (HEALTH & WASH): A quality health Indicator49 Planned Level of
system meets the needs of a vulnerable population, Target achievement
especially children
WASH Revised indicator
by the ET50:
49 The indicator for WASH in the logical framework available in the report to KOICA does not reflect the activities being evaluated:
Support to the National Standards for WASH within the framework of the Three Star Approach. The Health and hygiene activities
that appear in the logical framework are reported under health, not under WASH, as mentioned under effectiveness (health).
50 Based on UNICEF-RHAS Programme document: WASHinSchools/JOR/PCA2019187/PD2019220/2019/RHAS/Jordan
37
Implementation of the National Standards for Water Sanitation Number of boys
and Hygiene (WASH) in Schools programme in Jordan, in and girls with
tandem with the Three Stars Approach improved access
➢ Three Stars Approach training for schools’ health focal to WASH services 7200 8263 boys and
points at the directorate of educations and the selected girls (over-
schools Number of achieved)
➢ School health teachers support promoting behavior vulnerable
change for hygiene through hygiene awareness-raising children who
activities, Menstrual Hygiene Management (MHM) demonstrate an
water conservation, sanitation, solid waste awareness Data not
management, and environmental protection activities of key hygiene available
➢ Schools support to address environmental hazards,
messages and N/A
operate and maintain safe and usable WASH facilities
water
➢ Orientation and mobility training for schools’ janitors
conservation
➢ Water testing, cleaning, and disinfection of water
storage tanks
➢ Regular follow-up and monitoring visits monthly
WASH environmental clubs in targeted schools Number of clubs
➢ Establishment of environmental clubs in schools created 20
➢ Clubs facilitators trainings on the Environmental 20
curriculum, and activities
➢ Support the clubs to organize environmental initiatives
at the schools
Provision of services to the most vulnerable
The evaluation highlights the difficulties to understand how the targets under the WASH component
have been utilized to i measure the progress and achievements per activities. As mentioned
above, the indicators and targets reflected in the reporting documents to KOICA did not reflect the
activities implemented as understood by the ET and reflected in other documentation. The ET worked
to compile information from the available documents. While the planned target for the first indicator on
children and access to WASH services is clear, the targets for the two other indicators remain unclear
to the team.
During the data collection mission, the ET was able to visit 5 of the 16 schools supported by the WASH
intervention. The data collected evidenced that the activities were effectively implemented by UNICEF’s
IP, RHAS from June 2019 to March 2020 and continued remotely after the start of the pandemic. After
conducting a training needs’ assessment, RHAS effectively delivered the Three Star Approach training
in late 2019 to teachers and health focal points in schools. Trained staff in schools were responsible for
disseminating the content of the training to children in schools. Teachers and health focal points
organized activities, according to free time available, focusing on promoting hygiene and health
behavior with an emphasis on menstrual hygiene, water conservation, sanitation, solid waste
management, and environmental protection activities.
38
“RHAS asked us about our training needs and then organized training sessions. We learned a lot from the
training, and we would like to have a brochure. We were then in charge of organizing sessions with children in
the school; we had to find free time during the day for this, sometimes instead of the art class.”
A School staff
School staff reported learning on how to care for the school facilities and effectively learned how to
clean and disinfect the water storage system and tanks. In addition, environmental clubs were created
in all schools supported by the intervention. The schools involved in the activities started creating online
and social media networks to share about the on-going activities in schools. Teachers reported that
learning about what other schools were doing enhanced the effectiveness of what they had learned and
what they were implementing in their own school and also created a strong sense of belonging to a
joint community working in favor of a better school environment.
The WASH component highly suffered from the COVID-19 outbreak as activities in schools had started
in November 2019. By March 2020 with the lockdown measures, awareness raising sessions had to be
conducted online and remotely. However, the activities related to the school environment and clubs
were interrupted. This is considered as an important limitation leading to the impossibility of measuring
achievement.
Bolstered national capacities and systems
With the implementation of the Three Star Approach in the supported schools, UNICEF and KOICA
contributed to improving the National WASH in Schools Standards by proposing a holistic approach to
WASH in favor of a healthy and safe environment for children as well as empowering school staff and
the community with effective knowledge on health, hygiene and environment protection. The
intervention worked towards reinforcing the approach to WASH at national level with support and
alignment with the following policies:
➢ National WASH in Schools Standards 2017
➢ National Water Strategy 2016- 2025
Child Protection
The ET used the internal reporting documents between UNICEF and JRF to identify the level of
achievement for each activity implemented according to the planned target. It is reflected in the table
below:
Outcome 3 (CHILD PROTECTION): A Indicator51 Planned Target Level of
protective environment prevents achievement
exploitation, violence, abuse and neglect 52
and responds to the needs of vulnerable
girls, boys and women
Child Protection - Helpline Number of vulnerable 1200 3284
Helpline services provided to vulnerable children women and children
and families accessing quality
➢ Counseling services for women and helpline services
children for the following areas
● Violence reporting and
victims’ psychological care;
● Parenting;
● Case management.
51 There is no specific indicator for the helpline in the logical framework UNICEF-KOICA. The ET is suggesting the indicator in
the table.
52 Based on JRF reporting Helpline Statistics Summary March 2020-March 2021
39
Provision of services to the most vulnerable
Based on the available data from JRF reporting, the helpline activity was effectively implemented in a
systematic and extremely timely manner. UNICEF’s support to the helpline under the KOICA supported
activities was effective shortly after the outbreak of COVID-19 and at the start of the lockdown and
provided a protection response to the risks of violence, abuse and neglect against children. It also
brought incredible support to parents and caregivers in need during a traumatic time, with psychosocial
support and counseling services.
According to the planned target available in JRF’s progress report53, UNICEF’s partner has over-
achieved the expected result of the helpline services. This can be explained by the rising needs during
the period of implementation but the effectiveness of the helpline was also supported by external but
complementary factors to the KOICA supported activities. The UN Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) funded a national media campaign through the Jordan Humanitarian Fund
(JHF) called #We_Hear_You. The campaign provided information on available services, especially the
JRF helpline.
Bolstered national capacities and systems
By providing support to JRF’s helpline, UNICEF invested in a long existing system (since 2007), but
also strengthened the capacities of a key national actor in providing training to JRF staff on remote case
management for cases who benefited from referrals after calling the helpline.
UNICEF’s broader work in CP effectively contributes to strengthening the national capacities and
system as it provides technical support to relevant actors working to protect children and reduce the
risks of violence. Beyond the KOICA supported activities, UNICEF is engaged in the following national
agenda to support a legal framework and the provision of CP services:
➢ Guidelines for Alternative Care Services for Children
➢ National SOPs for Gender Based Violence, domestic violence and Child Protection
➢ Family violence tracking system for the management of Family Violence Cases
➢ National Child Labor SOP
“UNICEF’s work for protecting children in Jordan is focusing on different pillars, delivering protection services
but the core of our work focuses on the legislative framework to protect children against violence. In Jordan,
81% of children were subjected to violence, at home, at school or within the community.”
A UNICEF staff
53 Programme Progress Report FACE, JRF 2021
40
KEQ 2. What were the major factors influencing the achievement or non-achievements of the
objectives?
The ET developed a table to summarize the main enabling and limiting factors affecting the
effectiveness of the KOICA supported activities, as described in the different sections above.
Box 9: Summary of Enabling and limiting factors for achieving intended results
Sector Enabling Factors Limiting Factors
Health ➔ National interest and ownership ➔ COVID-19 crisis
➔ MoH partnership ➔ School closure
➔ Receptive health staff at CHC and ➔ Overlap Health & WASH
school staff ➔ Overload on medical staff
➔ Resource dedicated to camp
intervention
WASH ➔ National interest and ownership ➔ COVID-19 crisis
➔ MoE partnership ➔ School closure
➔ RHAS partnership ➔ Overlap Health & WASH
➔ RHAS technical capacities
➔ Receptive school staff
➔ Interest within the community
Child ➔ Rising needs ➔ COVID-19 crisis
Protection ➔ JRF partnership
➔ JRF long existing helpline
➔ UNICEF flexibility to adapt to the
context
KEQ 3. To what extent have the KOICA supported schools and centers improved the approach
to Health & WASH better than schools not directly supported?
Key Findings Rating
➢ The ET did not visit schools or CHC that were not directly supported N/A
by the KOICA activities54
The extent to which the KOICA supported schools and health centers improved the approach to Health
and WASH better than schools that were not directly supported remains unclear to the ET, especially
knowing that the intervention is plugged in a national functioning system when it comes to health so the
support is rather at central level, through funding. For WASH, it is rather unclear also because of the
potential overlap of health awareness and education implemented in schools by the MoH.
54 The ET was not able to allocate time for this; the field mission was fully dedicated to UNICEF
supported areas of intervention
41
7.5 Efficiency
The degree to which the KOICA supported activities realized value for money and maintained resource
levels required to attain intended results and quality
KEQ 1. Have the KOICA supported activities generated the intended outputs through the most
efficient use of inputs, including financial, human resources and partnership approaches?
Key Findings Rating
➔ Available reporting data on the use of funds against the generation of --
outputs is not clear and leads to gaps in assessing the efficiency of the
intervention
➔ The intervention is based on strong existing partnership ++
➔ No overall coordination project manager assigned to the KOICA supported --
activities
➔ From the design of the programme, Health & WASH sectors in schools have -
been dissociated, designed and implemented separately
➔ Strong leverage of internal inputs and efforts placed to invest in additional ++
human resources where needed
➔ Gaps in Allocation of resources, (HR gaps) may have affected the -
quality of services
According to Annex I Uncertified Donor Statement attached to the Final Report submitted in March
2021, the contribution from KOICA was distributed as below per sector.
Box 10: KOICA funding per sector
Distribution of KOICA funding per sector being evaluated
Health 1451746.55
WASH 828824.07
Child Protection (Helpline services) 1439380.68
Total 3,719,951.03
The ET had access to the expenditures reported to KOICA by UNICEF which appear to include a much
larger scope of activities than the one being evaluated. The ET was not able to analyze the specific
funding allocated to the activities as the available documents did not provide a breakdown per activity
as well as the grant provided to IPs. Nonetheless, the ET reflected on the available information and
highlighted that all three sectors of intervention were fairly and evenly supported, with less allocation of
42
funds to WASH. The final report for the intervention mentioned that other donors provided funding to
the WASH sector, however, there was a lack of clarity over the co-funding approach and identification
of who funded what. It appears that the UNICEF financial tracking system reached its limits when
reporting on a set of co-funded activities within larger programmes without a centralised, programme
based, coordination tasked with financial and KPI reporting. From the ET perspective this resulted in
an inability to have full and transparent access to the figures informing on the reality and reconcile
spending, activities and outputs reported.
Additionally, when looking at the UNICEF Jordan KOICA SC170416 Biannual Report (June 2020), work
plan per activity and expenditures, the ET found inconsistencies between the activities and output
figures against the disbursement of the budget. The implementation timeline of WASH & health activities
fluctuated over the years and it was rather difficult to link the activity and output indicators with the
financial inputs. The ET was surprised by the evenly distributed output figures in reports to donors, over
the years (1/4th of the target being met yearly) knowing that the timeline of activity implementation
would not support such consistent yearly outcomes and thus, is doubtful on the adequacy of the
reporting system with the type of programme made of diverse, non centrally managed, activities that
failed at attributing spendings to specific activity implementation. UNICEF possesses strong
reporting systems but those systems do not seem to be adequate to report fully on a programme of
KOICA type, spread across different sectors and embedded in other national programmes and
approaches.
Partnership
UNICEF in Jordan has been working hand in hand with the GoJ, particularly the MoE and MoH.
UNICEF’s role has been key in supporting both entities in strengthening existing systems in place by
providing financial and technical support.
“We have been working with UNICEF for many years, their support has been key, in helping us with technical
knowledge to reinforce the system but also covering financially for what we cannot provide”.
A Government actor
Beyond governmental actors, UNICEF holds strong ties with national NGOs and two of them worked
as implementing partners for the KOICA supported interventions. UNICEF financially supported local
NGOs through the provision of grants but also technically by building the capacities of the national civil
society. For the activities evaluated, UNICEF worked mainly with RHAS and JRF, two recognized key
national partners with extensive field experience of the WASH, Health and Child Protection sectors.
“We partner with strong national actors which are well connected to the institutions in Jordan and can have a
strong leverage. In addition, they are well established everywhere in Jordan, including in remote communities”.
A UNICEF Staff
The ET was able to evidence the complementarity between national NGOs and UNICEF in terms of
mandate and approach. RHAS and JRF received the necessary support to build the capacities of their
staff to implement the activities but also to create internal technical ownership that contributed to a
shared vision.
“We have a strong partnership with UNICEF for 15 years now. We have a fruitful relationship and they support
us with knowledge and the ability to respond to the needs of our community”
An implementing partner
The partnership approach developed by UNICEF with GoJ and national NGOs served the efficient
implementation of the KOICA supported activities.
43
It is also important to note that the intervention and specific activities under the child protection
component benefited from the partnership with IMC, a key actor in case management. The evaluation
evidenced the efficient case management system in place in host communities and refugee camps,
particularly in the latter, with a child protection team operating on site, at Makani centers, and
coordinating with IMC case management team. The team set up at camp level contributed to strong
community knowledge on the available services and support. The ET was able to identify respondents
to FGD that were well aware of the existence of the services because they had benefited from them,
and the knowledge of the specific terminology of “protection”. The ET recognized the limitations
associated with the low number of respondents related to case management, however the level of
understanding of the concept of protection and the stakes related to protecting children was striking and
may evidence the efficiency of the system in place in camps.
“During the Eid, a few weeks ago, I married one of my 18 years old daughter away to her cousin; during the
engagement, I agreed to also marry my 14-year-old daughter to the brother of the cousin. I was in a desperate
condition and felt that agreeing to this would relieve my family. A few days after, I realized how wrong it was and
I went to the protection office at the Makani center to ask for help and they supported me”.
A mother
Programme Management
The evaluation has evidenced a gap in human resources allocated to the KOICA supported activities:
as the intervention is built between three different programme sections at UNICEF, the compilation of
information and data related to the results and achievements has been challenging. Each programme
section was in charge of cooperating and providing consolidated data to the donors relations section. A
revision of the human resources chart in place shows that there was no assigned project manager
under the KOICA fund or for the activities implemented jointly by the sections. This gap may have
affected the efficiency of the intervention and the ability to create synergies, keep track of the
achievements per activity based on indicators. Moreover, it is important to note that the ET as well as
the M&E Section at UNICEF faced challenges in gathering the necessary information for the evaluation.
Beyond the efficiency gap this may have created over the course of implementing the activities, it may
lead to gaps in building the institutional memory of what has been achieved.
UNICEF and the GoJ have worked together to develop the National School Health Strategy with strong
inputs from the MoE and MoH. The data collected by the ET highlighted that a well established relation
existed between the two ministries although both worked independently on a specific health in schools’
strategy. Throughout the scope of the KOICA supported activities, this has led to a dissociation of
activities focusing on health with the provision of similar services. The dissociation appeared at two
levels:
1) At UNICEF programme sections level, with different teams working on WASH and health;
2) At Ministry level, with both competent ministries working in different geographical locations
and schools.
The schools identified for the WASH component benefited from health and hygiene awareness activities
and the schools under the Health component benefited from Health education activities. The ET found
a gap in synergies that may have led to an overlapping of activities implemented resulting in a lack of
efficiency.
Health
With a well established health programme section, UNICEF was able to grant access to vaccines at a
much lower price than the ones available locally. This contributed to the implementation of significant
immunization campaigns in public schools in host communities and in refugee camps. The UNICEF
health team had identified a health officer as their focal point within the section for the health-supported
activities. The ET also raised the lack of clarity on the human resources that contributed to medical
check-ups in public schools and the referral to CHC.
44
Staff involved in the medical checkups and vaccination campaign in refugee camps have reported gaps
when conducting the campaigns due to low human resources allocated to the large targets, and the
tight time frame. In addition, the efficiency of the vaccination component was undermined by gaps in
the vaccination information tracing: during the data collection, refugees have reported losing their
vaccination card in Syria and this has resulted in the exclusion from the vaccination scheme. In regard
to vaccination, the ET also noted that in 2020, the vaccination campaign in the camps was not supported
by UNICEF but rather directly implemented, led and funded by the MoH .
The efficiency of the medical checkups provided in the CHC was undermined by the overload of free of
charge services. Medical staff at CHC found themselves over-stretched between the response to the
daily workload in vulnerable areas, the COVID-19 crisis, and the provision of health services supported
by UNICEF. Health staff have reported an overwhelming load of cases with a pressure to deliver against
project’s targets. Representatives of the Health directorates have also reported the additional
administrative work for reporting against results of the activities to the MoH while no additional human
resources were provided.
Additionally, the evaluation has evidenced the lack of financial support provided to health staff at CHC
to cover for additional efforts. According to the data collected, only little incentives were distributed
during the year of implementation of the free medical check up activities at CHC. Staff reported financial
incentives between JOD 50 and JOD 180 (for the entire duration of the intervention) for the additional
efforts provided to achieve the results of the activities.
“We serve a large community in our area and the needs are very important. We were asked to provide free
services to children in addition to our usual work, we barely received any support or extra money for our work”
A Health Staff at CHC
The conditions in which the provision of health medical checkups were provided at CHC and not at
schools with specialized referrals at CHC, may have impacted the efficiency and quality of the services
provided. While staff reported the dire needs of the community to access free medical services because
of poor economic conditions, they have also felt pressured under the incoming flow of beneficiaries.
“When the project was implemented in our clinic, it was just after the first lockdown in Jordan. We had a lot of
cases related to COVID-19, the health situation was hectic and we had to suddenly provide health checkups for
a large number of children ”
Health Staff at CHC
WASH
UNICEF placed efforts in identifying a partner that had the capacity and the knowledge to start working
on hygiene, health and environment in public schools. UNICEF launched a call for proposal and RHAS
was selected to implement the WASH component in schools. Both organisations had previously
partnered for other projects. Throughout the course of the intervention, UNICEF and RHAS faced
challenges due to the turnover of staff at UNICEF and building trust with newly appointed staff was
mentioned as a restraint/ time consuming. When the WASH team at UNICEF was falling short in terms
of human resources affecting the consistency of the relationship with partners, UNICEF decided to
expand the team by hiring an additional staff (UNV national volunteer). This action by UNICEF
enhanced the efficiency of the intervention and was noted as a strong added value by UNICEF’s partner.
Hygiene and healthy behaviors training to school staff were provided by RHAS in public schools by the
end of 2019. Trained staff disseminated their knowledge by providing awareness sessions to children
in schools, as well as teachers who did not participate in the training. The “snow-ball effect” of
knowledge dissemination has shown to be quite efficient with the use of the school staff available.
However, the data collection in schools highlighted that there was no specific time allocated to schedule
awareness sessions with children and other teachers. The activities had not been designed to integrate
45
that component in the school programme. Trained staff had to explore any possible free time during the
day to conduct awareness sessions, during sports and arts classes or when some teachers were
absent.
Child Protection
The KOICA supported activities faced challenges when the COVID-19 crisis hit and implementing the
activities, particularly under CP, became strenuous. UNICEF helped in the transition to remote work
immediately when the lockdown started by supporting the provision of equipment and additional human
resources working at the helpline. UNICEF efficiently mitigated some of the main COVID-19 restrictive
measures and managed to partially shift the CP intervention to respond to the urgency of the situation.
Additionally, in order to respond to the challenges regarding case management, UNICEF supported
IMC in creating a volunteer network in refugee camps and urban areas to efficiently access vulnerable
populations and communities during COVID-19. UNICEF showed efficiency in the use of resources to
adapt to the changing context and supported a new model that has shown efficient results. The para-
caseworkers network created is a unique approach that has empowered the community and built strong
dynamics of proximity supporting positive development of community based protection.
KEQ 2. M&E: How efficient were the systems put in place to monitor progress of the KOICA
supported activities?
Key Findings Rating
➔ The M&E system was designed to efficiently capture progress and results -
of the activities implemented however UNICEF hardly captured the quality
of the services provided
The M&E system in place to capture progress and results responds to the requirements in terms of
accountability and transparency. The ET had access to the reporting reports submitted by UNICEF to
KOICA; the monthly activity report submitted by RHAS to UNICEF and brief progress reports from JRF.
M&E reporting documents were all disaggregated by nationality, gender, disability, and age group.
Health
UNICEF had developed a M&E system based on spot checks and field visits, and monthly progress
reports were provided by CHC to the health directorate at governorate level and then submitted to
UNICEF. UNICEF’s final report for the KOICA supported activities mentioned “ field visits to schools
twice per semester for inspection, observation and evaluation of activities implementation and
verification of distributed items on the ground”.55 The extent to which these monitoring visits were
conducted given the conflicting timeframe of the activities implemented and the closure of schools
related to COVID-19 is unclear to the evaluation team. In addition, the evaluation showed some gaps
in the information provided, for example: reports do not inform on the provision of services and the
referral from schools to health clinics as originally stated in the project proposal and the data collected
evidence that medical checkups were not conducted in schools but rather directly in CHC. The M&E
system in place faced challenges in capturing the operations changes in the field and reflecting the
changes in the implementation of activities.
The ET has identified gaps in the activities’ logical framework, and specific indicators related to health:
health education was not reflected and it is unclear to the team whether this component reflects the
health and hygiene activities provided under WASH. This highlights the need to better identify indicators
for each of the foreseen activities in order to develop the adequate M&E reporting system. The
evaluation also evidenced a gap in the follow up system with beneficiaries to measure the quality of the
services provided.
55 UNICEF Final Report to KOICA, March 2021
46
It should be noted that progress reports between the MoH and UNICEF were not provided for
consultation to the ET therefore, the accuracy of data reported on the results and the number of
beneficiaries children under the health component could not be verified.
WASH
The WASH section developed a M&E system based on UNICEF’s partner monthly reports on
achievements against activities and expected targets. RHAS reports are well structured to respond to
the requirements of UNICEF and provide the necessary information. However, the ET was not informed
on UNICEF’s plan to monitor the activities conducted by RHAS. Indeed, UNICEF supported RHAS in
conducting a KAP survey in December 2019 that was used as a baseline for the activities implemented
to measure the progress made by children, the knowledge acquired and the change in behavior. The
KAP survey-baseline was conducted in 11 of the 16 supported schools and 516 children participated.
A follow up KAP survey was due to be conducted in 2020 but was delayed with the start of the pandemic
in March 2020. UNICEF is currently exploring alternative options to finalize the KAP survey.
The evaluation showed that the WASH section had efficiently developed a joint M&E system with its
partner to monitor the progress of the KOICA supported activities and the KAP survey is a qualitative
tool informing the impact of the intervention.
Child Protection
UNICEF’s CP section developed a M&E system based on field monitoring visits, and reports provided
by its partner JRF, on a quarterly basis. Field visits were on hold during the prolonged COVID-19
restrictions. However, at the time of the evaluation, UNICEF had resumed its presence in the field. The
ET found that reporting from JRF efficiently informed UNICEF on the progress against expected results
however the quantitative data provided lacks information on the quality of services provided and follow
up of cases.
7.6 Impact
The extent to which the KOICA supported activities have generated changes for the beneficiaries and
within communities as well as generated changes in the health and education national systems.
Measuring the real impact of the programme for its direct beneficiaries has been quite of a struggle for
the ET. Indeed, the set of activities supported by KOICA are part of larger national interventions, broader
in scope and size than the support itself and for a large part of it, initiated before the onset of this
particular support. Additionally, some of the activities around awareness and behavior change in Health
and Hygiene are also similar to other actors’ interventions, to the same public, in different places (social
centers, community level, etc.) and different media (social network, radio, television, posters).
Furthermore, the COVID-19 pandemic and the public health discourse on health prevention, which hit
all layers of society through multiple messaging on multiple channels contributed partly to the same
objectives as a part of the KOICA supported interventions. Therefore, the ET faced a problem of
attribution of impact to the program when it comes to these particular sought behavior and practice
changes for the beneficiaries.
Moreover, the COVID-19 pandemic, and consecutive disruption of service delivery, school service and
activities made it difficult for the ET to analyze the impact of activities suspended 18 months earlier in
a shifting context of intervention. However, knowing that these interventions are based on a solid ToC
and experience of implementation in multiple countries for a very long time, and knowing that they are
in line with all classic public health intervention and health authorities’ recommandations, one can judge
that they are very likely to contribute to a positive impact in terms of amelioration of the health and
hygiene outcomes at the country level and positive behavior change for the individuals.
47
KEQ 1. What differences can be observed in children’s behavior as a result of the
intervention?
KEQ 2. What change has the intervention brought into the life of beneficiaries?
Key Findings Rating
➔ Poor quality of qualitative indicators and monitoring features to --
effectively measure the impact of the provided services
➔ Health and wellbeing of children enhanced ++
➔ Lack of evidence of impact on children from the health services provided --
➔ Strong children behavior change in regard to hygiene and environment ++
➔ Self hygiene awareness and new hygiene habits ++
➔ Sensitive taboos can now be addressed ++
Health
Under the health component, the significant change in the life of beneficiaries was the access to primary
health services for vulnerable children coming from families who could not afford the basic health
services. The services provided enhanced the health and wellbeing of children and families became
more aware of the existence of CHC in their communities.
“We provided dental services to children from families that were never able to afford this. Children have definitely
benefited from the services”
A health staff
Additionally, the supported immunization campaign ensured that children were protected from any form
of contractible disease. The ET noted a gap in available information as well as qualitative indicators and
monitoring regarding the services provided and follow up of medical cases which limits the capacity to
measure the quality and the impact of the intervention.
The evaluation evidenced that the impact of UNICEF’s support is primarily financial in covering gaps of
a prior existing system in Jordan implemented by MoH alongside technical support. The question
remains on the sustainability of such a system and whether the UNICEF role should switch to technical
support only while funding streams for implementation are redesigned especially for the programme
features already embedded into national policies and priorities. However, impact can be
extrapolated at national level as the system and approach adopted at national level will benefit and
bring long term change in the life of children, throughout the replication and perpetuation of the
intervention.
WASH
As mentioned previously, RHAS is conducting a KAP survey (endline), post implementation of the
activities in schools focusing on the knowledge acquired and the change in behavior. The ET was able
to collect data from participants to FGD discussions with parents and school staff. School staff, teachers
and directors mentioned how the school has changed as a result of the holistic approach to WASH
(Three Star Approach): The school environment has changed, especially the access to sanitation
facilities in some of the targeted schools, which are now separated for boys and girls in mixed primary
schools (protecting children from risks of SGBV), and by grade; children have access to running water
and soap as well trash bins.
48
“In the past, our toilets were hardly usable and we did not have any trash bins; now whenever there is no more
soap available, children come and complain so that we replace it. The students have felt the change in our
school”.
A School staff
Parents have extensively shared their perspective on the impact of WASH activities in schools,
mentioning that their children were sensitive to learning about hygiene in schools rather than at home.
Both school staff and parents also reported the impact on breaking certain taboos, for example
menstruation, and the ability for girls to discuss freely when they have specific questions on this. The
training provided by RHAS had a valuable impact on the ability for school staff to overcome barriers of
raising specific topics perceived as sensitive.
“About menstruation, we would speak to each student individually to avoid embarrassing her in front of her
peers. Sometimes we would contact a mother, to tell her how to speak to their daughters when they have their
period. To avoid embarrassment from the mother, I would say that maybe her daughter was shy to talk to her
about it. And I would recommend and advise her on personal hygiene and menstruation”.
A School staff
The evaluation team collected data from parents and caregivers however it is unclear whether the
impact on their children and the change in behavior could be attributed to the WASH activities or to
the COVID-19 health measures and messaging, as both were concomitant.
Child Protection
The helpline was a remarkable response to the vulnerabilities of isolated families during COVID-19.
Parents, especially mothers and children were able to have access to psychosocial support and mental
health support; access to this service certainly impacted the well-being of women and children and
helped them to cope with the situation. Additionally, the creation of para-case workers had an impact
on the reach and coverage of the needs during the lockdowns and isolation of families.
“The helpline was the only mean for beneficiaries. In a culture of silence, the helpline offered a place in which
they can find someone they can speak to. The national CP system is at stake if there isn't access to such a
service”.
A School staff
7.7 Sustainability
The potential for the KOICA supported activities’ benefits to persevere over the long-term.
The ET suggested merging KEQ 1 & KEQ 2 under sustainability as they address similar topics.
KEQ 1. To what extent do relevant ministries have the capacity to take full ownership of the
KOICA supported activities without UNICEF’s upstream support and donor funding?
KEQ 2. How will relevant ministries evolve when the supported activities end, will they adopt
the intervention strategy in the long term?
Key Findings Rating
➔ The relevant ministries were fully engaged in the supported intervention ++
with strong ownership over the strategy and well established technical
capacities
➔ Lack of GoJ’s engagement over the CP approach with ownership at civil -
society level
49
➔ The low level of financial resources at national level may hinder the --
capacity of GoJ to pursue the intervention
Health
The activities implemented under the health component were in continuation and in line with the national
programme for health promotion and services for children in public schools and in refugee camps. The
MoH is well aware of the activities supported by UNICEF and was a key partner in the intervention.
During interviews with staff from the MoH, it was reported that given the already existing nature of the
activities, the services will continue to be provided in the future. The MoH gained strong ownership over
the health approach of the intervention by being fully engaged in developing the National Standards for
Health in Schools which was adopted by the ministry.
“The activities implemented in schools and Health centers activities are a “pilot”. We are aiming for its scalability
and replicability to other governorates”.
A staff at MoH
The MoH expressed determination to replicate the model of the intervention to a larger geographical
scope to respond to the needs in Jordan and invest in a model that would be implemented at national
level. The evaluation evidenced sustainable ownership and technical capacities at GoJ level to pursue
the health strategy. In addition to the framework adopted, school health guidelines and manuals were
adopted to be disseminated in schools and used as guidance in future intervention.
The equipment provided to the health clinics in schools are sustainable in the sense that they will remain
in the future in each of the schools targeted, however it is unclear how schools will be using the clinics
and the material provided in the future, and there is no plan yet for supply or resupply of the
consumables (bandages, stitches, drugs etc.)
WASH
The MoE in Jordan was a key stakeholder in the implementation of the activities under the framework
of the National WASH in Schools Standards adopted in 2016 and developed jointly by the ministry56
and UNICEF; and the Health in School Strategy (MoE). The ET did not interview representatives of the
MoE; however, with strong efforts placed in adopting national standards and strategy for WASH in
schools, it is estimated that the ministry had ownership over the intervention, notably for the
rehabilitation component (not within the scope of the evaluation).
The soft WASH component (hygiene, health and environmental awareness) was implemented by
UNICEF’s partner RHAS and it is important to note that the MoE’s engagement on this approach
remains uncertain as the evaluation team was not able to interview representatives of the ministry,
however the approach seems to be integrated in the National WASH strategy. The Three Star Approach
was adopted by RHAS and implemented as a pilot directly in schools targeted by the activities. The
extent to which MoE has adopted the Three Star Approach as part of its strategy is unclear but RHAS
remains a strong partner, and can be understood as part of the national joint response with MoE. The
evaluation evidenced the ownership of UNICEF’s IP over the approach which is reflected by teachers,
parents and members of the community. As mentioned previously in the report, teachers and parents
reported a strong sense of ownership over the knowledge acquired and the willingness to continue the
hygiene, health and environmental activities in schools. They reported that as a result of the
intervention, children in the school now have access to rehabilitated toilets and sanitation infrastructure
which will last in the future and will serve the other children and students to come. The knowledge
acquired will remain and the approach has empowered the school community in living in a better and
healthy environment. Participants to FGD in WASH supported schools have expressed the will to
pursue and spread knowledge with future children.
56 Along with the Ministry of Water and Irrigation
50
“We have learned a lot and we saw the school changing but also how children are now more careful and aware.
We want this to continue in the future, we will continue to teach and raise awareness to the other children to
come; but we would like to have a brochure”
A School staff
Child Protection
The ET did not interview representatives from NCFA , however they were informed that UNICEF
conducted an assessment of existing helplines in Jordan in 2018. The assessment recommended to
pursue the support to the civil society helplines while strengthening the capacities of MoSD. The
evaluation evidenced a gap in addressing legal and structural changes regarding the existing helplines.
The support to JRF came as a mitigation measure to the COVID-19 crisis and the ET was not able to
evidence a sustainable input on the helpline activity. However, the national civil society built additional
capacities despite the emergency situation. UNICEF supported JRF with knowledge and capacities in
providing remote helpline services, especially remote phone follow-up for cases that were referred to
specific services. The sustainability of the support provided to the helpline can be discussed as it relies
exclusively on donor funding and lacks ownership at national level, however, staff working at the
helpline were supported in building their capacities to work during an emergency situation. JRF and
other civil society actors will be able to respond to future unexpected occurrences in the future.
“The support provided by Unicef was essential. First, in terms of material and mindset, and how durable it is.
During COVID-19, we felt supported when everybody felt shaken”
A Helpline staff
Health, WASH & Child Protection
The three sectors of the KOICA supported activities provided direct services to beneficiaries relying
almost entirely on international donors. Despite the well established ownership over the intervention,
the GoJ lacked financial resources to maintain the action which raised questions over the sustainability
of the action. In the context of Jordan, the needs will continue to grow and efforts should be placed in
sustaining the action at local level through internal, public or private funding schemes.
KEQ 3. Could other stakeholders be involved in sustaining the intervention and its results?
Key Findings Rating
➔ National Civil Society ++
➔ Network of volunteer within the community ++
Health, WASH & Child Protection
For all three sectors, the national civil society is well equipped to sustain the intervention and its results:
local NGOs are well linked with local communities and have strong relations with the different ministries.
In addition, they benefit from internal human resources and technical capacities that enable them to
replicate the action. At community level, the soft WASH approach has shown positive sustainable
effects of ownership and desire to pursue the action. Beneficiaries have shown interest in delivering
what they have learned throughout the community.
Under the case management component,57 UNICEF supported its partners in developing new
approaches to continue reaching out to the most vulnerables, especially during the COVID-19
lockdowns. A network of volunteer para-case workers was created which resulted in the extension of
the coverage when access was limited, sustaining case management and providing for the needs. This
57 Not included in the evaluation scope
51
has empowered the community to become an active member of the CP response in general and create
a strong sense of belonging within the community. The model of community-based volunteers could be
replicated at a larger scale covering not only CP and case management services but also other sectors
of intervention.
8 Conclusions and Lessons Learned
PA’s team presents here a set of conclusions, lessons learned and good practices per criteria. The
conclusions are based on the findings of the evaluation and offer a general reflection on the KOICA
supported activities. The below conclusions provide a global assessment against the objective of the
evaluation.
8.1 Relevance
Conclusion & Lessons Learned
Based on the reconstructed ToC, the identification of the needs responded to the original problems,
needs and challenges that justified the intervention: gaps in health services and education in schools
were identified; gaps of hygiene and health knowledge in schools were assessed with a KAP survey. In
addition, the supported activities have relevantly enabled the continuation of national priorities in terms
of health and WASH in schools by covering gaps that the country faced. The activities are relevantly
designed and respond to dire needs to be addressed in Jordan, however the scope and identification
of the areas of intervention have lacked a proper assessment prior to the intervention.
Good practices
➔ KAP Survey to support the baseline of the supported activities and inform on the needs
➔ National situation analysis that responded to the needs of the target populations
8.2 Coverage
Conclusion & Lessons Learned
The KOICA supported activities targeted vulnerable families and disadvantaged areas with a high
proportion of refugee families and neglected host communities. The evaluation showed that UNICEF
relied on its partners for the identification of areas and beneficiaries that lead to a presumption of
vulnerability, sometimes not validated by the data collection mission. The intervention was compliant
with the HRBA, in line with international standards, equity and gender equality. The participatory
approach of government actors was well established however beneficiaries or staff at intervention level
(schools) were not included in the design of the intervention. Additionally, CwDs represented only a few
beneficiaries covered by the intervention.
Good practices
➔ Partners involvement in target areas and populations, which should be coupled with UNICEF’s
participation
➔ Participatory Approach and inclusion of government actors in the design of the intervention
➔ Mainstreaming HRBA gender equality, and equity in programme design
8.3 Effectiveness
Conclusion & Lessons learned
UNICEF effectively supported a quality health system to meet the needs of a vulnerable population,
especially children; and a protective environment that prevents vulnerable girls, boys and women from
exploitation, violence, abuse and neglect and responds to their needs. In general, the activities that
were under the scope of this evaluation have been implemented, however the timeline and consistency
of the implementation remains unclear. While revised planned targets against reported results by
UNICEF and IP have been achieved for the WASH and CP components, the achievements of the
52
component were not analyzed further than UNICEF internal reports as data from the MoH was not
available. Additionally, the effectiveness of the intervention and the timely implementation of activities
was altered by the COVID-19 crisis.
Good practices
The KOICA supported activities are effectively consistent with UNICEF JCO Country Programme’s
strategy which are in broad terms:
➔ Provision of services to the most vulnerable
➔ Bolstered national capacities and systems
8.4 Efficiency
Conclusion & Lessons learned
The efficiency of the supported activities was made possible with UNICEF’s existing partnership with
the GoJ and both ministries relevant to the activities, MoE and MoH. Additionally, UNICEF was able to
build on prior partnerships with the Jordanian civil society. However, the in-depth analysis of the
efficiency of the intervention in regard to the use of funds was not made possible as the ET did not have
access to the overall budget, breakdown per sector and activities, and budget allocated to IPs. The
evaluation evidenced gaps in allocation of financial and human resources which may have hindered the
efficiency but also the quality of the services provided, especially for the health component in camps.
However, UNICEF worked its best to leverage on internal inputs to support the intervention (vaccination
delivery and appointing additional staff where needed). The ET estimates that the efficiency of the
intervention was affected by the lack of an assigned overall focal point or programme manager for the
KOICA supported activities which may have led to confusion and overlap. The confusion can be seen
in the logical framework of the supported activities in which, as mentioned, certain activities under
WASH do not appear further leading to a gap of clear indicators. The ET identified an overlap between
the WASH and health sectors at UNICEF level while the intervention, especially the areas of
intervention are dissociated.
Good practices
➔ Strong partnership and coordination with GoJ
➔ Partnership with strong local NGOs
8.5 Impact
Conclusion & Lessons learned
Assessing the impact of the KOICA supported activities was affected by the lack of proper indicators
and monitoring mechanisms to measure the quality and impact of the services provided. Despite the
lack of data-supported evidence of the impact on children for the health component, the evaluation
evidenced that the health and well-being of children was improved because they were provided with
health services in a context where their families can’t afford for their basic health. The evaluation
reflected evidence of behavior change among children, especially girls who were mostly targeted by
the hygiene and health awareness sessions in schools delivered by their teachers. Parents and
caregivers reported change in daily life habits, a better self hygiene awareness and care for the
environment in school but also in the community. The WASH awareness sessions in schools have had
a strong impact on the targeted communities. The helpline definitely had a strong impact on families in
despair during the COVID-19 crisis and should be at the heart of the national approach to CP in a
society where speaking to someone over the phone, anonymously is often an easier step to take.
Good practices
➔ Children health and well-being and access to health services
➔ Three Star Approach: holistic approach to WASH and soft WASH
➔ Awareness raising on the environment building stronger sense of belonging to schools and
community
53
➔ Helpline services
8.6 Sustainability
Conclusion & Lessons learned
The sustainability of the KOICA supported activities lies mostly in the strengthening of the national
capacities and systems in place. The GoJ, MoE and MoH had full ownership over the strategy of the
intervention and strong internal technical capacities. Moreover, long term strategies for health and
WASH in schools have been adopted based on previously supported national programmes. For the CP
component, there is still a lack of engagement at GoJ level, despite ongoing efforts, but the CP
ownership lies in the hands of the national civil society. The sustainability of the KOICA supported
activities is strongly affected by the nature of the intervention, relying exclusively on international funding
which may hinder the capacity of the GoJ to pursue the intervention.
Good practices
➔ GoJ engagement and ownership in the health and WASH sector
➔ Partnership with local civil society
➔ Network of volunteers within the community to support a community-based approach for CP.
9 Recommendations
PA’s ET worked on developing three levels of actionable recommendations: Strategic, programmatic
and operational. The matrix below presents the recommendations, the assigned entity and priority.
Sector Recommendations Finding Action Priority
Reference by
Strategic Recommendations
Health,
WASH
➢ KOICA and UNICEF should sustain financial support to nationally owned and Sustainability KOICA Short-term
& CP
implemented programmes (by the GoJ through relevant Ministries) and, for Page 49 GoJ and long term
sustainability purposes, all stakeholder should be involved in the identification of #2 UNICEF
future long-term funding through diversifying the financing landscape including Sustainability
development banks, the Jordanian private sector and other philanthropic actors. Page 50
#1
➢ UNICEF and the donor community should continue to invest in strengthening the
national capacity and systems with a strong focus on the sustainability of the
support provided.
➢ KOICA and UNICEF should continue to technically support the GoJ in fully owning Sustainability KOICA Medium-term
and implementing programmes that are aligned and supported by national policies Page 49 UNICEF
for full realization of intended results. #2 GoJ
➢ For the programmes features fully embedded into the routine activities of the MoE Sustainability KOICA Medium-term
and MoH within schools, KOICA should consider, with careful monitoring and Page 49 MoH
accountability mechanisms, transitioning the funding of operational activities to #2 MoE
bilateral support to reinforce ownership and sustainability on national strategies.
➢ The donor community and the implementing actors should align and enhance Coverage Donors Medium-term
synergies in the Health and WASH sectors for better coherency and coverage, to Page 30 KOICA
avoid duplication of activities (and efforts), transparency and accountability and #2 UNICEF
thus allowing for comprehensive school interventions rather than siloed sectoral Impact IPs
interventions. Page 47
#2
Programmatic Recommendations
➢ UNICEF should advocate and support GoJ and relevant ministries to work towards Effectiveness UNICEF Medium-term
a holistic approach for health & WASH in Schools while working with MoE and MoH Page 40 MoE
to develop a common framework for health & WASH in Schools #1 MoH
Efficiency
54
Page 52
#1
➢ UNICEF should support the child protection national system in strengthening Sustainability UNICEF Medium-term
the national helpline approach, engaging relevant ministries. UNICEF could Page 49 NCFA
engage with the GoJ in developing a national vision for the provision of #4
helpline, especially in facilitating learning on other existing national model in
the MENA region (Lebanon, Tunisia)
➢ Programme Design: A centralised programme management unit or project Efficiency UNICEF Short-term
manager should be assigned to support the consistent development of any Page 43
intervention bridging the different sectors with the same beneficiaries in a #1;#2
given location (school)
➢ Programme and project should focus on geographical areas of intervention
and the vulnerabilities of the targeted populations and develop a
comprehensive package including WASH and Health components rather than
developing siloed sectoral interventions in schools
➢ When designing a programme or project, UNICEF should make sure that the Efficiency UNICEF Short-term
logical framework specific to the intervention contain clear measurable Page 45
qualitative and quantitative indicators, planned targets and baseline (SMART #3
approach planning, implementation and reporting)
➢ Follow-up, quality & Impact: Using the suggested tools, UNICEF’s
sections and programmes should develop and use qualitative indicators
to measure the quality and impact of the intervention, particularly when
working with implementing partners and this, with a centralised
mechanism (eg. the aforementioned program management unit)
➢ For cross-sectorial programmes, tracking systems and tools should Efficiency UNICEF Short-term
ensure the possibility for reconciliation of budgets, spending, activities and Page 41
outputs, even in the case of a non centralised programme to ensure easy #2
budget transparency for all stakeholders and thus ensure better
accountability
➢ Targeting of areas for interventions should be sustained by clear assessment Coverage UNICEF Medium-term
methodology and indicators to inform on the vulnerability of the children prior Page 30 MoH
to their selection in such programmes. #1; #3 MoE
Operational Recommendations
Health UNICE Short-term
➢ Strengthen system in place at CHC level in coordination with schools and MoH with health focal F
point from nearby CHC assigned to each school MoH
➢ Create synergies between schools in camps and CHC in host communities
➢ Ensure that the level of resources dedicated for school health activities in camps match the
number of targeted beneficiaries and that the appropriate time is allowed for campaigns to be
rolled out with appropriate quality of the check-ups
WASH UNICE Short-term
➢ Develop training manuals and brochures on hygiene for teachers and students F
➢ Create a network of volunteer to disseminate knowledge acquired in other schools MoE
RHAS
Child Protection UNICE Short-term
➢ Raise awareness of the availability of the helpline in refugee camps F
➢ Develop campaigns in schools to inform on the helpline JRF
55
10 List of Annexes
10.1 Annex 1: Terms of References
10.2 Annex 2: Phases of the evaluation
10.3 Annex 3: Stakeholder Matrix
10.4 Annex 4: Evaluation Matrix
10.5 Annex 5: Data Collection Tools
10.6 Annex 6: Field Mission Agenda
10.7 Annex 7: Field Mission PPT presentation
10.8 Annex 8: List of respondents
10.9 Annex 9: Bibliograph
10.10 Annex 10: Evaluation Team
56