Disclaimer
The information and views presented in this report are the responsibility of the author and do not necessarily reflect
the official opinion of UNICEF. Neither the institutions and bodies of the United Nations nor any person acting on their
behalf may be held responsible for the use that may be made of the information presented here.
July 2022
Implemented by Dr. rer. pol. Eduardo Wirthmann Ferreira with support of movimentar GmbH – Project Management and Data Science
E-mail: support@movimentar.eu
Tel: +49 421 67 32 52 99
Web: https://www.movimentar.eu
movimentar GmbH – Project Management & Data Science
Technology Bremen
Anne-Conway-Str. 1
28359 Bremen, Germany
Commercial Register at Bremen Local Court
Commercial register no.: HRB 34102 HB
Acknowledgements
This evaluation was implemented by the international consultant Dr. rer. pol. Eduardo Wirthmann Ferreira with
support of German research and consultancy firm movimentar GmbH, involving local senior evaluators, a team
of trained phone interviewers based in Tajikistan, and the movimentar staff in Germany. Youth representatives
were involved at all stages of the evaluation including the design of the inception report and data-collection
tools; some of them also took part in field visits.
This report was only possible through the dedicated work of the programme team, youth reference group, and
partners both in the design of the study and the collection and analysis. The involved team included staff from
the youth reference group (Farahnoz Lafizova, Javohir Mirmastov, Jonibek Arabov, Madamin Ochilboev, Manzura
Mirzoxonzoda, Quvvatbek Zkuvat, and Shahrom Azimov), UNICEF Tajikistan (Farida Karimova, Ruslana Sirman,
Saidahmad Ikromov, Salohiddin Shamsiddinov, Saltanat Rasulova, Shukufa Ibodova, Stephen Grant, Tetyana
Nikitina, and Zamira Komilova) and movimentar GmbH (Ajeeb Almamari, Annalena Oeffner Ferreira, Carolina
Clemens, Eduardo W. Ferreira, Ilkhom Makhkambaev, Jailson Fulgencio de Moura, Lola Babakhanova, Saúl
Gámez, and Usman Ahmed). Local interviews were conducted by Naimova Sharifamo, Murodova Markhabo, and
Khursheda Kurbonalieva.
iii
List of abbreviations and acronyms
C4D Communication for development
CAE Centres for Additional Education
CBR Community-based rehabilitation
CFCI Child-Friendly Cities Initiative
CO Country office
Covid Coronavirus disease
CP Child protection
CRC Committee on the Rights of the Child
CRIA Child-Rights Impact Assessment
CRPD Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities
CRU Child Rights Units
CSO Civil society organisation
DAC Development Assistance Committee
EQ Evaluation questions
ERG Evaluation’s Reference Group
FCSC Family and Child Support Centres
GBV Gender-based violence
GDPR General Data Protection Regulation
GEROS UNICEF’s Global Evaluation and Research Oversight System
GIS Georeferenced information systems
GmbH Gesellschaft mit beschränkter Haftung (Limited Liability Company, in German)
hCTP Humanitarian Cash Transfer Programme
IM Inception mission
IR Inception report
J4C Justice for Children
JS Juvenile support
LNOB Leave no one behind
M&E Monitoring and evaluation
MOES Ministry of Education and Science
MOHSPP Ministry of Health and Social Protection of Population
MoJ Ministry of Justice
MoIA Ministry of Internal Affairs
MoH Ministry of Health
NGO Non-governmental organisation
O4CR Ombudsman for Child Rights
iv
OECD Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development
OPD Organisation of People with Disabilities
OSCE Organisation for Security and Co-operation in Europe
PE Protective environment
PPSW Paraprofessional social worker
QA Quality assurance
RBA Rights-based approach
RCI Residential care institutions
ROM Results-oriented monitoring
SAHU Social Assistance at Home Units
SGBV Sexual and gender-based violence
SMR Strategic moment of reflection
SWOT Strengths, weaknesses, opportunities, and threats
ToC Theory of change
ToR Terms of reference
UNCRC The United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child
UNEG United Nations Evaluation Group
v
Table of contents
Acknowledgements iii
List of abbreviations and acronyms iv
Table of contents vi
List of figures vii
List of tables vii
Executive summary viii
1 Introduction 1
1.1 Context and intervention 1
1.1.1 Intervention logic 3
1.1.2 Purpose of the evaluation 5
1.2 Evaluation scope 5
1.2.1 Evaluation use and audience 6
1.2.2 Evaluation Objectives 6
1.2.3 Key questions 7
2 Methodology 9
2.1 Data sources, methods, and sampling strategies 9
2.2 Limitations 11
2.3 Ethical considerations and confidentiality 12
3 Evaluation findings 12
3.1 Relevance 14
3.2 Coherence 21
3.3 Effectiveness 27
3.4 Efficiency 32
3.5 Impact 36
3.6 Sustainability 42
4 Conclusions 49
5 Lessons learnt and best practices 53
6 Recommendations 55
7 Annexes 57
vi
List of figures
Figure 1: Children’s safety and protection issues (phone interviews). ................................................................. 15
Figure 2: Relevance and appropriateness of the programme to the needs of the target group (online survey). 16
Figure 3: Text network plot of relevance to the needs of vulnerable children (KIIs and FGDs). ........................... 21
Figure 4: Opinions about the capacity of the programme to adapt to major factors (online survey). ................. 30
Figure 5: Text network of factors influencing the achievement of objectives and results (KIIs and FGDs). ......... 30
Figure 6: The level of implementing earlier evaluations into the programme. .................................................... 31
Figure 7: Utilised budget by PE programme component. ..................................................................................... 33
Figure 8: Assessment of the extent outputs were delivered on time (phone interviews).................................... 34
Figure 9: Participant opinions on extent to which programme objectives and results have been achieved. ...... 38
Figure 10: Text network plot of impacts achieved by the PE programme (KIIs and FGDs). .................................. 38
Figure 11: Text network plot of contribution to child rights and a protective environment (KIIs and FGDs). ...... 41
Figure 12: Satisfaction of beneficiaries (phone survey). ....................................................................................... 43
Figure 13: Extent in which the changes are lasting in the beneficiaries’ lives (phone survey). ............................ 44
Figure 14: Opinions about the ownership of partners (online survey). ................................................................ 45
Figure 15: Text network plot of continuation of benefits after the implementation (KIIs and FGDs). ................. 46
Figure 16: Text network plot of main suggestions for improvement (KIIs and FGDs). ......................................... 46
Figure 17: Text network plot of main lessons learnt (KIIs and FGDs). .................................................................. 48
List of tables
Table 1: Assessment criteria and scoring for the evaluation................................................................................... 9
Table 2: Overall scores by evaluation criteria and source. ................................................................................... 13
Table 3: Score for the criterion ‘relevance’ by the evaluation team...................................................................... 14
Table 4: Protective Environment outcome and changes to outputs. .................................................................... 17
Table 5: Score for the criterion ‘coherence’ by the evaluation team..................................................................... 22
Table 6: Score for the criterion ‘effectiveness’ by the evaluation team. ............................................................... 27
Table 7: Score for the criterion ‘efficiency’ by the evaluation team. ..................................................................... 32
Table 8: Score for the criterion ‘impact’ by the evaluation team. ......................................................................... 37
Table 9: Score for the criterion ‘sustainability’ by the evaluation team. ............................................................... 42
vii
Executive summary
This report presents the results of the formative and summative evaluation of UNICEF’s Protective Environment
(PE) programme in Tajikistan over six years from 2016 to 2022. The PE programme had a total planned budget
of USD 7.7 million (USD 6.4 million allocated, USD 5.6 million [88%] of which were utilised by April 2022). The
programme was designed around three main outputs: O1) Social protection and social work [48% of the utilised
budget]; O2) Alternative care [25% of the utilised budget]; and O3) Justice for children and preventing VAC
(violence against children) [27% of the utilised budget]. The programme aimed to create necessary mechanisms
to enable policy, legal, and operational environments to ensure that the rights of all children, with a focus on the
most marginalised, are upheld. For that, it supported systems to ensure that child victims of violence, children in
contact with the law, children affected by migration, children with disabilities, and children living in institutions
are protected, have access to social and rehabilitation services, are not discriminated against, and live in a safe
and supportive family setting1.
The purposes of this evaluation were to 1) generate sound and credible evidence with a focus on whether the
PE programme is contributing effectively and efficiently to ensuring sustainable protective environments for the
most vulnerable and marginalised children and on reasons for success or failure (accountability), 2) best
practices, gaps, and barriers in the applied approaches and programmatic and strategic choices made in its design
and implementation, and 3) lessons to be considered for shaping the future engagement of UNICEF in Tajikistan.
In this sense, the evaluation analysed not only the PE programme’s success achievements (expected and
unexpected) and good practices but also its gaps and challenges faced, identifying lessons learnt and providing
recommendations for future programming. The evaluation’s specific objectives were to: 1) provide an
independent assessment of approaches, strategies, and interventions within UNICEF’s Protective Environment
programme, 2) assess UNICEF’s strategic positioning and programmatic choices made, given the government’s
priorities, the changing socio-economic and political context, and the Covid-19 challenge, 3) identify good
practices which contributed to the achievement of intended results and draw lessons on challenges, gaps, and
barriers that hindered the progress, 4) provide forward-looking recommendations on how to accelerate actions
towards reaching the child-protection related targets. The evaluation audience includes primary stakeholders
(e.g., state bodies, civil society organisations, and UNICEF) and secondary ones (e.g., multilateral and bilateral
donors as well as other UN agencies).
The evaluation was conducted from October 2021 to May 2022 and used a mixed-methods approach, including
quantitative and qualitative data, both for its collection and analysis, allowing methodological triangulation from
the use of different data-collection methods. To provide a quick overview of the results, the evaluation used a
simple scoring system2 for each of the key questions which ranged from very good (score 5, grade A) to very poor
(score 1, grade E). The evaluation used a theory-based approach to assessing the PE programme and its three
core strategic outputs and activities based on its theory of change (ToC) as well as complementary documentary
evidence such as yearly output and outcome statements and country reports. In addition, the evaluation included
a primary data collection, aimed at understanding and assessing the contribution of the programme to the
expected short-term outputs and medium-term outcomes as well as towards longer-term impacts and
sustainability. The evaluation followed the UNEG ethical standards3, and the inception report and questionnaires
as well as informed consent/assent forms and protection protocols went through an external ethical review
commissioned by UNICEF from an independent contractor.
Data collection took place in January and April 2022 and included the following sources: a) document review,
including programme documents (e.g., PE work plans, programmatic reviews, ToC, annual reports, and other
reference documents); b) phone survey with 203 participants from school staff, beneficiaries (children, youths,
and young adults), parents, community representatives, local authority representatives, and NGO
representatives; c) 24 key-informant interviews and 8 focus-group discussions (a total of 63 people) that took
place remotely and in two selected regions (Panjakent, Sughd province and Kulob, Khatlon region) and included
the following stakeholders: ministry representatives (11)4, local authority representatives (4), NGO
representatives (4), UNICEF staff (5), youths aged 14-17 years (12), parents/guardians of minors aged 17 and
younger (23), school staff (2), and children aged 13 years and younger (2); d) an online survey involving 15
1 UNICEF Country Office Annual Report 2018.
2 This scoring system and key evaluation questions are based on EuropeAid’s methodology of Results Oriented Monitoring. EuropeAid (2012)
ROM Handbook. Available at: https://europa.eu/capacity4dev/rom/.
3 UNEG (2020) Ethical Guidelines for Evaluation. Available at http://www.unevaluation.org.
4 As from UNICEF feedback, According to UNICEF's feedback on the draft report, in the list of interviewees none of the interviewed persons
can be categorised as a "representative" of a ministry. They are either representatives of ministry sub-structures or local authorities.
Additional information is available in the section 2.2 (limitations).
viii
participants, among them UNICEF staff (6), NGO representatives (5), local authority representatives (2), ministry
representatives (1), and other public international/regional organisations (1).
The summary of the main findings is presented below by evaluation criterion. The scores were calculated from
the evaluative scale-based questions in the phone interviews and online surveys. The evaluation scores by the
evaluation team were based on the assessment of the overall quantitative and qualitative findings, considering
all primary and secondary sources:
Relevance and design (4.3 – ‘good’): The programme was highly relevant due to its sound intervention logic and
theory of change, which have been informed by an analysis of the needs of vulnerable children and youths,
including the geographical distribution of vulnerabilities. The programme addressed explicitly the most
vulnerable, including children in contact and conflict with the law, children at risk of institutionalisation, children
from war-affected zones, and children and women with disabilities. The programme’s implementation strategy
was relevant due to its focus on an evidence-based approach supporting changes at system level by
strengthening policy and legal frameworks for child protection and providing technical assistance for the revision
and development of policies. The 2018 revision of the ToC helped the programme to stay relevant, according to
the progress made at that time and changes in the context. The reviewed key programme documents and annual
reports suggest that the programme design followed a Right-Based Approach (RBA) and Leave-No-One-Behind
(LNOB) principles. Gender aspects seem to have been mainstreamed, and there are activities focused on
girl/women empowerment. In line with the recommendation 2, A specific gender action plan for the PE
programme, coordinated by the Gender Focal Point, can help to guide the programme in developing specific
activities to track and address specific gender-related protection issues, in line with the recommendations of the
Country Programme Evaluation (2020) and the Gender Programmatic Review (2019). The results of the
multivariate regression analysis5 model indicate that additional focus on the specific needs of girls and young
women6 could help to improve the future performance of the programme. Improvements could also take place
to address the issues of child labour related to housekeeping among female children and adolescents as well as
hooliganism (e.g., prevention of violence at community level). Additional cross-sectoral work can help to address
some of the most-frequently mentioned needs, which suggest synergy opportunities with health and education
sectors. Addressing emerging topics which have been identified among the key protection needs such as
guidance on digital protection, including the appropriate and safe use of mobile phones and internet, could
contribute to increased outcomes and impact. Healthy use of technology is becoming a key source of
intergenerational conflict, which is highly relevant for child protection and prevention of violence against
children7, and helps children to be safe online and make the most of new media and technology8.
Coherence (4.4 – ‘good’): The programme successfully generated significant policy and system level changes that
helped to improve policies at national and local levels and support a better protective environment for children.
UNICEF’s evidence-driven advocacy of policy revision resulted in concrete contributions to national and
institutional policies based on a strong partnership with the Government of Tajikistan (e.g., revision of two
important provisions in the Criminal Procedure Code and amendment to the Code of Administrative Offences to
introduce administrative punishment for parents and/or caregivers for using or threatening to use violence
against children). There is evidence of synergy with other child protection-related interventions (e.g., work with
migrants with the Ministry of Labour as well as issuance of legal documents with the Ministry of Justice) that
support the PE programme, and vice versa. Internal coherence is high with evidence of synergies and
interlinkages between the PE programme and other interventions carried out. There is a high consistency of the
PE programme with the relevant national and international policies, norms and standards (e.g., National
Development Strategy 2030, Mid-term Development Programme, draft National Programme for Children 20309).
The evaluation results suggest a very high external coherence. The programme’s cross-sectoral and integrated
approach offers concrete examples of the benefits, which were critically important to ensure that vulnerable and
marginalised groups had better access to services that respond to their needs. While the programme took
5 Multivariate regressions explore the relationship between multiple variables in datasets (see: https://movimentar.co/3FYt4Se).
6 This can include additional efforts around monitoring differences based on violence against girls and boys; their domestic and paid work
roles; access to services; activities promoting equal and peaceful relations between boys and girls; negotiation of gender promotion with
family and community; steps to reduce the risk of sexual violence and exploitation in public and private settings; strengthening of protection
complaints mechanisms (see more at https://movimentar.co/genderinchildprotection).
7 See: PEW Research Centre (2020) Parenting approaches and concerns related to digital devices. Available at:
https://www.pewresearch.org/internet/2020/07/28/parenting-approaches-and-concerns-related-to-digital-devices/
8 See: Harvard University (2020) Experts offer advice on how to become a ‘connected parent’. Available at:
https://news.harvard.edu/gazette/story/2020/12/how-parents-can-manage-children-and-their-technology-use/
9 The programme contributed to SDGs 1 (end poverty in all its forms everywhere), 4 (ensure inclusive and equitable quality education and
promote lifelong learning opportunities for all), 5 (achieve gender equality and empower all women and girls), and 16 (promote peaceful and
inclusive societies for sustainable development, provide access to justice for all, and build effective, accountable, and inclusive institutions
at all levels).
ix
sufficiently into account vulnerability assessments in its design and implementation, the use of objective
consistent vulnerability criteria is not fully in place due to data-access issues. A methodology note exists
describing an office-wide child-vulnerability index, which attempts to answer the recommendations from the
CPE 2020 and uses a composite approach without weights with indicators including on PE at district level, while
violence against children and nutrition indicators exist at a provincial level. The PE programme had a good
alignment with the SDGs 1, 5, and 16, with important synergies with other programmatic areas of the CO (e.g.,
education sector as well as with the programme on data and evidence for children. The results suggest that the
PE programme had sufficient complementarity, harmonisation and coordination with development partners and
other UN agencies, adding value while avoiding duplication. For example, under the UNICEF-UNHCR Coalition on
Every Child’s Right to a Nationality, in 2021 over 1,250 children at risk of statelessness and affected by migration
from 26 districts and cities received birth certificates. In coordination with the World Bank, the PE programme
and the UNICEF CO supported inclusion of low-income families with children under 7 years of age into the
emergency COVID-19 hCTP cash-transfer programme, which is another example of coordination of support and
synergies between development partners.
Effectiveness (4.4 – ‘good’): Considering the challenge related to COVID-19, the programme demonstrated a
good achievement of its objectives and results. From its 14 indicators, nine have been met or exceeded, while
the rest were considered as partially achieved. For two of the achieved indicators, the programme delivered two
to three times higher figures than the initial targets (indicator 1.1 with 271% of the target and indicator 3.1 with
251%). From the five indicators which had not met targets, two demonstrated progress of at least 70% of their
targets. The results suggest that the programme integrated well the three main programmatic areas (alternative
care of children, justice for children, and preventing violence against children) with other components of
children’s rights, for example, education and nutrition. There is strong evidence that the PE programme
successfully adapted to major factors influencing the implementation during the evaluation period. UNICEF’s
liaison with the government offered examples of best practices, which led to a strong partnership from 2019
onwards. UNICEF recognised and reacted to the new context posed by the COVID-19 pandemic, showing very
good capacity of the PE programme to adapt the context while leveraging resources for the achievement of its
objectives and results. A narrative analysis of the data related to internal and external factors that influenced the
implementation of the programme suggests a very good cooperation between all parties involved, including with
the governmental institutions. There are examples of concrete new partnerships (e.g., work with migrants with
the Ministry of Labour; facilitation of issuance of legal documents by the Ministry of Justice; and dialogue with
key development partners for raising USD 5.4 million, which benefited the PE programme and other country
office programmes), which are consistent with the answers from both UNICEF and government respondents.
Since 2019, the RAM reports have started to include a specific section on ‘Evaluations’, which was a very good
decision and places emphasis on UNICEF’s evidence-driven approach. Documentary evidence indicates that
UNICEF has implemented recommendations from earlier evaluations. In the 2021 RAM report, the
implementation of 8 of the 16 actions from the 2020 CPE recommendations had been reported to be completed.
From the response matrix, it is difficult to assess its current implementation as it is relatively recent and focuses
on the whole country programme. However, in the online survey (institutional stakeholders), the
implementation of the recommendations of earlier evaluations was among the aspects that received the lowest
scores (3.4 – regular). The overall results suggest that this is an area for improvement. There is strong evidence
that the PE programme has been making progress towards its objectives, considering the results and progress as
from the narrative annual reports and evidence from the primary data collection. For instance, in the online
survey and phone interviews, most of the participants (67%, 15 participants) rated positively the extent to which
the programme objectives had been achieved (see Annex 10 for details). It is clear from the responses to the
KIIs/FGDs with beneficiaries that the support received was helpful to their lives.
Efficiency (4.4 – ‘good’): The evaluation did not include a cost analysis (how costs compare to similar
interventions or standards). However, it asked questions around efficiency, which help to assess the programme
performance in this regard. The PE programme had a very good management quality and efficiency, considering
the challenges of the COVID-19 pandemic. By April 2022, the PE programme had utilised 88% of the USD 6.4
million planned since 2016. Output 1 (Social protection and social work) was the largest one throughout the
period, with the exception of 2018, when Output 2 (Alternative childcare) saw a higher allocation in support of
the conversion of baby homes to family and child-support centres. The largest budget allocation and utilisation
was in 2019, when also Output 3 (J4C and VAC) reached its peak, at higher values than Output 2. This budget
allocation remained similar between 2019 and 2022, following a reduction in the budget allocation for alternative
childcare considering the successful transformation from baby homes to family and child-support centres as from
2019. Despite the low budget compared to other country programme components, PE programme successfully
achieved its planned outcomes. The programme had sufficiently detailed two-year work plans. However, it is
unclear since when this started. The joint work planning with government partners added value and is a good
x
practice, especially considering that the PE programme had diverse and broad range of partners. The work plan
for 2021-2022 included activities, sub-activities, geographical coverage by sub-activity, implementing partners,
timeline by quarter, and budget information such as amount funded and funds to be mobilised. However, the
work plan did not contain information on outputs for all sub-activities, which can be improved to ease results-
oriented management. The evaluation team did not have access to the internal corporate systems (e.g., Etools).
The results indicate that The programme has a highly functional, sufficient, and goal-oriented management
system, grounded on UNICEF’s procedures. Improvements may include the use of a more granular, specific
commercial digital/cloud project-management information system to coordinate the PE programme intervention
tasks internally and with external implementation partners and for improved tracking and visibility of results in
terms of short-term outputs beyond intermediate and long-term changes highlighted in the ToC and RAM
reports. More systematic use of the RBA (rights-based approach), namely building stakeholder interest groups
to define representatives to participate in yearly planning and review workshops, particularly involving
beneficiary and government representatives, can help to improve the opinions about transparency and
accountability, while supporting increased local ownership.
Impact (4.3 – ‘good’): There is strong evidence that the PE programme had a good performance against its pre-
defined indicator targets, considering the COVID-19 challenges. Primary data show positive opinions among
beneficiaries and other key stakeholders about impact performance. By April 2022, four out of nine outcome-
level indicators (44%) had been fully achieved. Among the five outcome indicators that had been partially
achieved, three had achieved at least 70%. At the output level, the best performance in indicator achievement
was seen in the alternative care component, followed by social protection and social work. Component 3 (J4C
and VAC) showed the most areas for improvement in achieving output targets. The PE programme’s advocacy of
policy revision and cooperation with the government resulted in important policy and institutional changes that
advanced children’s rights in Tajikistan. Such changes include various policy revisions in the J4C system, the
transformation of baby homes to child and family support centres, improved focus on children with disabilities,
and capacity-development actions that concretely improve institutional responses to violence against children
and emergencies. Opinions from key stakeholders about the programme’s contribution to children’s rights are
very positive and contained requests for the continuation of the support. Key impact areas from the multiple
evaluation sources include: 1) development of capacities of social service staff to improve assistance to
beneficiaries including home visits, psychological and legal support; 2) increased awareness (also among
children) and support related to children’s rights, gender issues, and special needs of children with disabilities in
the centres; 3) production of documented knowledge about the situation of the most vulnerable families; 4)
equipment and training support to FCSCs. A government representative mentioned a “real change” in terms of
“regular involvement and support of children with special needs in the centres that were not [present] in the
past”. Some responses from multiple stakeholder categories to this and other questions above suggest that the
programme can contribute to reducing criminality and violence (e.g., reduced bullying), which could be assessed
in future impact assessments. Answers from parents suggest an integrated and comprehensive approach,
including improved knowledge of legal processes (e.g., steps to obtain documents) and cross-sectoral support in
terms of job skills and professional orientation (e.g., car repair and electricians) delivered by other interventions.
The results show awareness of UNICEF staff that impact assessment requires further analysis after some time
(e.g., 2-4 years) after the support has been delivered to beneficiaries. Responses from local authorities
mentioned that the programme helped the government to do its job better and faster and made certain local
institutions focus on the rights of CWDs. NGO representatives pointed out that the local culture and parents’
attitudes limit the advancement of gender issues and children rights. According to UNICEF staff, gender
mainstreaming needs improvement. The analysis of the answers suggests some areas for improvement such as
1) increased duration of programme support and 2) increased focus on gender issues.
Sustainability (4.3 – ‘good’): The programme has successfully influenced local, regional, and national policies and
public services. Considering evidence from primary data, public representatives and families clearly identify child
protection policies as a public responsibility. The opinions of beneficiaries are very positive, with 97% of the 203
beneficiaries in phone interviews highly satisfied with the programme and over 87% considering that the
programme delivered long-lasting results. Views from institutional stakeholders contrast with the positive views
from the beneficiaries in the phone survey. There are concerns about the sustainability of the support, also in
terms of dependency on the support for the continuation of some benefits. Considering the primary evidence,
the results suggest that implementing partners (institutional stakeholders) assessed the ownership of the
programme as ‘regular’, and this is one of the main areas for improvement. Although there is evidence of a very
good relationship with the state institutions, the evaluation did not identify documentary evidence of kick-off,
planning or review meetings during the implementation with the participation of key stakeholders such as
representatives of beneficiaries. As mentioned in the key finding 4.i (see section 3.2.4 on efficiency), building
stakeholder interest groups to define representatives to participate in yearly planning and review workshops,
xi
particularly involving beneficiaries (e.g., children, youths, parents, community leaders, PWDs, and implementing
partners) and government representatives, can help to improve the opinions about local ownership,
transparency, and accountability. It is clear from the phone survey and FGDs that beneficiaries and their families
identify a sustainable effect on their lives (see also answers to EQ20). There is enough documentary evidence
that government structures (local, regional, national) will continue to benefit based on outputs such as system
and policy changes (see EQ5 and Annex 12), studies/assessments, capacity building, and material support (see
EQ20) provided by the PE programme, particularly in the justice system, SAHUs (Social Assistance at Home Units),
FCSCs (Family and Child Support Centres), and schools. The opinions from key stakeholders indicate a high
likelihood of continuation of the generated benefits but raise concerns about the resources and technical
capacity to maintain such benefits in the long term. The programme strengthened the structures and capacities
of its partners from a long-terms perspective. Opinions from institutional stakeholders about the programme
contribution to building local capacities show a high level of satisfaction but also areas for improvements. The
programme has no formal exit strategy prepared with the involvement of representatives of beneficiaries and
other key stakeholders. The participatory development of an exit strategy is a good practice for sustainability
and can contribute to improving the programme performance in this sense.
For concision, the key recommendations of high priority are presented below. A full list is available in chapter
5. lessons learnt and best practices are presented following the conclusions in chapter 6.
• Recommendation 1 (Responsible: UNICEF / Priority: High) – Develop narrative descriptions to complement
current programme documents where objectives, intervention logic, planned activities, cross-cutting
approaches, related SDGs and monitoring mechanisms (targets and indicators) are mentioned and explained.
• Recommendation 2 (Responsible: UNICEF and National Government / Priority: High) – Develop a specific
gender-action plan for the programme including specific activities and targets/indicators to track progress. We
recommend explicit reference to the specific cross-cutting issues in the theory of changes of future
programmes, to clarify which aspects they intend to address, including specific activities (inputs).
• Recommendation 3 (Responsible: UNICEF and Government at all levels / Priority: High) – There is an emerging
need for introducing a proper case-management system at the ground level, which the programme can
contribute to. We recommend seizing this opportunity to introduce more detailed beneficiary registration
forms, in line with the recommendations of the CRC concluding observations of 2017 around data collection.
• Recommendation 4 (Responsible: UNICEF / Priority: High) – Consider using administrative data or
commissioning primary data collection at household and district level to independently build composite
vulnerability indexes (specific related to protection indicator and ideally including also standard development
indicators such as the poverty probability index, life-satisfaction index or coping strategy index). Data collection
can be eased with tools such as RapidPro, which UNICEF has been successfully using worldwide to build
nationally scalable mobile applications. This can help to build capacities of government partners while
validating/triangulating official data, helping to improve vulnerability targeting and disaggregation of data by
multiple demographic and geospatial variables (e.g., village, jamoat, district and province levels).
• Recommendation 5 (Responsible: UNICEF / Priority: High) – We recommend to improve / scale up the
programme outreach to remote villages compared to urban areas. Adaptations to the needs of those
participants in rural areas (e.g., additional focus on households whose livelihoods depend on cattle raising,
which may be more vulnerable to child labour), can help to improve the programme performance.
• Recommendation 6 (Responsible: UNICEF / Priority: High) – We recommend additional focus on the needs of
primary-grade participants (e.g., age specific materials and contents) as it could help to improve the
programme performance, particularly considering that this group represents most of the respondents, and
lower educational levels are usually correlated with higher vulnerability.
• Recommendation 7 (Responsible: UNICEF / Priority: High) – We recommend scaling up activities related to
building capacities and raising awareness for prevention of violence against children. The output 3 (Justice for
children and preventing VAC) was the programme component with the lowest budget share [27% of utilised
budget]). In addition, the outcome indicator 5 (“Percentage of parents who consider physical punishment of
their children acceptable under given circumstances”) saw an increase from 16% in 2017 to 16.4% in 2021 as
from the RAM reports.
• Recommendation 8 (Responsible: UNICEF / Priority: High) – Develop an explicit exit strategy in a participatory
way that describes how the programme intends to end its support, ensuring that the achievement of
programme goals (assistance or development) is not compromised and that progress towards these goals
continues. The participatory development of an exit strategy is a good practice for sustainability, and can
contribute to improve the programme performance in this sense.
xii
1 Introduction
The evaluation of UNICEF’s Protective Environment (PE) programme in Tajikistan will be presented here, covering
six of the seven years of the country programme from 2016 to 2022. The evidence and forward-looking
recommendations generated by the evaluation will be used by the government and UNICEF during
implementation of the remaining part of the current country programme as well as to inform the 2023-2026
country programme planning process. The PE programme covered the whole country and had a total planned
budget of USD 7.7 million (USD 6.4 million allocated, of which 88% were utilised). The programme aimed to build
a protective environment for children that prevents and responds to deprivation, violence, abuse, and neglect,
especially for the most vulnerable. Three key outputs guided the programme implementation, namely: O1) social
protection and social work, O2) alternative care, and O3) justice for children and preventing violence against
children (VAC). The programme strived to strengthen the existing systems to ensure that rights holders such as
child victims of violence, children in contact with the law, children affected by migration, children with
disabilities, and children living in institutions are protected, have access to social and rehabilitation services, are
not discriminated against, and live in a safe and supportive family setting.
The programme involved a range of interventions implemented by various civil society partners10 in partnership
with state actors at national and sub-national levels (duty bearers). The PE programme and this evaluation
involved the Commission on Child Rights (CCR)11 under the government of the Republic of Tajikistan chaired by
the Deputy Prime Minister of Tajikistan (and the Department of Child Rights Protection of the Presidential
Executive Office serving as Secretary to the Commission on Child Rights).
1.1 Context and intervention
The Republic of Tajikistan has one of the youngest populations in Central Asia12: Of its 9.7 million inhabitants,
around 37% are below 15 years of age. According to the World Bank, although Tajikistan showed progress in
terms of poverty reduction between 2013 and 2019 (poverty rates of the total population decreased from 34%
to 26%), national poverty rates have stalled since then and are currently projected for 2022 at 25.9%13. There is
a substantial geographic variation in the overall and children’s poverty rates in Tajikistan, and rural areas are
substantially poorer than urban areas14. This suggests that Tajikistan’s socio-economic context puts vulnerable
families under economic stress, making them struggle to meet their basic needs, while the state only provides
an insufficient child-protection and justice system.
The social and economic wellbeing of the population severely deteriorated following the outbreak of COVID-19
in the second half of 2020. According to the World Bank, loss of livelihoods, a deterioration of food security, and
a decrease in remittance income that made families struggle to meet their basic needs have been reported as
impacts to the pandemic15. Increased consumer prices together with falling household income has resulted in
the rise of food insecurity, particularly for households depending on formal wages and those without remittance
income, which are currently affected by the Russian war in the Ukraine16 with its substantial challenges to the
sustainability of past and ongoing support actions.
Due to a combination of a high unemployment rate and low incomes, Tajikistan is one of the most remittance-
dependent countries in the world, and Russia is a top destination for Tajik migrant workers. According to the
World Bank, remittances accounted for 27% of the total GDP of Tajikistan in 202017. In 2021, Tajik labour
migration to Russia hit a historic high with more than 2 million Tajik migrants registered by the Interior Ministry
of Russia, 1.6 million of whom indicated work as their primary and official purpose for migration. In 2019, the
remittances which Tajik workers sent from Russia exceeded US$2.6 billion, which was about three times more
10 These include (not exclusively) the Legal Initiative; NGO Hayot dar Oila; HealthProm; Aga Khan Development Network; Association of
Parents of Children with Disabilities; Caritas Germany in Tajikistan; the Red Crescent Society; Terre des Hommes; CESVI; and EHYO.
11 The Commission is a permanent, interdepartmental, consultative body established to coordinate the activities of state, non-governmental
bodies, and international organisations and bodies involved in working with children in need of special measures of protection. The members
of the Commission include government ministries, agencies, local authorities, non-governmental organisations, and religious figures. Source:
Terms of reference, please see annexes.
12 UNICEF (2021) Country office Annual Report 2020 Tajikistan. https://movimentar.co/38PpE7O
13 World Bank (2021) Poverty in Tajikistan 2021. https://movimentar.co/3Ob7vkO
14 Tajik Agency on Statistics (2022) Child Poverty in Tajikistan. https://stat.tj/en/welfare-of-the-population
15 World Bank (n.d.) Economic and social impacts of COVID-19: Update from listening to Tajikistan.
16 Geopolitica (2022) The impact of the Russian-Ukraine war on the Central Asian economy. Available at: https://movimentar.co/38PTKrN
17 World Bank (2022) Personal Remittances, received (% of GDP) – Tajikistan. Available at:
https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/BX.TRF.PWKR.DT.GD.ZS?locations=TJ
1
than the value of all other Tajik exports that year combined18. In this context, sudden shocks and economic
downturns in Russia directly impact on the Tajik economy as well as the ability of households to provide for their
members. It can be expected that this will even worsen in view of the recent sanctions against Russia as result
of the Russian invasion in the Ukraine. Also, the emerging phenomenon of migrant workers who have been
deported and face a re-entry ban into Russia returning to Tajikistan is likely to have serious consequences on
families and children.
Amid the fallout of the economic and social situation of households, the well-being of children is under pressure,
undermining progress diminishing extreme poverty. Although school closures during the COVID-19 pandemic19
have been limited in Tajikistan, children’s education is hindered by an increased exposure to violence and
exploitation, such as early marriages, child recruitment to militias, sexual exploitation of girls and young women,
teenage pregnancies, and child labour20.
The concluding observations on the combined third to fifth periodic reports of Tajikistan on the implementation
of the Convention on the Rights of the Child, dated back from 2017. This document emphasised as main areas of
concern and recommendations: corporal punishment, family environment, children with disabilities, health and
health services, in particular, nutrition , and administration of juvenile justice. The concluding observations on
the combined sixth to seventh periodic reports (2022) highlighted some important policy changes and progress
towards past concerns and recommendations. This included legal amendments providing additional guarantees
for orphans and children left without parental care (Resolution No. 419 of the Government of Tajikistan of 6
October 2016), for example. The amendments and additions to the State Registration of Civil Status Acts of 19
July 2019, No. 1637, were adopted and helped to implement the recommendations of the UN Committee on the
Rights of the Child for the free issue of a child's birth certificate submitted no later than three months after birth.
The CO also introduced, together with the government of Tajikistan, the new National Program for Children for
2020–2030 as a response to the recommendations given to by UNICEF to the government after submitting the
latest report on the state of child rights in the country. The Program outlines the main priorities of the
Government of the Republic of Tajikistan in the framework of achieving the Sustainable Development Goals
(SDGs) related to children.
In this context, the PE programme forms part of UNICEF’s 2016-2022 country programme in Tajikistan and is
based on the following outputs, which were covered in this evaluation:
● O1) Social protection and social work: By 2022, the most vulnerable girls and boys will have increased
inclusive access to social benefits and quality social work services.
● O2) Alternative care: By 2020, girls and boys, including children with disabilities, in institutions, and children
at risk of family separation have increased access to family- and community-based alternative care.
● O3) Justice for children and preventing VAC (violence against children): By 2022, boys and girls, including
those in contact with the law, benefit from programmes that prevent and respond to VAC and a
strengthened child-friendly justice system.
The causes for child institutionalisation are directly related to the SDGs 1 (end poverty in all its forms
everywhere). This context requires the promotion of appropriate social protection systems (target 1.3), the
creation of pro-poor and gender-sensitive policy frameworks (target 1.b). An adequate protective environment
requires consideration for the SDG 4 (target 4.5: Eliminate gender disparities in education and ensure equal
access to all levels of education and vocational training for the vulnerable, including persons with disabilities,
indigenous peoples, and children in vulnerable situations) and 5 (achieve gender equality and empower all
women and girls). More specifically, gender disparities must be eliminated and children with disabilities and in
vulnerable situations included (targets 4.2, 4.5, and 4.a), discrimination and violence against girls and women
need to be fought against. The PE programme is also directly related to SDG 16, the strengthening of legal
institutions (promote peaceful and inclusive societies for sustainable development, provide access to justice for
all, and build effective, accountable, and inclusive institutions at all levels), since it involves ending abuse and
violence against children (target 16.2) and contributed to providing legal identity for all (target 16.9).
18
EurasiaNet (2021) Tajik Labour migration to Russia hits historic, officially. Nov. 2021 Eurasianet. https://eurasianet.org/tajik-labor-migration-
to-russia-hits-historic-high-officially
19 See: https://www.unicef.org/tajikistan/stories/children-tajikistan-return-safer-schools-amid-covid-19 and
20
UNESCO (2021) Adverse consequences of school closures. Available at: https://en.unesco.org/covid19/educationresponse/consequences.
Access on 20 May 2022.
2
1.1.1 Intervention logic
● According to its 2018 theory of change21, the overall developmental outcome (impact) of the PE
programme was: “Children who are most at risk benefit from a better-functioning protective
environment that prevents and responds to deprivation, violence, abuse, exploitation, and neglect”.
The programme aimed to achieve this outcome through the following outputs: 1) By 2020 the most
vulnerable children have increased access to social benefits and quality social work services; 2) By 2020
children in institutions and children at risk of family separation have increased access to family and
community based alternative care; and 3) By 2020 children in contact with the law benefit from
strengthened justice system. The programme followed the activities described below, as from the
programme’s 2021-2022 two-year action plan, with the intention of leading to the following
intermediate changes: 1) National stakeholders recognise and support the revision of laws and policy
documents to better support the realisation of child rights; 2) National stakeholders are convinced
about the efficiency of allocations; 3) M&E systems for the protection of children are capacitated and
operational; 4) Systems at the local level are in place; 5) Para-social workers are capacitated to deliver
their expanded mandate; 6) Government cash-assistance programmes are child-sensitive, and eligibility
criteria and selection procedures are streamlined; 7) Budgetary allocations are child-focused and child-
sensitive; 8) Curricula for pre- and in-service training on practical social work are developed and
accredited; 9) Childcare professionals and foster carers are capacitated; 10) Task shifting of Family and
Child Support Centre (FCSC) is effective; 11) Legal framework is revised for greater alignment with the
UNCRC (UN Convention on the Rights of the Child) and other international standards; 12) Disaggregated
data on protection of children is generated and updated regularly; 13) An increased number of
vulnerable children benefit from quality integrated social-work interventions; 14) TSA (Targeted Social
Assistance) benefit amount is increased based on the number of children in the household; 15)
Enrolment in the disability pension is simplified; 16) Number of accredited PPSW has increased; 17)
Number of children sent to RCIs is reduced; 18) Children in contact with the law are handled in a child-
friendly manner. Rehabilitation and reintegration of children in conflict with the law and reduced rate
of offending and re-offending.
Core output components (2021-2022 action plan)
O1) Social protection and social work: By 2022, the most vulnerable girls and boys will have increased inclusive access to social
benefits and quality social work services.
● Activity 1: Promote social inclusion of children and women with disabilities through awareness-raising interventions
and advocacy.
- Activity 1.1: Conduct communication for social-change interventions to promote the rights of children and women
with disabilities.
- Activity 1.2: Strengthen the role of the OPD and other CSOs to advocate for the social inclusion of persons with
disabilities, with a focus on children and women with disabilities.
- Activity 1.3: Sustain the community-based rehabilitation interventions in Rasht district within the CFCI initiative.
● Activity 2: Support the reintegration of children separated from their families and address the needs of child protection
in emergency situations.
- Activity 2.1: Reintegrate repatriated children from war-affected zones.
- Activity 2.2: Strengthen existing systems to plan for and render psychosocial support before and after emergencies
and disability inclusion during emergencies.
● Activity 3: A well-formed and supported system of social-work workforce development.
- Activity 3.1: Develop and operationalise a comprehensive system of social-work workforce (composed of mapping,
planning, licensing, training and supervision, and supporting).
- Activity 3.2: Capacitate para-social workers from 5 targeted SAHUs on different thematic sessions (children with
disabilities, in foster care, at risk of institutionalisation, in contact with the law, in migration context, etc.).
● Activity 4: Integrated and person-centred system of social protection.
- Activity 4.1: Strengthen data-collection systems on better coverage of vulnerable children.
- Activity 4.2: Make the social-protection system child-sensitive, hCTP-inclusive, and well-functioning.
- Activity 4.3: Ensure access of children affected by migration to essential services, including birth registration.
- Activity 4.4: Pilot an hCTP module during emergencies.
O2) Alternative care: By 2020, girls and boys, including children with disabilities, in institutions, and children at risk of family
separation have increased access to family- and community-based alternative care.
21 See Annex 7
3
● Activity 1: Advocate for amendments of the national legislation related to alternative family care in the country to
promote community and family-based support to children without family care.
- Activity 1.1: Support the working group on development of the law on guardianship based on the current practices
in the country.
- Activity 1.2: Advocate for approval and implementation of the methodological guidance for the Commission on Child
Rights related to children without family care.
- Activity 1.3: Hold a series of consultations at national and local level to align the work of gatekeeping mechanisms
to address the needs of children without family care.
● Activity 2: Generate evidence related to children without family care aimed at reintegration of children with their
biological/extended families.
- Activity 2.1: Carry out assessment of families whose children are in residential childcare institutions.
- Activity 2.2: Monitor selected residential childcare institutions.
- Activity 2.3: Conduct a roundtable for presenting the results of the monitoring of selected residential childcare
institutions.
● Activity 3: Promote community and family-based alternative family care for children without family care or at risk of
being placed in residential childcare institutions.
- Activity 3.1: Operationalise family and child-support centres through reallocation of funds, technical support,
capacity-building interventions, and implementation of the newly introduced family and child-support services.
- Activity 3.2: Promote foster care and existing guardianship mechanisms in the country as part of alternative family
care through advocacy, evidence generation, legislation amendments, development of bylaws, curriculum revision,
capacity building, and service provision.
- Activity 3.3: Place children affected by violence in a safe and protective family environment.
● Activity 4: Strengthen the child-protection system at national level and in targeted districts in Tajikistan as per CFCI in
the country (support for better functioning and capacity building of the CRU and CCR members in CFCI districts).
- Activity 4.1: Develop/revise the training module at the Academy of Public Administration to provide pre- and in-
service training on child-rights issues in general and on child protection in particular.
- Activity 4.2: Provide short-term training orientation sessions for the Secretaries of the Commission on Child Rights.
O3) Justice for children and preventing violence against children: By 2022, boys and girls, including those in contact with the
law, benefit from programmes that prevent and respond to VAC and a strengthened child-friendly justice system.
● Activity 1: Promote justice systems that guarantee equal access, benefits, protection, and support to children (enabling
environment).
- Activity 1.1: Advocate for the revision of the national legislation to introduce amendments to protect the rights of
children, be it offenders, victims, or witnesses of crime, including the implementation of the National Plan of Action
of Justice for children system reform and on prevention of offences among children and youths.
- Activity 1.2: Monitor and document legal processes for children, in particular girl victims and witnesses of
crime/violence, to identify and address shortfalls regarding the protection of, and support to, victims and witnesses.
- Activity 1.3: Strengthen the capacities of law enforcement, judiciary, defence lawyers, and O4CR on child protection
and diversion and on working with victims and witnesses of crime/violence.
- Activity 1.4: Open four child-friendly interview rooms in the Prosecutor’s office, Ministry of the Interior to connect
with child-friendly courtrooms.
● Activity 2: Prevent unnecessary contact with the justice system and the criminalisation of children and respond to needs
of children in contact with the law (prevention and response).
- Activity 2.1: Provide juvenile support services to children in conflict with the law allowing diversion from the formal
justice system (7 CAEs in Sughd region).
- Activity 2.2: Expand the number of juvenile-support services in Dushanbe, DRS, and Khatlon.
- Activity 2.3: Build the capacity of professionals providing juvenile-support services including child-rights units.
- Activity 2.4: Bring in education, rehabilitation, and reintegration to the boys’ colony.
● Activity 3: Prevent all forms of violence against children (VAC).
- Activity 3.1: Promote positive parenting in families, communities, and schools to prevent SGBV (sexual and gender-
based violence) against girls and violence against children.
- Activity 3.2: Establish a network of NGOs to deliver community-based services to child victims of violence.
Psychosocial support, legal support, court representation, and social-worker support.
- Activity 3.3: Build the capacity on VAC for teachers, home-visiting professionals, social workers, and CRU officers in
six targeted districts.
● Activity 4: Establish and sustain the foundations for change through empowerment and participation of children in all
decisions that affect their lives (O4CR).
- Activity 4.1: Improve child-friendly complaint mechanisms within the O4CR including development of the referral
system for individual complaints.
- Activity 4.2: Increase the awareness of children about the O4CR through community meetings and dissemination of
advocacy materials.
● Activity 5: Carry out advocacy meetings and workshops.
4
1.1.2 Purpose of the evaluation
The purpose of this evaluation was to assess the performance and effectiveness of UNICEF’s Protective
Environment Programme, including child protection agenda and social protection interventions in Tajikistan
2016-202222. It focused on the extent to which the PE programme is contributing effectively and efficiently to
ensuring sustainable protective environments for the most vulnerable and marginalised children. The evaluation
aimed at providing information on successes and areas for improvement, identifying best practices, gaps, and
barriers in the applied approaches, and programmatic and strategic choices made in its design and
implementation. Also, it aimed at providing insights and recommendations for the implementation of the country
programme and UNICEF’s work in Tajikistan.
The evidence and forward-looking recommendations generated by the evaluation will be used by the
government and UNICEF during implementation of the remaining part of the current country programme as well
as to inform the 2023-2027 CP planning process, which will commence in late 2021. It will also contribute to a
more evidence-based advocacy and development of the child protection system in the country. More specifically
the evaluation will help UNICEF and partners in the following:
1. The evaluation findings on the effectiveness of different PE interventions at national and sub-national
level will allow dropping or scaling them up depending on the needs of those most vulnerable.
2. Generated evidence on good practices and lessons learned on the gaps, bottlenecks, barriers and
challenges will enable UNICEF, government and other partners to develop a vision towards ensuring
protective environment for children and to shape the child protection policy agenda grounded in
national realities and context, informed by needs and preferences of those most marginalized.
3. The evaluation findings will help to define a clear vision on how to accelerate actions/progress towards
reaching the child-protection related targets and commitments.
The PE programme included interventions in partnership with several stakeholders such as government
institutions (e.g., Ministry of Health and Social Protection of Population (MoHSPP), Ministry of Education and
Science (MoES), Ministry of Health (MoH), Ministry of Justice (MoJ), and Ministry of Internal Affairs (MoIA), the
commissioner for Children’s rights and other independent child rights institutions), development partners, and
civil society (e.g., Caritas Germany, Red Cross, HealthProm, and CESVI). The PE programme worked closely with
international and national development partners to implement the programme’s activities: for example, the
collaboration with the European Union and the government to finalise the draft National Social Protection
Strategy in 201623 as well as strategic partnerships with the World Bank, the World Food Programme (WFP), the
International Organisation for Migration (IOM), and the International Labour Organisation (ILO). Other examples
are UNICEF’s partnership with the World Bank, which allowed baseline data on the economic situation of Tajik
families to be generated through the Listening to Tajikistan survey in 2016. The 2018 collaboration with the
World Bank and the statistics agency, which allowed the introduction of a child poverty measurement
methodology in the poverty measurement system24. Other partners include the Ombudsman for Child Rights
(focusing on assistance on institutional strengthening) and national and international NGOs (examples: CESVI
and Istituto degli Innocenti for formative research implementation and Refugee Children and Vulnerable Children
(RCVC) for assistance of refugees in the field). One of the flagship results in 2020, the transformation of baby
homes into family- and child-support centres, was a product of the partnership between UNICEF, the MoHSPP,
and other stakeholders such as the UK-based NGO HealthProm with local NGOs Hayot dar Oila and Sarchashma.
Another example was the partnership with UNDP, UN Women, and UNFPA under the Spotlight Initiative for the
development of the national referral mechanism for women and girls survivors of SGBV.
1.2 Evaluation scope
The evaluation follows the scope detailed in the ToR, evaluating the Protective Environment programme
between 2016 and 202225 following both a summative and a formative approach. The scope of this evaluation
included both national (policy and advocacy work) as well as subnational (selected districts) levels. Field visits
were paid in only two selected districts. The evaluation of each individual intervention needed to take place
separately to allow for sufficient information to decide about dropping the interventions or scaling them up. The
evaluation focused on the key components of the programme including alternative family care, justice for
22 Initially, the Country Programme Document had been developed for the period of 2016-2020, but it was subsequently prolonged due to
COVID-19 and to align with the government timeframe. This evaluation focuses mostly on the period until the end of 2021.
23 UNICEF Annual Report (2016), p. 2 (internal document).
24 According to feedback from UNICEF during the review of the draft report for this evaluation, these interventions were covered within PE
before Strategic Moment of Reflection (SMR), in 2018. After the SMR (second half of 2018), this moved from the PE programme to the
Knowledge Programme.
25 Due to the time of the evaluation, the main focus was on the period from 2016 to the end of 2021.
5
children, and violence against children, migration effects, children with disabilities, child protection in
emergencies, and the role of social services. This evaluation was undertaken at the end of the sixth year of an
extended seven-year country programme (CP) of cooperation (2016-2022) between UNICEF and the Government
of the Republic of Tajikistan.
1.2.1 Evaluation use and audience
The evidence and forward-looking recommendations generated by the evaluation were intended to be used by
the government and UNICEF during the implementation of the remainder of the current country programme and
to inform the 2023-2026 CP planning process, which started at the end of 2021. The evaluation aimed at
contributing to a more evidence-based advocacy and development of the child-protection system in the country.
More specifically, UNICEF and partners plan to use the evaluation in the following ways:
1. Use information for dropping or scaling up programme interventions depending on the needs of those
most vulnerable.
2. Gather evidence on the needs, gaps, and challenges as well as good practices and lessons learnt to
inform the child-protection policy agenda.
3. Build on insights on how to accelerate actions/progress towards reaching the child-protection related
targets and commitments.
The evaluation audience includes primary stakeholders (e.g., state bodies, civil society organisations, and
UNICEF) and secondary stakeholders (e.g., multilateral and bilateral donors as well as other UN agencies). A
detailed list of stakeholders is available in the terms of reference, which can be found in the annexes to this
report. Among the primary stakeholders and duty bearers, the evaluation also involved the Directorate on Child
Rights Protection under the Ministry of Education and Science, which is the official custodian of the
implementation of the Child Rights Protection Law of 2015 and child-protection issues. The evaluation aimed at
involving line ministries and agencies responsible for child-protection related policy and services including
representatives of the Ministry of Health and Social Protection of the Population; Agency on Social Insurance and
Pensions; Department on Prevention of Delinquencies among Adolescents and Youth, Ministry of Internal Affairs;
Department on Supervision of the Law on Youth and Minors, General Prosecutor’s Office; Department on
Juvenile Justice, Ministry of Justice; Judges Training Institute, Supreme Court; Republican Centre of Additional
Education; Ministry of Labour, Migration and Employment; and the Commissioner for Children’s Rights
(Ombudsman for Child Rights) through the interagency Evaluation Reference Group established by the
government of Tajikistan for this evaluation.
The evaluation aimed to be useful to both primary and secondary stakeholders, providing: (i) evidence to improve
future UNICEF interventions in the country; (ii) knowledge, including best practices and lessons learnt, that could
be used by the Government of the Republic of Tajikistan and other key-partners in better designing and
enhancing public policies to reach and address the beneficiaries’ needs and expectations; (iii) accountability and
control of the PE implementation. The entire process from evaluation design to development of data-collection
tools and reporting counted on the engagement of representatives of young people in the evaluation process
and the Evaluation Reference Group (ERG). This aimed to support local adaptation and learning while ensuring
participation, equity, and accountability.
1.2.2 Evaluation Objectives
The overall objectives of the evaluation were to:
1. Provide an independent assessment of approaches, strategies, and interventions designed and
implemented with UNICEF’s Protective Environment programme in Tajikistan.
2. Assess UNICEF’s strategic positioning and programmatic choices made, given government priorities,
the changing socio-economic and political context, and COVID-19 challenges in Tajikistan.
3. Identify good practices which have contributed to the achievement of intended results and draw
lessons on challenges, gaps, and barriers that have hindered the progress towards ensuring a protective
environment for the most vulnerable and marginalised children, looking beyond the traditional
vulnerable groups.
4. Provide forward-looking recommendations on how to accelerate actions towards reaching the child-
protection related targets set in the National Programme for Children 2030 and implementing the
recommendations of the 2017 CRC Concluding Observations.
6
1.2.3 Key questions
This evaluation followed the principle of having few yet well-focused questions. The inception report annexed to
this report includes an equivalence table and evaluation matrix showing how the key questions correspond to
the questions from the terms of reference. The key questions were defined based on the terms of reference and
updated during the inception phase. The key evaluation questions are presented below, divided into the
OECD/DAC evaluation criteria26.
Relevance
● What is the relevance of the programme considering the needs and priorities of its key beneficiaries?
● To what extent is the programme design appropriate to achieve the intended outcomes and impact (including
intervention logic, approach, structure, components, and assumptions)?
● To what extent did the programme design take sufficient account of cross-cutting issues (e.g., gender, minorities,
persons with disabilities, and the environment)?
● How well have the different needs of vulnerable girls and boys been considered?
Coherence
● What has been the contribution of the programme to improved local and national policies?
● To what extent did other child-protection activities by UNICEF and partners, especially social policy and social
protection, reinforce the Protection Environment programme?
● How well did the programme use a cross-sectoral and integrated approach while using vulnerability criteria
developed by UNICEF Tajikistan?
● To what extent has the programme coordinated with development partners and other UN agencies to avoid
overlaps, leverage contributions, and catalyse joint work?
● How closely is the programme aligned with the Sustainable Development Goals (external coherence)?
Effectiveness
● To what extent have the objectives and results of the programme been achieved?
● How well was the programme implementation adapted to the major factors (internal and external) influencing the
achievement or non-achievement of the objectives and results?
● To what extent have the recommendations of earlier evaluations been implemented in the programme?
Efficiency
● How adequate was the management quality and efficiency (including work planning, procurement, financial resource
management, budget allocation, and timely outputs)?
● To what extent is the programme output data efficiently used for national/regional advocacy?
● How functional, sufficient, and goal-oriented is the programme-management system (including technical expertise
as well as monitoring, planning, and reporting systems)?
Impact
● How well has the programme had direct impacts at its overall-objective level?
● To what extent does/will the programme have any indirect positive and/or negative impacts (i.e., environmental,
social, cultural, gender, and economic)?
● How well have the implemented interventions/activities contributed to ensuring a protective environment for
children?
● To what extent has the programme advanced children’s rights?
Sustainability
● To what extent have the interventions had a sustainable effect at the local, regional, and national level?
● To what extent has the local ownership of partners been considered in the implementation of the programme?
26 OECD (2021), Applying Evaluation Criteria Thoughtfully, OECD Publishing, Paris, https://doi.org/10.1787/543e84ed-en.
7
● To what extent will the target groups and beneficiaries continue to use the benefits after the support has ended
(long-term orientation)?
● What is the contribution of the programme to the institutional capacity of local partners?
In order to provide a quick overview of the conclusions, the evaluation used a simple scoring system27 for each
of the key questions. The scores ranged from very good (score 5, grade A) to very poor (score 1, grade E). Grades
and scores are explained in the following table and are supported by detailed information on the actual findings,
the rationale behind the conclusions, and key lessons learnt and recommendations.
27 This scoring system and key evaluation questions are based on EuropeAid’s methodology of Results Oriented Monitoring. EuropeAid (2012)
ROM Handbook [online]. Available at: https://europa.eu/capacity4dev/rom/.
8
2 Methodology
This section summarises the methodological approach used in the evaluation. A more detailed account of the
methodology can be found in the inception report and sample documentation, which are available in the annexes
to this report. Unless explicitly mentioned, the terminology used here follows the OECD/DAC Glossary of Key
Terms in Evaluation28.
Table 1: Assessment criteria and scoring for the evaluation.
Grade Score Qualitative Explanation
A 4.6 to 5 Very good The situation is a reference for good practice. Recommendations focus on
measures to facilitate replication of good practices in future operations.
B 3.6 to 4.5 Good The situation is highly satisfactory, largely above average, and potentially a
reference for good practice. Recommendations are useful but not vital for the
operation.
C 2.6 to 3.5 Regular The situation is satisfactory, but there are important operational risks, and there
is room for improvements. Recommendations are important for increasing the
likelihood of successful operation.
D 1.6 to 2.5 Poor There are issues which need to be addressed or else the overall performance
may be negatively affected. Necessary improvements, however, do not require
major revisions of the intervention logic.
E 1 to 1.5 Very poor There are deficiencies which are so serious that, if not addressed, they can lead
to failure of the operation. Major adjustments of the intervention logic and
revision of the strategy are necessary.
The data-collection process followed the principles of the European Union’s General Data Protection Regulation
(GDPR) and informed participants of the purpose of the exercise as well as other GDPR requirements. All
calculations were documented in computer syntax (RMarkdown). The syntax/source code for this document is
hosted on a private repository on Github and is available to authorised users. The source code allows the
automatic download of data from the cloud and document aggregator in a fully reproducible way at all stages,
from the cleaning process to the visualisation of the results.
2.1 Data sources, methods, and sampling strategies
The evaluation used a mixed-methods participatory approach29, including quantitative and qualitative data, both
for its collection and analysis. Different programme stakeholders were involved through online surveys
(Institutional stakeholders), Key informant interviews (Institutional stakeholders and beneficiaries) and phone
interviews (beneficiaries), and data was triangulated to draw conclusions. The evaluation was based on a theory-
based approach to assessing the PE programme and its three core strategic outputs and activities, based on its
theory of change (see Annex 2 for the evaluation matrix, and Annex 6 for the ToC in graphic form) as well as
complementary documentary evidence including yearly output and outcome statements and country reports. A
primary-data collection formed part of the evaluation, as detailed below. This aimed at understanding and
assessing the contribution of the programme to the expected short-term outputs and medium-term outcomes
as well as towards longer-term impacts and sustainability. A random sample of 500 beneficiaries was taken in a
simple random manner using the R programming language. The sample includes a total of 675 beneficiaries in
15 of 15 locations. The sample is larger than the goal of phone interviews in order to account for non-response,
inoperative numbers or any unforeseen event during data collection.
The locations and samples were randomly drawn from a list provided by UNICEF based on defined criteria. Firstly,
the programme team provided a list of individual and institutional beneficiaries with a total of 962 beneficiaries
in 14 locations. From the total records, 954 beneficiaries had known and unique phone numbers and names. This
represents the population from which the sample for the phone interviews has been drawn. During data
collection, the local team identified the need to complement the initially drawn sample. This was necessary due
to non-response rates caused by non-operational phone numbers and 146 duplicated phone numbers out of a
total of 500 (29%). We complemented the initially drawn sample by the same number of duplicated phone
28 OECD (2010) Glossary of Key Terms in Evaluation and Results-Based Management. http://bit.ly/oecdrbm
29 UNICEF (2014) Participatory Approaches. https://www.unicef-irc.org/publications/pdf/brief_5_participatoryapproaches_eng.pdf
9
numbers added by 20% to allow for a security margin, while excluding phone numbers that had been selected in
the first sample. The sample included a total of 675 beneficiaries in 15 locations. The sample was larger than the
goal of phone interviews in order to account for non-response, inoperative numbers or any unforeseen event
during data collection.
The data-analysis methods followed a mixed-methods approach and included techniques focusing on both
quantitative data (e.g., analysis of scores for each criterion using triangulation) and qualitative data (e.g., natural
language processing using word-stemming algorithms30 and network co-occurrence plots31 for visualisation of
key words after removal of stop words32 in addition to a traditional, manual analysis of open questions). Data-
collection sources have been selected with due independence and methodological rigour including the use of
reproducible random samples as much as possible. To avoid bias and improve the validity and reliability of results,
this evaluation combined the following multiple data sources and data-collection methods:
Document review: The reference group uploaded inputs to a virtual folder to which the evaluation team had
access throughout the assignment. The provided inputs included a desk review of documents such as photos of
programme activities, strategies, statistics, reports, past related evaluations, publications, monitoring data, and
similar interview forms. Key sources of secondary data included sectoral administrative statistics as well as
studies and literature on topics related to the object of the evaluation.
Online survey: The evaluation team prepared an anonymous survey form in English, Tajik, and Russian that was
available online for about five weeks to gather opinions from UNICEF staff and other relevant internal and
external stakeholders from a list of participants prepared by UNICEF staff. The online survey allowed key
stakeholders to provide inputs anonymously and identify best practices, key challenges, and lessons learnt. The
survey reached 15 participants (69% female) out of the 71 people invited by e-mail (21% response rate). Most
participants were UNICEF staff, followed by NGO and government representatives. For confidentiality, there was
no personally identifiable information recorded with online surveys so as to allow respondents to present their
critical feedback and suggestions.
Phone interviews: To minimise risks related to the Covid-19 pandemic, phone interviews were used to collect
data from local partner staff and beneficiaries. A list of phone numbers of beneficiaries and other stakeholders
was made available by the programme staff33, similarly to the one for the online survey described above. The
phone survey aimed at focusing on children, youths, and their families to complement other primary-data
sources, as not for all beneficiaries and stakeholders a phone number was available34. The evaluation team
developed a digital form in Tajik, Russian, and English to collect evaluative data from beneficiaries through phone
interviews. Using beneficiary registration data/attendance lists, the team drew a simple reproducible random
sample of beneficiaries of 675 people, so at least 200 respondents could be reached35. The evaluation team
trained phone interviewers, involving also female interviewers to ensure comfort for female participants during
interviews. The data-collection team successfully conducted a total of 203 interviews (78% female) with mainly
school staff, adolescents, children, and youths as well as representatives of community/mahalla parent’s
committees. The questionnaire was deployed using KoBoToolbox, which allowed for collecting data with any
device with a browser. Digital data collection allowed for efficiency and quality gains, particularly concerning the
prevention of data-quality issues.
30 Stemming is the process of producing morphological variants of a root/base word. A stemming algorithm reduces the words “chocolates”,
“chocolatey”, “choco” to the root word “chocolate”, and “retrieval”, “retrieved”, “retrieves” to the stem “retrieve”. Stemming is an important
part in natural language processing. Source: https://movimentar.co/3uowF7N
31 These plots are the result of an algorithm that presents the network of co-occurrences of the most frequent words used by participants
to answer the questions after the so-called stop words have been automatically removed (e.g., articles, prepositions, and other words that
do not convey significant meaning). The blue lines indicate how often the words occur together. The thicker the line, the more often they
occur together in the dataset. The graph presents the most frequent words in the centre of the plot and groups them according to their co-
occurrence. Text networks are common tools for natural language processing, namely for visualising qualitative data.
32 Stop words are a set of commonly used words in a language. Examples of stop words in English are “a”, “the”, “is”, “are”. The method is
being used in Text Mining and Natural Language Processing (NLP) to eliminate words that are so commonly used that they carry little useful
information. Source: https://movimentar.co/stopwords
33 The list contained 962 beneficiaries in 14 locations. 954 beneficiaries were identified with unique phone numbers and names, which
represented the population from which the sample was drawn.
34 The sample documentation in RMarkdown, which includes all the steps from the data loading to cleaning and reproducible sampling, is
available at: https://movimentar.co/unicef-taj-pe-sampledoc.
35 In 2016, the Tajik Telephone Agency announced the creation of the unified database of identification numbers of mobile phones (see
https://movimentar.co/3cmKJFo). Re-registration of a subscriber number was free of charge but had to be done by the end of April 2017. To
re-register their mobile-phone numbers, subscribers of any cellular company had to take their passports and SIM cards to the nearest service
centre of their mobile operators.
10
Key-informant interviews and focus-group discussions: A total of 32 qualitative interviews36 and eight focus-
group discussions with beneficiaries were conducted using qualitative, semi-structured interview guides (face-
to-face and remote); a list of participants for the KIIs can be found at Annex 3. Data collection for such interviews
also involved visits to two regions (the districts of Panjakent and Khujand in Sughd province and the district of
Kulob in Khatlon province) for interviews at both district and regional levels. The participants of the individual
key-informant interviews were selected from a list of 123 contacts (both service providers/duty-bearers and
rights holders) with which the programme staff had provided the evaluation team. Participants of the seven
focus-group discussions with beneficiaries were selected locally by the data-collection team in coordination with
local stakeholders. The selection followed a purposeful sampling design in coordination with the evaluation
management group and sought to maximise stakeholder diversity of opinions. Key-informant interviews involved
mainly local authorities, UNICEF staff and consultants, and representatives of civil society organisations, while
focus-group discussions involved parents, children, and adolescents (divided into different groups). A digital form
supported the implementation of the key-informant interviews. The interviews aimed at collecting detailed views
from the participants. Data were collected mainly by our local senior evaluator, who is based in Dushanbe and
travelled to the project areas. He was supported by a female colleague on-site to ease interviews with female
beneficiaries and involved trained representatives of youths (aged above 18 years) from the evaluation reference
group.
Triangulation: The findings used data from the document review, online surveys, phone interviews, key
informant interviews and focus group discussions to increase the credibility and validity of the findings while also
avoiding biases. Conclusions were drawn from the findings when the results of different methods and data
sources converged.
Statistical regression: The multivariate regression is a statistical technique to explore the relationship between
multiple variables in datasets. This statistical computation technique was used to inform the analysis of the main
determinants of the OECD criteria score. The model seeks to explain OECD score variations based on other
variables. The selection of the variables follows an automated process that seeks to maximise Akaike’s
information criterion. This aims to avoid a bias in the selection of the parameters. To determine the significance
of independent factors, we considered that a p-value <0.05 (less than 5 in a hundred chance of being wrong) is a
reasonable threshold.
2.2 Limitations
The main limitations were:
1. As explained above in detail, phone interviews were conducted based on reproducible random samples.
The list of beneficiaries and contacts had been provided by the programme staff based on a pre-selection
process that did not include full datasets37 with beneficiary registration data38. To this the evaluation team
did not have access due to confidentiality of personal data. The online survey and key-informant interview
participants also came from a list of stakeholders provided by the programme staff. Although the random-
sampling procedure could help to mitigate selection bias in the phone interviews, the evaluation team could
only assume that the reference lists of beneficiaries and stakeholders provided by the programme staff was
representative of the total beneficiaries and stakeholders.
2. According to UNICEF's feedback about the draft report, in the list of interviewees in the key-informant
interviews, none of the interviewed persons can be categorised as a "representative" of a ministry. They
are either representatives of ministry sub-structures or local authorities. The local team prioritised
interviews with stakeholders at local level in order to make the most of the field visits and collect feedback
at ground level, while categorising the stakeholders according to the information provided by the
interviewees and the implementing partners. The online survey also invited institutional stakeholders at
national and international level to participate, in order to maximise participation and representativeness.
3. Although there may be potential limitations of the outreach to highly vulnerable groups, in terms of
assessing the access of children with disabilities to basic services, for example, the evaluation team did not
36 Initial goal: 25 interviews.
37 According to the evaluation management group, “The shared excel file included the complete datasets of ultimate beneficiaries (right
holders) downloaded from the Activity Info Platform. Direct access was not granted due to confidentiality of personal data. On the
beneficiaries/duty bearers, as far as I remember, there were no unified databases (information kept by relevant programme officers)”. The
information, however, does not include all beneficiaries of the programme activities as from the RAM reports. This is probably so since not
all beneficiaries’ contacts are available to UNICEF.
38 According to UNICEF feedback, “this related only to Justice for Children. For others the datasets were not pre-selected”.
11
have access to data from the programme beneficiaries as a whole39. Also, the evaluation team did not
identify objectively verifiable vulnerability criteria or thresholds to ease the identification and prioritisation
of beneficiaries based on registration data. This context limits the capacity of the evaluation to assess the
extent to which the sampled beneficiaries are indeed the most vulnerable. It also limits the assessment and
follow-up of vulnerabilities based on a more quantitative approach. To mitigate these gaps, the evaluation
team included questions to assess the vulnerability of the beneficiaries following aspects based on their
Food Consumption Scores, among other standard vulnerability indicators.
4. The team successfully interviewed 203 participants, while 23% of the sampled participants did not have an
operational number or the number did not work, 16% did not want to participate, and 9% did not answer
the phone. Participation of the invited beneficiaries and stakeholders may be determined by aspects such
as access to an operational phone and electricity, particularly in phone interviews. This may bias the results
as people without access to operational mobile phones or people who are too busy to participate (e.g.,
mothers or those affected by child labour), for example, may not have answered the calls from the
interviewers. The evaluation team tried to mitigate these risks by calling non-respondents up to three times
at different times of the day and by attempting to re-schedule phone interviews.
5. The anonymous online survey had a lower-than-expected response rate (21%), with 15 out of 71 invited
stakeholders participating. Potential factors behind this performance can include the period of time/time
of the year that the survey was available (from 4 to 31 January 2022), low engagement of key stakeholders
in the programme, limited internet connectivity, and/or limited habit to participate in online surveys,
particularly among stakeholders at subnational level. The evaluation team tried to promote participation
by extending the data-collection period for the online survey as well as using phone interviews to mitigate
this risk. The team also used a professional campaign-management tool (MailChimp), which allowed it to
monitor participation and send eight reminders to non-clickers throughout the data-collection period.
2.3 Ethical considerations and confidentiality
The evaluation followed the UNEG ethical standards40 in terms of integrity, accountability, respect, and
beneficence. Following UNICEF procedures for Ethical Research Involving Children, the inception report and
questionnaires as well as informed consent/assent forms and protection protocols went through an external
ethical review commissioned by UNICEF from an independent contractor. The official ethical approval is available
upon request to UNICEF. Forms related to informed consent/assent and emergency protocols are included
among the annexes to this report. Data from minors were collected only after obtaining parental consent. The
interviews adhered to the GDPR (General Data Protection Regulations) and avoided situations that might have
led to upsetting children or inducing a conflict with their legal representatives. Confidentiality was ensured by
separating samples which included contact information (e.g., phone survey sample) from the datasets, thus
preserving respondents’ anonymity. Data-collection tools contained the required information to obtain informed
consent for participation, which was voluntary. Participants in face-to-face key-informant interviews received a
letter with all required information for informed consent and data-protection rights. The evaluation assessed
children in conflict with the law, who were not identified as such in the sample for confidentiality. No risk was
identified for participants during the data collection. Our team completed the BSAFE training as well as ethics
and protection against sexual exploitation and abuse (PSEA) courses, and all personnel collecting data received
refresher training about ethical issues and data-protection guidelines; guidance for risk mitigation was provided.
Carbon emissions were minimised by involving local consultants in the data-collection design and
implementation, thus avoiding air travels, and by reducing material use through digital data collection.
3 Evaluation findings
This section presents the key findings holistically but grounded in the primary and secondary data collected
during this evaluation. The participatory evaluation approach strongly values the inputs from the evaluation
participants, which have been triangulated with evidence from the document review. The box below summarises
key characteristics of the participants in the primary data collection. The annexes contain detailed information
about participants’ demographics as well as key vulnerability indicators of the beneficiaries who took part in the
phone survey, including protection-related issues and needs.
39 As from feedback from UNICEF during the draft report review, “the PE [programme]does not have a complete set of databases for all
beneficiaries. What we shared were the complete databases (except J4C) for those interventions/projects that established beneficiary
databases. Also apart from various lists of training attendants (re improving service delivery) or WG members (re legislation) there is no
database for policy and system related interventions and I think it is not possible to document the beneficiaries (maybe could be analysed
through admin data , e.g. for alternative care).”
40 UNEG (2020) Ethical Guidelines for Evaluation. Available at http://www.unevaluation.org.
12
Summary of key characteristics of the evaluation participants
● Among the 15 online survey respondents were 6 UNICEF staff, 5 NGO representatives, 2 local authority
representatives, 1 ministry representative, and 1 other public international/regional organisation. Most
of the participants were female (11 or 73%) and were based mainly in Tajikistan, and two in Geneva,
Switzerland (UNICEF RO).
● There were 203 phone interview submissions, from which 160 were female. The most common age group
of the phone interview respondents was under 20 years (57), with only few being above 61 years (8).
The participants were based mostly in Kulob, Isfara, Sarband, B. Gafurov, Hissar, Rudaki, Shakhrinav,
Yavon, and Bokhtar. Most lived in towns (119), the rest in villages (84). 67 participants had a university
degree, 43 primary, 38 lower secondary, 27 higher secondary, 19 secondary specialised education
(technical school, college). Only 9 participants had no education.
● The KIIs and FGDs involved key informants that had been selected in coordination with UNICEF staff. A
total of 63 people were interviewed in 24 individual interviews and 8 focus-group discussions, which
involved 39 participants (average of 5 participants per focus group, mostly beneficiaries and parents).
The qualitative data collection included the following stakeholders: government representatives (11),
local authority representatives (4), NGO representatives (4), UNICEF staff (5), youths aged 14-17 years
(12), parents/guardians of minors aged 17 and younger (23), school staff (2), and children aged 13 years
and younger (2).
Additional information including charts is available in the annexes.
We present below the summary of key findings, taking into account primary and secondary data sources, which
include the programme theory of change, as described in the methodology section. To aid the triangulation of
results, the table below presents the mean scores41 of all questions in the online and phone interviews, as well
as a numerical representation of the evaluative decision considering all primary and secondary data sources as
per triangulation results. These scores are used through the report as a way of summarizing beneficiaries and
stakeholder opinions, and subsections in the findings.
Table 2: Overall scores by evaluation criteria and source.
Scoring by evaluation criteria and type of source
(1 = very poor; 5 = very good)
Institutional stakeholders Beneficiaries
Criterion Evaluative decision (Online survey) (Phone interviews)
Relevance 4.3 3.7 4.4
Coherence 4.4 3.7 -
Effectiveness 4.4 3.6 4.6
Efficiency 4.4 3.7 4.5
Impact 4.3 3.5 4.5
Sustainability 4.3 3.3 4.7
Overall score 4.4 3.6 4.5
Overall rating B ('good') B ('good') B ('good')
The programme obtained higher scores in the phone interviews than in the online survey. The difference in
scores between both methods can be attributed to the different types of participants and questions. In the view
of the evaluation team (first column of the table), the PE programme performed best in the criterion efficiency,
41 The scores from the online survey and phone interviews have been computed after conversion of answers based on scale-based questions
(see methodology section) and calculation of averages.
13
followed by its relevance and impact. The criteria with the most areas for improvement were sustainability and
effectiveness, which received the lowest scores by the evaluation team.
The subsections below explain the rationale behind the views from the evaluation team, with reference to both
primary and documentary evidence. Each section starts with the scores by the evaluation team for each of the
Evaluation Questions (EQs). These scores reflect the final evaluation decision by the evaluation team considering
both primary and secondary evidence, followed by a detailed response to each of the EQs. Section 2
(methodology) presents the approach to analysis, while Annex 2 presents the evaluation matrix with the
indicators/judgement criteria for each of the evaluation questions. Section 2.5 presents the limitations to this
evaluation and its results, including mitigation actions to compensate them.
3.1 Relevance
Key findings
1.i: The programme was highly relevant due to its sound intervention logic and theory of change, which have
been informed by an analysis of the needs of vulnerable children and youths, including the geographical
distribution of vulnerabilities.
1.ii: The programme’s implementation strategy was relevant due to its focus on an evidence-based approach
supporting changes at system level by strengthening policy and legal frameworks for child protection and
providing technical assistance for the revision and development of policies.
1.iii: While the PE programme included gender-related activities, its ToC did not mention gender issues and
outcomes. A specific gender action plan for the PE programme, coordinated by the Gender Focal Point, can help
to guide the programme in developing specific activities to track and address specific gender-related protection
issues, in line with the recommendations of the Country Programme Evaluation (2020) and the Gender
Programmatic Review 2019.
In line with the OECD/DAC definitions42, the relevance criterion assessed the extent to which the objectives of a
development intervention are consistent with beneficiaries’ requirements, country needs, global priorities, and
national policies. The overall relevance score given by the evaluation team (evaluative decision) was 4.3 (grade
B), which indicates a ‘good’ performance. The table below presents a summary of the scores and weights given
by the evaluation team for each evaluation question for this criterion, considering both the primary and
secondary evidence.
Table 3: Score for the criterion ‘relevance’ by the evaluation team.
KEY QUESTIONS – RELEVANCE PERFORMANCE WEIGHT
A = 5 B = 4 C = 3 D = 2 E = 1
EQ1: What is the relevance of the programme considering the
5.0 25%
needs and priorities of its key beneficiaries?
EQ2: To what extent is the programme design appropriate to
achieve the intended outcomes and impact (including
4.0 25%
intervention logic, approach, structure, components and
assumptions)?
EQ3: To what extent did the programme design take sufficient
account of cross-cutting issues (e.g., gender, minorities, 4.0 25%
persons with disabilities, and the environment)?
EQ4: How well have the different needs of vulnerable girls
4.0 25%
and boys been considered?
Note: A = very good; B = good; C = fair; D = poor; E = very
Result: 4.3 B
poor.
42 See more at: https://www.oecd.org/dac/evaluation/daccriteriaforevaluatingdevelopmentassistance.htm (last visited: 4 June 2022).
14
EQ1: What is the relevance of the programme considering the needs and priorities of its key beneficiaries?
The PE programme’s intervention logic and theory of change have been well targeted. In line with the Country
Programme Evaluation (2020), there is strong evidence that design and implementation of the PE programme
have been informed by an analysis of the needs of vulnerable children and youths, including the geographical
distribution of vulnerabilities43.
The 2015 Country Programme Document recognised that there was a need “to build a protective environment
that prevents and responds to deprivation, violence, abuse, exploitation, and neglect, especially for the most
vulnerable”. This document pointed out that the PE programme’s implementation strategy followed an evidence-
based approach to support changes at system level by strengthening policy and legal frameworks for child
protection and providing technical assistance for the revision and development of policies. In this sense, there is
strong evidence, in line with the Country Programme Evaluation (2020), that the PE programme reflected the
key national policies and strategies, particularly the Mid-term Development Programme, the programme and
action plan of the Justice Reform for Children for 2017-2021, the Programme for Training of Personnel of the
Social Protection System for 2030, the Programme on Rehabilitation and Social Reintegration of Children After
Released from Closed Institutions 2020-2024, the National Programme on the Prevention of Juvenile
Delinquency for 2020-2024, the State Programme on Youth Social Development and the National Education
Strategy, and the Child Rights Ombudsman Strategy.
The programme addressed explicitly the most vulnerable, including children in contact and conflict with the law,
children at risk of institutionalisation, children from war-affected zones as well as children and women with
disabilities. These findings from documentary evidence (e.g., theory of change, results matrix, and action plan
2021-2022) could be confirmed when triangulating evidence from primary data collection.
Figure 1: Children’s safety and protection issues (phone interviews).
The phone survey with the sample of beneficiary children, adolescents, and youths until 30 years included a
range of questions exploring key vulnerability indicators, which included opinions and needs, as well as
protection issues. When asked about the key problems in their lives nowadays, the most frequently mentioned
ones were related to job insecurity, bad economic situations, health problems, and housing problems. Some of
the main problems specifically associated with children were the lack of schools and kindergartens, parent-
related problems (e.g., neglect/mis care and violence), poor living and health conditions, and insufficient access
to clothing. Although not all these problems are directly related to the scope of the PE programme, parenting
and violence problems are among the most frequent issues mentioned by the beneficiaries, which is in line with
the programme problem analysis and intervention logic.
The programme is highly relevant considering the results in terms of beneficiaries’ opinions on child safety. When
asked about protection issues on child safety, only 9% of the participants answered that at the moment there
43 This include studies such as: Rapid assessment of the system’s response to adolescents’ mental health, including prevention of suicidal
behaviour in the Republic of Tajikistan (2016); Formative research on infant and young child feeding and maternal nutrition in Tajikistan
(2016); Mapping the vulnerable and excluded groups of adolescents and youth in Tajikistan (2017); Adolescence baseline study (2018),
Situational analysis, Baseline study on knowledge, attitudes, behaviours and practices related to children and women with disabilities in
Tajikistan (2018); Assessment of the impact of social allowances on the quality of life of children living with HIV (2018); Baseline study on
children, teachers and parents’ ability to recognise and respond to situations of discrimination or exclusion in five target districts of Sughd
region of Tajikistan (2019); Endline study on knowledge, attitudes, behaviours and practices related to children and women with disabilities
in Tajikistan (2021); among others.
15
were no threats to the lives and well-being of their children. The most common protection issues in order of
frequency were domestic violence (19%), child labour (19%), hooliganism (17%), bullying and intimidation (10%),
verbal harassment and spread of rumours (10%), sexual assault (3%), and gang violence (3%). 24 respondents
(8%) answered ‘other’, which includes a range of issues with parents, school, mobile-phone use, neglect, and
other children.
Domestic violence was the main protection issue reported by both female and male respondents, in very similar
proportions. However, child labour was the most frequent protection issue reported among female participants.
This can be related to traditional gender roles associated with housekeeping work, for example, and suggests the
need of additional sex-specific initiatives for girls and boys, in line with the Country Programme Evaluation
assessment44. Hooliganism was the third main protection issue, particularly reported by male respondents but
also by female ones. Bullying and intimidation was the fourth most mentioned protection issue, with higher
reporting frequency among female participants.
Qualitative data included evidence of girls not being allowed to go to school after reaching 9th grade. From the
collected evidence, the extent is unclear to which this is related to protection issues/traditional norms and/or
poor hygiene and sanitation in schools, the latter also contributing to female student dropout following the start
of menstruation. Although this can at first look unrelated to the PE programme, there may links worth
investigation with the Family Code and exceptions to the minimum age of marriage / child marriages. Another
issue is the improper usage of mobile phones, computer games, and watching age-inappropriate movies. These
can be opportunities for future programming, particularly as parents may welcome guidance from teachers and
social workers on how to best support the development of their children amid the pitfalls of abuse of digital
devices.
Feelings of personal safety and that of the community (mahalla, kishlak), especially for children, were
predominantly positive and regular. When asked about the needs for children’s safety and protection, most
respondents emphasised the importance of meetings and recreational/sports grounds, including promoting
cooperation between families and schools as well as makhalla meetings for improved awareness and monitoring
to prevent children’s abuse.
The latest ToC of the programme (Annex 6) as well as implementation reports make clear that the programme
supported the government in generating knowledge for evidence-based policy making and piloting new social
service provision models for vulnerable families. Since the onset of the programme, the UNICEF country office
(CO) commissioned a range of studies and partnered with different organisations to generate the evidence
required on the needs of its ultimate beneficiaries. For example, in 2016, UNICEF partnered with the World Bank
to undertake the regular Listening to Tajikistan Survey (2015–2020) and generated a baseline as well as endline
study on knowledge, attitudes, practices, and behaviours related to children and women with disabilities. In
2018, the functional assessment of the Commission on Child Rights and the Child Rights Units was finalised, which
allowed it to identify gaps in the child protection and justice system.
Figure 2: Relevance and appropriateness of the programme according to the needs of the target group (online survey).
The implementing staff and institutional stakeholders (online survey/key-informant interviews) and the ultimate
beneficiaries (phone interviews) had positive opinions about the programme’s relevance, as shown in the graph
above. The online survey asked its participants about the relevance and appropriateness of the programme in
44 See the Country Programme Evaluation of 2020, page 27, Relevance to gender equality, paragraph 75.
16
regard to the needs and priorities of vulnerable boys and girls, with an average rate of 3.7 (‘good’). This result
suggests that the programme considered the needs and priorities of the vulnerable children in an appropriate
way, in line with the documentary evidence described above as well as the other data sources. Similarly, the
beneficiaries’ opinion on the relevance of the programme was positive. The participants believe that the
programme met their expectations, was relevant to their lives, reached and accommodated for the needs of
children. The results can be seen in more detail in Annex 10 (Detailed findings).
Summary – EQ1: The PE programme was highly relevant, taking into consideration the needs and priorities of its
key beneficiaries (Evaluation score of 5.0). The reasons for this are that: 1) the programme used an evidence-
based approach that considered the needs of its key beneficiaries, which included the analysis of the needs of
vulnerable children and youths, including the geographical distribution of vulnerabilities. This has been
confirmed by strong evidence from both documentary and primary data sources; 2) UNICEF closely collaborated
with the government of Tajikistan and other international organisations to implement the activities in the ToC;
3) both implementing staff and beneficiaries have positive opinions about the relevance of the programme,
especially the beneficiaries.
EQ2: To what extent is the programme design appropriate to achieve the intended outcomes and impact
(including intervention logic, approach, structure, components, and assumptions)?
The 2016 ToC started as the basis for the programme’s implementation and included the key elements that the
PE programme would be based on, namely inputs, operational changes, intermediate changes, outputs, and
outcome, all of which were coherent and followed a logic intervention rationale. This was further revised in 2018
as part of the Country Programme revision of outputs, which helped to update each element to better fit the
national context regarding the needs of vulnerable girls and boys and the programme’s progress. The table below
presents the latest outcome statement as well as changes to outputs of the PE programme.
Table 4: Protective Environment outcome and changes to outputs.
Outcome statement45: By 2020, boys and girls, including those in contact with the law, benefit from programmes that
prevent and respond to VAC and a strengthened child-friendly justice system.
2016 PE programme outputs 2018 Revised PE outputs
● Children benefit from an improved protection system ● Social Protection and Social Work – By 2020, the most
based on a policy and legal framework in line with vulnerable girls and boys have increased inclusive
international standards, adequately resourced by access to social benefits and quality social work
evidence-based, equitable resource allocation and services;
executed through strong intersectoral coordination at ● Alternative Care – By 2020, girls and boys, including
central and local levels; children with disabilities, in institutions, and children at
● National and local authorities increasingly ensure risk of family separation have increased access to
availability and accessibility of quality child protection family and community-based alternative care; and
services and social benefits, including during ● Justice for Children and Violence against Children – By
emergencies, for children most at risk and their 2020, boys and girls, including those in contact with
families; and the law, benefit from programmes that prevent and
● Social norms shift in favour of better protection and respond to VAC and a strengthened child-friendly
inclusion of the most marginalised children. justice system.
In addition to the changes above, other notable changes between both versions were: 1) improved output
statements, which in the 2016 version were less succinct and time-bound, with the definition of more clear
programme components, and 2) the addition of four activities based on the good progress of the programme
during the last two years. These changes made the intervention logic clearer and helped to maintain the
programme relevant.
The programme design was based on a sound intervention logic and theory of change, with a detailed results
matrix (see Annex 8), which was introduced in 2018. Those included appropriately designed programme
components and activities, which were well integrated in UNICEF’s country programme. Areas for improvement
can include the preparation and maintenance of a full logical framework for the programme, in complement to
the ToC. While the ToC played a key role in programming, a logical framework matrix collaboratively designed
with representatives of beneficiaries and other key stakeholders could help to better clarify the programme
intervention logic and indicators at all levels as well as assumptions and risks. Such a logical framework document
45 Source: UNICEF Tajikistan End of Year RAM Outcome and Output Statements (2021), Outcome 4150/A0/05/884, page 71.
17
could also help to specify better the links between interventions/activities with results and indicators presented
in the results matrix of the PE programme (Annex 8). A narrative programme document describing approaches
and each activity in more detail is also necessary, considering the inputs and the document review results. As
from the two-year work plan for 2021/2022, activities were clear and detailed by sub-activities. Additional
information about tasks under the sub-activities could help to further clarify the intervention logic. For example,
activities A1.346 and A2.347 could be more concrete (either in the activity statement or with tasks under it) and
mention which concrete measures (e.g., training, mentoring, equipment, material provision) are planned to
strengthen the capacities of the target groups, including the expected number of participants or outputs directly
in the activity statements. This can help to speed up and clarify the implementation to partners, although it needs
to be done with flexibility to allow for adaptations to the changing context and needs.
Summary – EQ2: The programme was well designed and highly appropriate to achieve the intended outcomes
(score 4.0). The inputs, outcomes, intermediate changes, and assumptions were coherent with each other and
logical. The 2018 revision of the ToC helped the programme to stay relevant, according to the progress made at
that time and changes in the context. There is both primary and secondary evidence of appropriate integration
in UNICEF's country programme.
EQ3: To what extent did the programme design take sufficient account of cross-cutting issues (e.g., gender,
minorities, persons with disabilities, and the environment)?
The programme explicitly states the work with children with disabilities in its theory of change. The reviewed key
programme documents and annual reports suggest that the programme design followed a Right-Based Approach
and Leave-No-One-Behind principles. The evaluation team received study reports from the programme staff with
sufficient evidence, data collection, and disaggregation that go beyond gender, geography, and age. However,
while the latest ToC mentions activities with vulnerable families and children among its inputs, there is no explicit
mention of gender or other cross-cutting issues in either of the programme’s ToCs. The 2015 Country Programme
document, nevertheless, identified girls and children with disabilities (CWD) as key beneficiaries by stating that:
Children are often exposed to risk and vulnerability and left unprotected because of social norms and
harmful practices and beliefs. These include the perception of CWD as bringing shame and burdens to
their families and society; and the tolerance of physical punishment of children and violence against
women and girls. This programme’s focus on innovative communication for social change will help to
overcome these barriers.
The most recent Social Institutions & Gender Index (SIGI) for Tajikistan dates back to 2019 and places Tajikistan
among those countries with ‘medium’ SIGI at 39% of its level of gender discrimination index. Although Tajikistan
performs better than most of its neighbouring countries, legal frameworks related to child marriage, household
responsibilities, and divorce were the main areas for improvement48 with consequences to the protection of the
rights of girls and female adolescents and youths.
There were activities focused on girls’ and women empowerment as evidenced by the latest programmatic two-
year action plan for 2021-2022. Gender aspects have been explicitly mentioned by some of the PE programme’s
activities under its social protection/social work output component (e.g., Activities 1.1, 1.2), as well as J4C/VAC
component (e.g., Activities 1.2, 3.1).
Hence, despite the gap in the PE programme theory of change in terms of gender issues and the results of the
Gender Programmatic Review 2019, there is strong primary and secondary evidence (e.g., RAM and COAR
reports) that the programme mainstreamed gender in its activities. The KIIs and FGDs suggest a very good
contribution of the PE programme to improving the lives of children with disabilities, legal support to parents of
children in contact with the law, promotion of gender issues, capacity building of social workers and beneficiaries
on children’s rights, guidance for obtaining birth certificates, and support to home visits (see detailed findings in
Annex 10). Further evidence of UNICEF’s work on cross-cutting issues are the baseline and endline studies on
knowledge, attitudes, behaviours, and practices related to children and women with disabilities in Tajikistan and
other assessments supported by the UNICEF CO. In fact, according to some KII/FGD participants, the support
offered to CWD can be considered one of the most relevant results of the programme, in coherence with the
LNOB principle. At the same time, gender issues were mentioned as a component that needed to be
strengthened.
46 Activity 1.3: Strengthen the capacities of law enforcement, judiciary, defence lawyers, and O4CR on child protection and diversion, and on
working with victims and witnesses of crime/violence.
47 Activity 2.3: Build the capacity of professionals providing juvenile-support services including child-rights units.
48 OECD (2022) Social Institutions & Gender Index. Available at: https://www.genderindex.org/country-profiles/
18
The primary and secondary evidence for the PE programme evaluation is in line with the conclusions of the
Country Programme Evaluation (CPE), which stated that:
The CO has taken a first essential step in terms of requiring sex-disaggregated data. There is more work
to be done on consistently collecting, monitoring, and utilising sex-disaggregated data. The UNICEF-
commissioned situation analyses identify a range of important gender issues, such as: different rates of
suicides among adolescent boys and girls; reasons for dropping out of school being different for boys and
for girls; boys tending to commit more offences; and boys being more frequently in conflict with the law.
Whilst these issues are identified in analyses, the CO has not incorporated them into specific programme
approaches in the same way as those of marginalised groups.
Gender sensitivity and mainstreaming can be improved by fully and explicitly embedding gender issues into the
PE programme ToC and approaches. In line with the CPE, a more systematic approach is required to ensure that
gender inequalities are addressed. A specific gender action plan for the PE programme, coordinated by the
Gender Focal Point, can help to guide the programme in developing specific activities to track and address
gender-related protection issues. This may include, for instance: an increased scale and activities around
monitoring differences based on violence against girls and boys; their domestic and paid work roles; access to
services; activities promoting equal and peaceful relations between boys and girls; negotiation of gender
promotion with family and community; additional activities to reduce the risk of sexual violence and exploitation
in public and private settings; and strengthening of protection complaints mechanisms at community level49.
Summary – EQ3: The ToC of the programme explicitly mentions the work with children with disabilities but does
not include gender issues and outcomes. Despite that, the PE programme included gender-related activities in
its action plan. Further documentary evidence (e.g., RAM and COAR reports) as well as primary data indicate that
the programme mainstreamed gender in its implementation and contributed to gender equality. A specific
gender action plan for the PE programme, coordinated by the Gender Focal Point, can help to guide the
programme in developing specific activities to track and address gender-related protection issues, in line with
the recommendations of the Gender Programmatic Review 2019 and the 2020 CPE.
EQ4: How well have the different needs of vulnerable girls and boys been considered?
It is important to know the beneficiaries’ problems to understand their needs before assessing the performance
of the PE programme in this regard. Beyond analysing the assessment reports and studies provided by UNICEF,
and to ensure triangulation, phone interviews and KIIs/FDGs were used as source of information.
The phone interview questionnaire asked beneficiaries about child protection issues threatening the lives and
well-being of children in their communities. As presented in the answer to the EQ1, domestic violence, child
labour, and hooliganism were the most frequent problems, followed by bullying and intimidation, verbal
harassment and spread of rumours. When asked about their safety feeling and the safety of the community
(mahalla, kishlak), especially the children, the participants answered mostly ‘very good’/’good’ and ‘regular’.
Questions about safety concerns suggest that although community-based hooliganism was an issue, the core site
of interest for protection issues remains the household, rather than community/street issues. While community-
based work can be important to achieve broader social changes, the programme can increase its impact by
focusing on household-based and school-based protection issues. We recommend that particularly for remote
areas and the potentially sensitive issues (e.g., physical punishment of children, gender empowerment and child
labour) depending on the context and openness of each specific village/town.
The results of the multivariate regression analysis model50 (see Annex 10, section 10.4) of phone interviews with
beneficiaries, indicate that male participants gave higher scores to the programme compared to their female
counterparts, with statistically significant differences. The multivariate regression is a statistical technique to
explore the relationship between multiple variables in datasets. The results suggest that additional focus on the
specific needs of female participants could help to improve the future programme performance, as explained
above in the answer to the EQ3 regarding gender mainstreaming.
As shown in the answer to the EQ1, UNICEF considered the generation of knowledge as one of the key
programme actions following an evidence-driven, and pilot-based approach. Through this dense body of
evidence, UNICEF has contributed to the understanding of the context of its ultimate beneficiaries, and their
49 See more at https://movimentar.co/genderinchildprotection.
50 The multivariate regression analysis model of the average scores for scale-based questions suggested significant differences between
scores of male and female participants in phone interviews. Male participants (36%) tend to give higher scores (0.28) compared to their
female counterparts (64%). Although the difference is low and the overall average score was high, this indicates that additional focus on the
specific needs of female participants could help to improve the future performance of the programme. See more in the Annex 10 and at
https://movimentar.co/3FYt4Se.
19
vulnerabilities, including of the most vulnerable such as children of migrants, girls and children with disabilities.
Some examples are described in the box below.
• Children from migrant workers are frequently living in households led by women, who are mostly
dependent on remittances that are often insufficient to meet the family’s necessities. These children tend to
be more vulnerable and more likely to suffer from abuse and neglect51. The main cause of children
institutionalisation was the inability of families to cover for the children’s necessities (around two thirds of
the children were institutionalised because of this reason).
• Children in child-protection institutions (e.g., baby homes, institutions for children with disabilities,
and boarding schools) have also been identified as vulnerable, as these institutions have been regarded
more as medical facilities (in the case of baby homes and institutions of children with disabilities), lacked
possibilities of alternative family-based care, and needed specialised social workers (training of social
workers and hiring psychologists) 52.
• Tajik girls and women are in a more vulnerable position because social norms put them in
disadvantage as they have fewer opportunities for further education and economic independence. About
one quarter of women aged 15-49 were victims of physical violence and that 31% of married women have
been victims or physical, sexual, or psychological violence53 54.
• Children living with disabilities are particularly vulnerable. The available data on disability
prevalence rates among adults and children of 2% and 0.8% are perceived to be gross underestimates. It is
estimated that most boys and girls with disabilities do not have access to mainstream social services despite
the government’s efforts to promote community-based rehabilitation through day-care centres.
Furthermore, misconceptions and lack of awareness about people with disabilities among children and
adults are still prevalent and boys and girls with disabilities in residential care institutions are especially
vulnerable, as 9% of them were double orphans, girls were more institutionalised than boys, and family
reintegration plans were not in place.55
All data sources support the assessment of how effectively the programme’s interventions reflected the needs
identified in the planning stage and those of the beneficiaries. The PE programme’s intervention logic and theory
of change have been well targeted. Although the programmatic ToC did not include gender issues and outcomes,
the PE programme explicitly included gender-related activities focusing on the specific needs of girls and women.
This happened particularly under its social protection/social work (output 1), as well as J4C/VAC (output 3)
components, as presented in the answer to the EQ3.
The programme activities in the ToC directly address the problems identified in the assessments supported by
UNICEF, and there is evidence that the programme has been implemented taking these issues into account. For
example, regarding the justice for children component, UNICEF, in collaboration with the Tajikistan government
identified gaps (through the functional assessment of the Commission on Child Rights and the Child Rights Units)
in the justice system in terms of child protection. After these gaps were identified, a number of amendments in
the following years were performed that prevented children from being exposed to violence in the system.
Similar steps were taken to reform the child protection system, UNICEF cooperated with the government to
identify problems in the system. Together they sought organisational changes, they achieved the transformation
of baby homes to family support centres and continued the support through capacity building in these newly
created institutions. During the programme’s duration, UNICEF also conducted interventions to prevent and
respond to violence against children in the family (collaborating with NGO CESVI and Istituto degli Innocenti
research institute) while also focusing on CWD, among others.
Further evidence of the consideration of the specific needs of vulnerable boys and girls come from the KIIs/FGDs.
The graph below summarises the answers from participants in KIIs and FGDs about the relevance of the
programme considering the needs of vulnerable children. From the graph, it is possible to see that disabilities
features among the most mentioned key words. This pattern can be seen in other results of open questions with
qualitative data. KIIs and FGDs also include evidence of good performance in reaching out for children at risk and
their parents, including street children, orphans and those children affected by migration (detailed results are
available in Annex 10).
51 UNICEF (n.d.) Protecting Children affected by migration in Southeast, South, and Central Asia (Tajikistan) (internal document).
52 UNICEF (2014) Study Report Children in residential care in Tajikistan.
53 Republic of Tajikistan (2018) Demographic and Health Survey 2017.
54 UNICEF (2019) Situation analysis of children’s and young women’s rights in Tajikistan.
55 UNICEF (2020) Study on knowledge, attitudes, behaviours and practices related to children and women with disabilities in Tajikistan.
20
Figure 3: Text network plot of relevance of the programme to the needs of vulnerable children (KIIs and FGDs).
Summary – EQ4: The evaluation team considers that the different needs of girls and boys have been well
considered (evaluation score 4.0) due to the evidence-oriented approach used, and progress from documentary
evidence (e.g., RAM and COAR reports). Although the programmatic ToC did not include gender issues and
outcomes, the PE programme explicitly included gender-related activities focusing on the specific needs of girls.
However, male beneficiaries in phone interviews gave higher scores to the programme compared to their female
counterparts, with statistically significant differences. The results of the statistical analysis triangulated with the
results from other data sources and documentary evidence suggest that additional focus on the specific needs
of female participants, informed by a more systematic gender action plan, could help to improve the future
programme performance. This is in line with the conclusions from the Country Programme Evaluation. In future
interventions, child labour issues, especially cases related to housekeeping among girls (see also answer to the
EQ1), and hooliganism could be addressed more explicitly considering the most frequent protection issues
mentioned by the beneficiaries who took part in the phone interviews and key-informant interviews, in line with
priority 38 of the State Comprehensive Programme for Children “Rushdu Numu” 2030, which is pending approval
by the government.
3.2 Coherence
Key findings
2.i: The programme successfully generated significant policy and system level changes that helped to improve
local and national policies and support a better protective environment for children. UNICEF’s evidence-driven
advocacy of policy revision resulted in concrete contributions to national and institutional policies based on a
strong partnership with the Government of Tajikistan.
2.ii: The programme’s cross-sectoral and integrated approach offers concrete examples of the benefits, which
were critically important to help to ensure that vulnerable and marginalised groups had better access to services
that respond to their needs. While the PE programme took sufficiently into account vulnerability assessments in
its design and implementation, the use of objective vulnerability criteria is not fully in place due to data-access
issues.
2.iii: The PE programme had a good alignment with the SDGs 1, 5, and 16, with important synergies with other
programmatic areas of the CO (e.g., education sector as well as with the programme on data and evidence for
children). Specification of target SDGs in the programme documents (e.g., ToC, work plans and reports) can help
to clarify the planned contribution of the PE programme to the SDGs, and ease assessments about its
performance.
This subsection summarises the findings for the evaluation criterion of coherence, which assesses the
compatibility of the PE programme with other interventions. The evaluation assessed the compatibility of the PE
programme with other interventions. The score for this criterion by the evaluation team (evaluative decision)
was ‘good’ or 4.4 (grade B).
21
Table 5: Score for the criterion ‘coherence’ by the evaluation team.
KEY QUESTIONS – COHERENCE PERFORMANCE WEIGHT
A = 5 B = 4 C = 3 D = 2 E = 1
EQ5: What has been the contribution of the programme to
5.0 20%
improved local and national policies?
EQ6: To what extent other child protection activities by
UNICEF and partners, especially social policy and social
4.0 20%
protection, reinforced the Protection Environment
programme?
EQ7: How well did the programme use a cross-sectoral and
integrated approach while using vulnerability criteria 4.0 20%
developed within UNICEF Tajikistan?
EQ8: To what extent has the programme coordinated with
development partners and other UN agencies to avoid 5.0 20%
overlaps, leverage contributions and catalyse joint work?
EQ9: How closely is the programme aligned with sustainable
4.0 20%
development goals (external coherence)?
Note: A = very good; B = good; C = fair; D = poor; E = very
Result: 4.4 B
poor.
EQ5: What has been the contribution of the programme to improved local and national policies?
Based on the documentary evidence, the programme provided direct contributions to priorities listed in the draft
State Comprehensive Programme for Children “Rushdu Numu” 2030, such as priority 6 (e.g., support to birth
certificates and advocacy relate to children affected by migration), priority 8 (e.g., work related to GBV and VAC),
priority 11 (e.g., supporting transformation of baby-homes into family and child support centres, as well as their
operationalisation), priority 38 (e.g., interpersonal and public dialogue with parents’ community and the society
in general regarding prevention of violence against children), priority 39 (e.g., strengthening supervision system
at district level (Commission of Child Rights) for preventing placement of children to institutions; and improve
alternative family care mechanisms, such as guardianship and trusteeship, foster care and other types of family
care), and priority 40 (e.g., Introduction of community-based rehabilitation approach for children with disabilities
to include children with disabilities into society).
The document review indicates high consistency of the intervention with the national and international norms
and standards (e.g., Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities, National Development Strategy 2030,
Mid-term Development Programmes, draft National Programme for Children 2030, UN Convention on the Rights
of the Child, National Plan of Action for implementation of the Concluding Observation of the UN Committee on
the Rights of the Child for 2018-2022, National Plan of Action on Justice for Children System Reform 2017-2021,
and the discussions around the coming National Social Protection Strategy). As presented in the answer to the
EQ1, the PE programme reflected the key national policies and strategies. An important axis of the PE programme
was related to its support to the reform of the justice system for all children in contact with the law. For example,
the programme supported the development, implementation and monitoring of the National Plan of Action on
Justice for Children System Reform 2017-2021. For this purpose, the PE programme included advocacy for legal
revision and institutionalisation of J4C (Justice for Children) in pre-service and on-the-job training for law
enforcement and justice professionals. The UNICEF CO has supported the Government in the elaboration,
adoption and implementation of the state programme “On prevention of Offences by juveniles for 2020-2024”.
The programme included both advocacy and capacity development of MoIA and other key stakeholders.
Moreover, UNICEF CO has advocated for and contributed to the elaboration and adoption of the State
Programme “On Social reintegration and social rehabilitation of children released from closed and semi-closed
institutions for 2020-2024”.
Through its advocacy efforts UNICEF successfully generated policy and system level changes that improved local
and national policies and supported a better protective environment for children. These changes include the
signing of the Convention of the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (CRPD) by the Government of Tajikistan in
22
2018 (pending ratification), and the different amendments done to the law in the context of the J4C component.
For example, in 2018, UNICEF advocacy with the Ministry of Justice has led to the Government’s decision to
revise two important provisions in the Criminal Procedure Code (CPC), that is, the obligation to start interrogating
children within 12 hours following their arrest (instead of 24 hours previously); and the reduction of the duration
of police custody upon arrest from 72 hours to 48 hours. In 2020, to improve connection between evidence and
policy-making, a first-ever independent monitoring of the boys’ detention centre (colony), ‘special schools’ and
special vocational schools was led by the Ministry of Justice (MoJ), which was a step towards a comprehensive
need assessment of the institutions56. In 2021, the Government amended the Code of Administrative Offences
to introduce administrative punishment for parents and/or caregivers for using or threatening to use violence
against children in the process of upbringing and has toughen up the punishment57.
Another important system-level change was the transformation of the first baby homes into Family and Child
Support Centres (FCSC) in 2019. As from UNICEF’s Country Office Annual Report 2019, the transformation of
Baby Homes into FCSCs increased the chances of new-borns and young children to stay with their families and,
thereby, reduced the number of children in institutions. Annex 12 presents a comprehensive selection of system
and policy-level changes for which the PE programme contributed through the evaluation period.
Summary – EQ5: This evaluation question received the maximum score by the evaluation team (5.0 – ‘very
good’). Through its advocacy efforts, the PE programme successfully generated significant policy and system level
changes that helped to improve local and national policies and support a better protective environment for
children. UNICEF’s evidence-driven advocacy of policy revision resulted in concrete contributions to national and
institutional policies based on a strong partnership with the Government of Tajikistan.
EQ6: To what extent did other child-protection activities by UNICEF and partners, especially social policy and
social protection, reinforce the Protection Environment programme?
Internal coherence is high with evidence of synergies and interlinkages between the PE programme and other
interventions carried out by UNICEF and partners, as further described below. There are a range of examples
from the documentary evidence about how other child-protection activities have reinforced the PE programme,
especially social policy and social protection. Through the PE programme, UNICEF jointly with MOHSP conducted
a vulnerability assessment in the country with the aim to: a) analyse current processes of identification and
registration of vulnerable groups; b) list those who are registered as recipients of protective measures and those
who are outside of the social protection (SP) system; c) examine current processes of data collection, usage,
storage and data flow in SP sector, with specific focus on children58.
The programme demonstrated a high degree of collaboration with other actors and their interventions, including
adding value by using its convening and coordination role to leverage resources and synergies. During 2021, for
example, the CO engaged in dialogue with key players such as the European Union, Government of Japan, USAID,
GAVI and UNAIDS, which resulted in raising USD 5.4 million for the PE programme as well as Early Years and
Emergency programmes. The PE programme supported the GoT to develop comprehensive social protection
mechanisms, and a system59 for Social Work Workforce Development to better meet the needs of the vulnerable
children, including children affected by migration, in contact and/or in conflict with the law, children affected by
emergencies, repatriated and children with disabilities. The programme also supported the Ministry of Education
and Science to have an initial draft of the Law on Guardianship, with inclusion of Foster Care60.
In line with the conclusions of the Country Programme Evaluation, the PE programme has been able to work in
an integrated and cross-sectoral way. This helped to increase the overall contribution to progress particularly
within the social protection and social work, as well as VAC components, which operated across the inclusive
education, mental health/psychosocial support, communication and child protection sectors. For example, the
PE programme had supported in 2021 over 1,270 children left behind by migrant parents to access social welfare
services in 26 districts, and over 1,250 vulnerable children obtained birth certificates. This contributed to improve
these children’s access to essential services including healthcare, legal aid, reintegration, education and social
care services. In 2021, complaint mechanisms were established in 51 schools and communities that covered
17,634 (including 8,851 girls) young people. UNICEF also carried out a Communications for Development (C4D)
campaign to promote the rights of children and women with disabilities, reaching 2.5 million people61.
56 UNICEF’s End of Year Results Summary Narrative 2020
57 UNICEF’s End of Year Results Summary Narrative 2021.
58 UNICEF Tajikistan’s End of Year RAM Outcome and Output Statements, 2021.
59 According to UNICEF‘s feedback, the system has been developed and the initial steps were taken, but there is still work to be done to
consolidate the result.
60 Idem. According to UNICEF feedback during the draft report, "This is a purely CP [country programme], not relevant to this EQ which
focuses on other CP-related activities especial on social policy and Social protection (it is more relevant to EQ5)".
61 Idem.
23
Jointly with the Commissioner on Children’s Rights, Ministry of Labour and Migration and the European Network
of Ombudspersons for Children, UNICEF conducted a Child Rights Impact Assessment (CRIA) of COVID-19 related
measures and children’s right to protection, with a specific focus on children affected by migration and left
behind. Based on the experiences of the PE programme, UNICEF played an important role in several joint UN
programmes on SDG financing, migration, peacebuilding and ending violence against women and children.
Summary – EQ6: From the beginning, the programme activities presented in the ToC prioritised collaboration
with the government to identify gaps in the social protection and justice systems that could expose children to
violence or discrimination, considering CWD (e.g., Children Rights Units and CRC observations). Other child-
protection activities by UNICEF and partners, especially social policy and social protection (e.g., support to
schools and childcare centres, support to families to be enrolled in vocational training as a means of income
generation, access to birth certificates and legal documentation), reinforced the Protection Environment
programme. This can be seen in the answers to both KIIs and FGDs, but also in the phone survey and documentary
evidence. There are important linkages within the PE programme between social policy/protection with child
protection interventions as evidenced above. While social policy and social protection is marked by a broader
portfolio, there is evidence of a shared understanding in the CO that they are not part of the child-protection
framework. Despite that, the programme’s cross-sectoral and integrated approach offers concrete examples of
the benefits of cross-sectoral work in this sense.
EQ7: How well did the programme use a cross-sectoral and integrated approach while using vulnerability
criteria developed by UNICEF Tajikistan?
As presented in the EQ6, the programme’s cross-sectoral and integrated approach offers concrete examples of
the benefits of cross-sectoral work. Such work helped to ensure that vulnerable and marginalised groups had
better access to services that respond to their needs. These include, for example, the pilot hCTP module during
the COVID-19 emergency, inclusive education for CWDs, work with schools to prevent SGBV (sexual and gender-
based violence) against girls and violence against children, capacity building on VAC for teachers, and
psychosocial support for adolescents through the school system.
In line with the Country Programme Evaluation (2020), there is strong evidence that design and implementation
of the PE programme has been informed by analysis of the needs of vulnerable boys, girls and youth, including
the geographical distribution of vulnerabilities. The programme ToC considered the generation of knowledge as
one of the key programme strategies to support system and policy-level changes for an improved child protection
environment following an evidence-driven, and pilot-based approach. Through this dense body of evidence,
UNICEF has contributed to the understanding of the context of its ultimate beneficiaries, and their vulnerabilities,
including the most vulnerable such as children in contact and conflict with law, children at risk of
institutionalisation, children from war-affected zones as well as children and women with disabilities.
As discussed in the EQ3, the PE programme applied a cross-sectoral and integrated approach in practice.
However, these issues were not explicitly stated in its intervention logic and ToC. The programme supported the
generation of information about vulnerabilities (e.g., vulnerability assessment jointly conducted with the
MOHSP). According to staff from the programme, an office-wide vulnerability index including PE related
indincators was recently developed using existing administrative data, and is planned to be used from 2022
(“Methodology Note: CHILD Vulnerability Index”). The note describes a child-vulnerability index, which attempts
to answer the recommendations from the CPE 2020, and uses a composite approach without weights with
indicators at district level, while violence against children and nutrition indicators are at a provincial level.
Although a good start, lack of reliable disaggregated PE-related administrative data is one of the main limitations.
The use of such an objective vulnerability criteria at household level for beneficiary selection, such as specific
vulnerability thresholds following some indexes such as the poverty probability index, coping strategy index or
life-satisfaction index, can be useful for objectively targeting the most vulnerable households. However, it can
be also highly data intensive, and its feasibility needs to consider and build local capacities and tools, particularly
around data protection, real-time management and visualisation.
Despite that, there is strong evidence that sufficient vulnerability assessments were in place before and during
the programme implementation. Some examples are the Rapid assessment of the system’s response to
adolescents’ mental health, including prevention of suicidal behaviour (2016); Mapping the vulnerable and
excluded groups of adolescents and youth in Tajikistan (2017); Adolescence baseline study (2018), Situational
analysis, Baseline study on Children, Teachers and Parents’ Ability to Recognise and Respond to Situations of
Discrimination or Exclusion in Five Target Districts of Sughd Region of Tajikistan (2019). In addition, the baseline
(2018) and endline (2021) studies on knowledge, attitudes, behaviours and practices related to children and
women with disabilities in Tajikistan provided valuable information for programming.
Summary – EQ7: The programme’s cross-sectoral and integrated approach offers concrete examples of the
benefits of cross-sectoral work, which were critically important to help to ensure that vulnerable and
24
marginalised groups had better access to services that respond to their needs. While the PE programme took
sufficiently into account vulnerability assessments in its design and implementation, the use of objective
vulnerability criteria is not fully in place due to data-access issues. Vulnerability criteria in the form of indexes
can be useful for objectively targeting the most vulnerable, and for ensuring an evidence-driven implementation.
However, the approach is also highly data intensive, and its feasibility needs to consider and build local capacities
and tools, particularly around data protection, real-time management and visualisation.
EQ8: To what extent has the programme coordinated with development partners and other UN agencies to
avoid overlaps, leverage contributions, and catalyse joint work?
The results suggest that the PE programme had sufficient complementarity, harmonisation and coordination
with development partners and other UN agencies, adding value while avoiding duplication. A list of examples is
shown in the box below.
• Under the UNICEF-UNHCR Coalition on Every Child’s Right to a Nationality, in 2021 over 1,250 children at risk of
statelessness and affected by migration from 26 districts and cities received birth certificates.
• In coordination with the World Bank, the PE programme and the UNICEF CO supported inclusion of low-income
families with children under 7 years of age into the emergency COVID-19 hCTP cash transfer programme.
• During 2019, the programme negotiated the joint implementation with FAO, IOM and UN Women of the Migration
Multi-Partner Trust Fund to empower families left behind, particularly women and children.
• The programme also helped to develop the National referral mechanism for women and girls’ survivors of SGBV in
partnership and coordination with UNDP, UN Women and UNFPA. The trainings planned for the operationalisation
of the referral pathways had to be delayed due to COVID-19 constraints and limited access to online services among
service providers. However, the programme helped to provide mental health support to girls’ survivors of SGBV via
an established hub of mental health counsellors who were connected to a national hotline supported by UNDP.
• Another example of a well-succeeded effort to leverage contributions and catalyse joint work was the partnership
with UNDP's Rule of Law project, which facilitated free legal aid provision of duly capacitated defence lawyers to
children.
• In addition, UNICEF with UNHCR, EU, OSCE and other partners initiated a capacity building programme with State
Border Troops on child protection as part of emergency preparedness and response to the Afghan situation. This
programme aims to sensitise border troops on issues with unaccompanied and separated children so that the best
interests of the child are taken into consideration during the process of receiving refugees62.
• In coordination with the Commissioner on Children’s Rights, Ministry of Labour and Migration and the European
Network of Ombudspersons for Children, the programme supported the conduction of a Child Rights Impact
Assessment (CRIA) of COVID-19 related measures and children’s right to protection, with a specific focus on children
affected by migration and left behind. The report highlighted areas for improvement such as regarding the amounts
of cash transfers, and limitations of support to children that were formally registered in the social protection system,
with around 59% of families affected by migration not receiving any assistance63.
• The programme had a range of partnerships with other development partners such as civil society organisations
throughout its implementation. One example was the partnership with the UK-based NGO HeathProm, local NGOs
Hayot dar Oila and NGO Sarchashma to transform Baby Homes into the Family and Child Support Centres and to
promote the right of each child to grow in a safe and protective family environment.
• The programme worked with the network of Coalition of Associations of Parents of Children with Disabilities to roll
its community mobilisation campaign for social inclusion of children and women with disabilities.
• The programme also worked with the International Committee for the Red Cross and the local NGO Refugees,
Children and Vulnerable Citizens (RCVC) to reintegrate 57 repatriated children from conflict zones.
• In partnership with the NGOs Chashma, Rights and Prosperity, Terre des Hommes, which were contracted within the
“Protecting Children Affected by Migration” project, the programme ensured that 1,250 beneficiary children were
protected and had access to essential services.
• Another example was the partnership with a national NGO to initiate “strategic litigation” of cases related to VAC
and SGBV against girls. This involved monitoring cases both at the stage of preliminary investigation and in the court,
with the aim of identifying gaps in legislation and practice that fall short of the international standards.
The evidence obtained through key-informant interviews and the online survey highlighted that the work has
been well coordinated with organisations, UN agencies and other stakeholders particularly at regional and
national level. Most participants emphasised that the programme was successful in avoiding duplication based
on different mandates and coordination framework applicable to UN agencies (e.g., UNDAF). The results suggest
a very good relationship with the government at both national and local levels. However, most answers did not
highlight synergies between development partners nor coordination fora at sub-national level (e.g., protection
cluster meetings, thematic working groups, NGO coordination meetings). In contrast, at national level, UNICEF is
the Chair of the Donor Coordination Council for Social Protection and calls quarterly meetings with the donor
62 UNICEF’s End of Year Results Summary Narrative, 2021.
63 UNICEF (n.d.) Impact assessment of the COVID-19 pandemic-related measures to children’s right to protection.
25
community, development and government partners and CSOs. According to the programme staff, UNICEF has
also taken part in the meetings of the development coordination council, foras about emergencies and child
protection, and other events that have helped UNICEF to coordinate with relevant partners and stakeholders,
also at sub-national level.
According to most of the online survey participants, the coordination was good and there was no mention of
duplication of activities. The participants also believed that the coordination between the government, NGOs
and other UN agencies was high. Local authority and NGO representatives mentioned that the cooperation
between the programme and the government was good and supported public policies. Staff from UNICEF
mentioned that they worked closely with the government so that the programme’s components could serve as
a model and be upscaled to all the country, and that changes in the legislation were sought (for additional
information, please see the answer to the EQ5 and Annex 12, System and policy level changes through the
programme’s evaluation period).
The Country Programme Evaluation (2020) mentioned “the need for strengthened coordination and
harmonisation of service provision horizontally and vertically and particularly at provincial levels”. Although
there are systemic challenges (e.g., structural fragmentation and lack of consistency when it comes to the
implementation of social policies, current division of labour and the lack of clarity around roles and
responsibilities among ministries, departments and agencies), the evidence suggest that UNICEF with its
leadership and provision of technical expertise accumulated over years can add value by increasing its support
to complementarity and harmonisation of the interventions of other actors at local level.
Summary – EQ8: The coordination with development partners and other UN agencies was very good (evaluation
score: 5), and that the necessary mechanisms to avoid overlap, leverage contributions, and catalyse joint work
are in place. There is strong evidence that the programme was successful in coordinating the work among the
various stakeholders and the UNICEF CO leveraged capacities and resources to create synergies at all levels.
UNICEF with its leadership and provision of technical expertise accumulated over years can add value by
increasing its support to complementarity and harmonisation of the interventions of other actors at local level.
EQ9: How closely is the programme aligned with the Sustainable Development Goals (external coherence)?
The evaluation team could not find explicit reference to the SDGs in the PE programme design and reporting
documents. However, the country office annual report 2018 states that the 2016-2020 Country Programme for
UNICEF Tajikistan aligned with the UNICEF Strategic Plan and Gender Action Plan planned to contribute to eight
out of 17 Sustainable Development Goals (Goals 1 to 6, 9, 10, 13, 16, 17). Despite that, in 2021, UNICEF Tajikistan
was the lead agency of the joint programme “Financing SDGs in Tajikistan”, implemented together with UNDP
and UN Women, to support GoT in advancing SDGs and national development priorities through addressing
technical constraints in securing SDG financing. Focused on improving capacities of its staff on SDG financing, key
staff from the UNICEF CO completed a public finance for children training in 2021, for example. Documentary
evidence shows that other learning sessions on the budgetary and financial system of Tajikistan took place by
lead national and international experts, followed by discussions on how to enhance/utilise the knowledge within
the ongoing and future UNICEF programmes.
The Mid-term Development Programme (MTDP) 2021-2025 developed with support of UNDP, UNICEF and other
partners was approved in 2021. MTDP result matrix includes 22 child-related SDG indicators and lays the
foundation for the national SDG monitoring system. Although not part of the PE programme, UNICEF provided
continuous support to Tajstat to improve data on vulnerable children at local level as part of the CO programme
on data and evidence for children. Tajstat organised study visits to districts and reviewed data collection
processes and reporting forms on children without parental care, orphans and children with disabilities. Based
on this, Tajstat made recommendations on how to improve official statistical reporting on the most vulnerable
children. UNICEF expects that the implementation of these recommendations (postponed to 2022 due to
Tajstat’s staff turnover) will address the data challenges revealed during the inter-ministerial technical
consultations and collection of child protection data.
The document review indicates that the PE programme directly contributed to the SDGs 1 (End poverty in all its
forms everywhere), 5 (Achieve gender equality and empower all women and girls), and 16 (Promote peaceful
and inclusive societies for sustainable development, provide access to justice for all and build effective,
accountable and inclusive institutions at all levels). Out or 22 child-related SDG indicators that were integrated
into the Mid-term Development Programme (MTDP) 2021-2025 developed with support of UNDP, UNICEF and
other partners, five related to PE programme (child marriage, poverty and social protection, violence). Activities
related to child and social protection systems contributed to targets 1.364 by generating change in the social
64 1.3: Implement nationally appropriate social protection systems and measures for all, including floors, and by 2030 achieve substantial
coverage of the poor and the vulnerable. Source: https://unstats.un.org/sdgs/indicators.
26
protection systems and policy. The programme’s work with girls (including the work with CWD and J4C)
contributed to targets 5.165 and 5.2, and the programme’s work with children affected by migration contributed
to targets 16.166, 16.267, 16.368 and 16.969.
Specification of target SDGs in the programme documents (e.g., ToC, work plans and reports) can help to clarify
the planned contribution of the PE programme to the SDGs, and ease assessments about its performance in this
sense. In addition, reports could highlight indirect contributions to other SDGs and other Country Programme
components, which can also help to promote cross-sectoral work towards the SDGs.
Summary – EQ9: The PE programme had a good alignment (evaluation score: 4.0) with the SDGs 1, 5, and 16,
with important synergies with other programmatic areas of the CO (e.g., education sector as well as with the
programme on data and evidence for children). Programme activities and interventions related to child and social
protection systems contributed to targets 1.3 by generating change in the social protection systems and policy.
The programme’s work with girls (including the work with CWD and J4C) contributed to targets 5.1 and 5.2, and
the programme’s work with children affected by migration contributed to targets 16.1, 16.2, 16.3 and 16.9.
Specification of target SDGs in the programme documents (e.g., ToC, work plans and reports) can help to clarify
the planned contribution of the PE programme to the SDGs, and ease assessments about its performance in this
sense.
3.3 Effectiveness
Key findings
3.i: Despite the challenge of the COVID-19, the programme demonstrated a good achievement of its objectives
and results. From its 14 indicators, nine have been met or exceeded, while the rest were considered as partially
achieved. For two of the achieved indicators, the programme delivered two to three times higher figures than
the initial targets (indicator 1.1 with 271% of the target and indicator 3.1 with 251%). From the five indicators
which had not met targets, two demonstrated progress of at least 70% of their targets.
3.ii: There is strong evidence that the PE programme successfully adapted to major factors influencing the
implementation during the evaluation period. UNICEF recognised and reacted to the new context posed by the
COVID-19 pandemic, showing very good capacity of the PE programme to adapt the context while leveraging
resources for the achievement of its objectives and results. UNICEF’s liaison with the government offered
examples of best practices, which led to a strong partnership from 2019 onwards.
3.iii: Since 2019, the RAM reports have started to include a specific section on ‘Evaluations’, which was a very
good decision and gives emphasis to UNICEF’s evidence-driven approach. Documentary evidence indicates that
UNICEF has implemented recommendations from earlier evaluations. By the end of 2021, the implementation
of 8 from the 16 actions from the 2020 CPE recommendations had been completed. However, in the online
survey with institutional stakeholders, the implementation of the recommendations of earlier evaluations was
among the aspects that received the lowest scores (3.4 - regular). The overall results suggest that this is an area
for improvement.
The overall findings indicate that the PE programme had ‘good’ (4.0, grade B) effectiveness as summarised by
the table below.
Table 6: Score for the criterion ‘effectiveness’ by the evaluation team.
KEY QUESTIONS – EFFECTIVENESS PERFORMANCE WEIGHT
A = 5 B = 4 C = 3 D = 2 E = 1
EQ10: To what extent have the objectives and results of the
4.0 30%
programme been achieved?
65 5.1: End all forms of discrimination against all women and girls everywhere. Source: https://unstats.un.org/sdgs/indicators.
66 Significantly reduce all forms of violence and related death rates everywhere. Source: https://unstats.un.org/sdgs/indicators.
67 16.1: End abuse, exploitation, trafficking and all forms of violence against and torture of children. Source:
https://unstats.un.org/sdgs/indicators.
68 16.2: Promote the rule of law at the national and international levels and ensure equal access to justice for all. Source:
https://unstats.un.org/sdgs/indicators.
69 16.3: By 2030, provide legal identity for all, including birth registration. Source: https://unstats.un.org/sdgs/indicators.
27
EQ11: How well was the programme implementation adapted
to the major factors (internal and external) influencing the
5.0 40%
achievement or non-achievement of the objectives and
results?
EQ12: To what extent have the recommendations of earlier
4.0 30%
evaluations been implemented into the programme?
Note: A = very good; B = good; C = fair; D = poor; E = very
Result: 4.4 B
poor.
EQ10: To what extent have the objectives and results of the programme been achieved?
Triangulated with evidence from primary data collection, we used mainly the available documentary evidence
(e.g., ToC, RAM and COAR reports) to assess the extent that the programme achieved its objectives and results.
Annex 8 presents a result matrix of progress against indicators for each one of the 14 indicators of the PE
programme. The table presents data from UNICEF Tajikistan’s End-of-Year RAM Outcome and Output Statements
up to the end of 2021, which was generated on 30 March 2022.
Despite the challenge of the COVID-19, the programme demonstrated a good achievement of its objectives and
results. The programme had progress indicators for both its outcome and output components which were related
to the operational and intermediate changes listed in the ToC. From its 14 output indicators, nine have been met
or exceeded, while the rest were considered as partially achieved70. For two of the achieved indicators, the
programme delivered two to three times higher figures than the initial targets (indicator 1.171 with 271% of the
target and indicator 3.172 with 251%). From the five indicators which had not met targets, three demonstrated
progress of at least 70% of their targets. The other three indicators that achieved less than half of their target
value were: 1.5) number of children benefiting from government cash transfer programmes [49% of the target];
2.1) number of unaccompanied and separated children who have benefitted from a formal UNICEF-supported
process [36% of the target]; and 3.3) number of justice professionals and law enforcement officials trained on
J4C [30% of the target]. From the 9 outcome indicators, four were considered as achieved and 5 as partially
achieved.
We identified partially achieved targets in all three programme output components. The programme component
which had the highest number of indicators with achieved targets was social protection and social work (four
from six targets achieved), while the alternative care and J4C components achieved three from five and one of
three targets respectively.
The programme’s targets and indicators stuck close with the proposed ToC, whose activities aimed to generate
intermediate changes related to revision of legislation, budgetary allocation, improving M&E capacity, piloting
the hCTP model and capacity building (For ToC see Annex 6). The achievement and partial achievement of the
targets shows that progress has been made towards the three outputs and ultimate outcome, even if not in the
targeted magnitude.
Outside of the indicators identified in the RAM reports, the programme had sufficiently detailed two-year work
plans, which can be highlighted as a good practice. These were important for presenting output targets that are
objectively verifiable. The work plan for 2021-2022 included activities, sub-activities, geographical coverage by
sub-activity, implementing partner, timeline by quarter as well as budget information such as amount funded
and funds to be mobilised. However, the work plan did not include information on outputs for all sub-activities
(e.g., number of repatriated children from war-affected zones for; or number of children affected by migration
supported to access essential services, including birth registration), which is an area for future improvement. In
addition, the available documentary evidence indicates the need to continue efforts around improvement of the
evidence base around protection issues (including on social norms and behaviour change), in support of the CO’s
actions on data and evidence for children together with Taj stat.
There is enough evidence that the PE programme has been making progress towards its objectives, considering
the results and progress as from the narrative annual reports, as well as evidence from primary data collection.
For example, in the online survey and phone interviews, most of the participants (67%, 15 participants) rated
positively the extent to which the programme objectives had been achieved (see Annex 10 for details). It is clear
70 We identified five indicators which the RAM report for 2021 indicated as fully achieved (indicators 1.5, 2.1, 2.4, 2.5, and 3.2), whereas
their latest data indicated below-target performance. It is unclear if this is a mistake in the system from UNICEF. Additional information is
available in Annex 8 in the footnotes for these indicators.
71 Number of households benefiting from new or additional social assistance measures provided by governments to respond to COVID-19
with UNICEF support [COVIDSitRep].
72 Number of women, girls and boys accessing GBV risk mitigation, prevention or response interventions.
28
from the responses to the KIIs/FGDs with beneficiaries that the support received was helpful to their lives. When
asked about how helpful the support was and how it met their expectations, participants mentioned that the
programme helped children and families to know more about their rights (e.g., what to do in case of domestic
violence), supported children facing law problems, home visits by social workers including assistance to children
with disabilities, schools materials/books, school transportation, food, clothes, and livelihood skills such as
sewing. Since livelihood support was not among the activities of the PE programme, this result also suggests that
there has been integration of other interventions supported by UNICEF with the PE programme.
Summary – EQ10: Considering the challenge of the COVID-19, the programme demonstrated a good
achievement of its objectives and results. The indicators with the most need for improvement were: 3.3) number
of justice professionals and law enforcement officials trained on J4C [30% of the target]; 2.1) number of
unaccompanied and separated children who have benefitted from a formal UNICEF-supported process [36% of
the target]; and 1.5) number of children benefiting from government cash transfer programmes [49% of the
target].
EQ11: How well was the programme implementation adapted to the major factors (internal and external),
influencing the achievement or non-achievement of the objectives and results?
There is strong evidence that the PE programme successfully adapted to major factors influencing the
implementation during the evaluation period.
A major factor influencing the PE programme was the COVID-19 pandemic, which led to limitations regarding
travel, face-to-face meetings, and the general implementation of the programme. This factor was addressed by
the 2020 Narrative Annual Report, where the CO recognises that the pandemic increased significatively the
number of children at risk of exclusion and the struggle of the social protection system to address the negative
impacts to vulnerable families. During this time, UNICEF adapted its plans to support children and its families to
cope with the impact of the pandemic.
For example, the programme overachieved its indicator 1.1 by 277% of the initial “number of households
benefiting from new or additional social assistance measures provided by governments to respond to COVID-19
with UNICEF support” (124,164 against a target of 44,772 households). This was possible through a partnership
with World Bank for the inclusion of low-income families with children under 7 years into the emergency COVID-
19 hCTP, which demonstrates the very good capacity of the programme to adapt the context while leveraging
resources for the achievement of its objectives and results.
The Tajikistan CO included in its annual reports descriptions about major external factors affecting the PE
programme implementation. Most of such factors were reported between 2016 and 2018. In 2016, the CO
reported that institutional changes and significant staff turnover in the government caused delays and
uncertainty regarding alternative family care. In response, UNICEF recognised the need for advocating for the
training of new officials. During 2018, three significant delays concerning the government were reported. These
include delays in the: 1) operationalisation of the new regulation on Family and Child Support Centres (planned
to replace baby homes), 2) submission of the new Social Protection strategy, and 3) revision of the Criminal Code
and Criminal Procedure Code. As discussed in other sections, UNICEF was successful in achieving major reforms
to these working areas, despite the mentioned delays. The CO’s reacted by increasing liaison efforts, which
allowed the programme to pave the way for substantial improvements in the partnership with ministries,
departments and agencies. To overcome political unwillingness, UNICEF sponsored study visits to Scotland to
make government official acquaintance with international examples of best practices and models of foster care,
supported inter-ministerial consultations and advocated with the Ministry of Justice to revise two provisions in
the penal code.
Further evidence of the programme’s adaptation to internal or external factors comes from the online surveys
and KIIs/FGDs, where most participants had a good opinion towards this aspect. In the online survey, most of the
surveyed participants had a positive opinion about this EQ (see graph below).
29
Figure 4: Opinions about the capacity of the programme to adapt to major factors (online survey).
Figure 5: Text network plot of major factors influencing the achievement of objectives and results (KIIs and FGDs).
This was complemented by results from the KIIs, where words such as ‘support’, ‘government’, ‘results’, ‘good’
and ‘achieve’ were the most mentioned by the participants, as shown in the text-network plot above. The
connections between the words support the findings from the documentary evidence. Government support was
a major positive factor mentioned in the KIIs, related to factors influencing the achievement and non-
achievement of objectives.
After 2018, there are examples of concrete new partnerships with government institutions (e.g., work with
migrants in synergy with the Ministry of Labour, Migration and Employment, as well as support from local
individuals and private sector to support Family and Child Support centres in Khujand), which is consistent with
the answers from both UNICEF and government respondents. These results indicate that the scenario improved
considerably compared with programme reports before 2019, with very positive references to the involvement
and collaboration with government institutions. Lessons learnt identified in the responses refer to the
importance of perseverance in the face of initial resistance by some government representatives who at first saw
external support as unnecessary. The participants highlighted regular communication and networking with
government agencies as lessons learnt.
Summary – EQ11: There is strong evidence that the PE programme successfully adapted to major factors
influencing the implementation during the evaluation period. There were delays caused by difficulties in
cooperating with government institutions at the beginning of the programme implementation (2016-2018).
However, UNICEF’s reactions were timely, very effective and an example of best practice; with an improvement
of the relationship with the government from 2019 onwards. UNICEF recognised and reacted to the new context
posed by the COVID-19 pandemic, showing very good capacity of the PE programme to adapt the context while
leveraging resources for the achievement of its objectives and results.
EQ12: To what extent have the recommendations of earlier evaluations been implemented in the programme?
In the online survey, the implementation of the recommendations of earlier evaluations was among the aspects
that received the lowest scores (3.4 – regular), as shown in the graph below (see Annex 10 for details).
30
Figure 6: The level of implementing earlier evaluations into the programme.
Two examples of evaluations at country-programme (CP) level during the period to which we had access to were
the “Evaluation of UNICEF Capacity Development Interventions in Tajikistan (2016-2018)” and the “Country
Programme Evaluation 2020”. Both evaluations provided UNICEF with forward looking recommendations that
supported future programming improvements. Since both previous evaluations were performed at CP level, they
included recommendations holistically to the CO. Although the evaluations did not include specific
recommendations for the PE programme, changes in CP strategies and approaches included the PE programme.
The 2018 Evaluation of UNICEF’s Capacity Development Interventions in Tajikistan included recommendations.
Some aspects from these recommendations were general, and could affect the PE programme. Examples of
recommendations from this report were to: 1) consider national priorities and scale up/exit strategies in the
capacity-development interventions, 2) develop monitoring and evaluation mechanisms / develop robust M&E
systems, 3) design interventions based on vulnerability analysis, 4) continue to advocate and engage in policy
dialogue, and 5) to engage representatives of the legislative.
The 2021 Country Programme evaluation’s recommendations mainly included to: 1) take into consideration the
achievements and experience gained to develop further programme strategies, 2) use suggested vulnerability
criteria to prioritise national needs, 3) use the most recent data to respond to the COVID-19 crisis, 4) ensure
effectiveness of coordination mechanisms, 5) include in the monitoring systems the complexity of different types
of indicators, 6) revise CO monitoring and research strategies, and 7) use the ToC to track progress on a regular
basis. Recommendations specifically related inequalities and gender included: 8) to develop a systematic
approach that ensures that inequalities (including gender inequalities) are systematically addressed, 9) to follow
up on gender issues identified in situation analyses, and 10) to assess the effectiveness of interventions that
address inequalities.
During the document review, we found evidence in the COAR and RAM reports that the CO recognised and
analysed both evaluation reports through the “Evaluation Management Response Documents”. This type of
document includes overall and specific responses to the evaluation recommendations, as well as their planned
use in future programme activities. The specific responses are detailed and include the evaluation
recommendations, mention if the people responsible agree or disagree with it, provide the rationale for
agreement or disagreement according to the country’s context, specify activities performed to address the
recommendation and their progress, designates specific responsible CO sections/people and describes reasons
for delays in the responses if any.
Since 2019, the RAM reports have started to include a specific section on ‘Evaluations’, which was a very good
decision and gives emphasis to UNICEF’s evidence-driven approach. The 2021 RAM reported that the
management responses for the 2021 CPE were ongoing, with 8 from 16 actions completed, which is impressive,
considering that the CPE was finished in mid-December 2020. Despite these references in the annual reports and
the evaluation management response documents, it is not fully clear how the CPE recommendations have
impacted the PE programme as they address the whole CP.
The document review results indicate that the CO analises the applicability of each recommendation and
responds to each one with concrete actions. However, the previous evaluations were implemented at a CP level
and none of the recommendations were directly addressed to the PE programme, which is a CP component. This
means that the effect of previous CPE recommendations will be indirectly reflected in the PE programme and is
difficult to assess. Another factor that complicates the assessment of previously implemented recommendations
is the timeframe between the past and present evaluations (CPE completed in 2021 and this one, ongoing in
2022), which would probably not be enough to implement all recommendations. These factors might be the
31
reason why respondents gave regular and poor ratings in the online survey. For future CP 2023-2026 evaluations,
it is recommended to evaluate the extent in which the recommendations of this report are applied in the new
CP’s components.
Summary – EQ12: Since 2019, the RAM reports have started to include a specific section on ‘Evaluations’, which
was a very good decision and gives emphasis to UNICEF’s evidence-driven approach. Documentary evidence
indicates that UNICEF has analysed and implemented recommendations from earlier evaluations. By the end of
2021, the implementation of 8 from the 16 actions from the 2020 CPE recommendations had been completed.
However, it is not fully clear which of the CPE recommendations have had an effect in the PE programme.
3.4 Efficiency
Key findings
4.i: The PE programme had a very good management quality and efficiency, considering the challenges of the
COVID-19 pandemic. By April 2022, the PE programme had utilised 88% of the USD 6.4 million planned since
2016. The programme budget utilisation was concentrated in its output 1 (Social protection and social work
[48%]); followed by its output 2 (Alternative care [25%]); and output 3 (Justice for children and preventing VAC
[27%]). Building stakeholder interest groups to define representatives to participate in yearly planning and
review workshops, particularly involving beneficiary and government representatives, can help to improve the
opinions about transparency and accountability, while supporting increased local ownership.
4.ii: UNICEF’s evidence-driven advocacy of policy revision resulted in concrete contributions to national and
institutional policies. The use of Activity Info (data aggregator) as well as PowerBI (data visualization) by the
programme since 2019 is an example of best practice. To allow for a more efficient and effective use of data, the
system could be enhanced with the use of cloud computing (reproducible processing of raw data in an automated
way) and modern data science tools, particularly for the integration of qualitative data, and up-to-date
functionalities (e.g., predictive analytics, natural language processing and machine learning/artificial intelligence
applications).
4.iii: The programme has a highly functional, sufficient, and goal-oriented management system, grounded on
UNICEF’s procedures. Improvements can include the use of a more granular, specific commercial digital/cloud
project-management information system to coordinate the PE programme intervention tasks internally and with
external implementation partners, and improved tracking and visibility of results in terms of short-term outputs
beyond intermediate changes and long-term changes highlighted in the ToC and RAM reports.
Following the OECD/DAC criteria for the evaluation of development assistance, the criterion efficiency assesses
the extent to which an intervention delivered, or is likely to deliver, results in an economic and timely way73. The
evaluation did not include a cost analysis (how costs compare to similar interventions or standards). This was not
feasible considering the focus of the terms of reference, provided inputs/data, available time and resources. In
addition to the documentary evidence (e.g., two-year work plan, financial statements and results of past
evaluations), the questionnaires included questions around efficiency which helped to assess this criterion, also
considering the perspective of the participants. Considering both primary and secondary evidence, the PE
programme had a ‘good’ (4.4 – grade B) performance in terms of efficiency in our view, as detailed in the table
and answers to the evaluation questions below.
Table 7: Score for the criterion ‘efficiency’ by the evaluation team.
KEY QUESTIONS – EFFICIENCY PERFORMANCE WEIGHT
A = 5 B = 4 C = 3 D = 2 E = 1
EQ13: How adequate was the management quality and
efficiency (including work planning, procurement, financial
5.0 40%
resource management, budget allocation, and timely
outputs)?
73 “Economic” is the conversion of inputs (funds, expertise, natural resources, time, etc.) into outputs, outcomes and impacts, in the most
cost-effective way possible, as compared to feasible alternatives in the context. “Timely” delivery is within the intended timeframe, or a
timeframe reasonably adjusted to the demands of the evolving context. This may include assessing operational efficiency (how well the
intervention was managed) Source: https://movimentar.co/oecd-eval-criteria.
32
EQ14: To what extent is the programme output data
4.0 30%
efficiently used for national/regional advocacy?
EQ15: How functional, sufficient, and goal-oriented is the
programme-management system (including technical
4.0 30%
expertise as well as monitoring, planning, and reporting
systems)?
Note: A = very good; B = good; C = fair; D = poor; E = very
Result: 4.4 B
poor.
EQ13: How adequate was the management quality and efficiency (including work planning, procurement,
financial resource management, budget allocation, and timely outputs)?
The results suggest that the PE programme was adequate in terms of management quality and efficiency
(including work planning, procurement, financial resource management, budget allocation, and timely outputs),
considering the challenges of the COVID-19 pandemic. The PE programme had a total planned budget of USD 7.7
million for the period between 2016 and 2022 (USD 6.4 million planned, 88% of which had been utilised),
according to data provided by the CO in April 2022. Considering the period from 2016 to 2022, the programme
budget utilisation was concentrated mainly in its output 1 (Social protection and social work [48%]); followed by
its output 2 (Alternative care [25%]); and output 3 (Justice for children and preventing VAC [27%]). The following
graph presents the utilised budget allocation for each one of the programme components. The component 1
(Social Protection & Social Work) was the largest one throughout the period, with the exception of 2018, when
the component 2 (Alternative Child Care) saw a higher allocation in support of the conversion of baby homes to
family and child-support centres. The largest budget allocation and utilisation was in 2019, when also the
component 3 (J4C and VAC) reached its peak, at higher values than the component 2. This budget allocation
remained similar between 2019 and 2022, following a reduction in budget allocation for alternative childcare
due to the successful transformation from baby homes to family and child-support centres as from 2019.
Figure 7: Utilised budget by PE programme component.
As presented in the answer to the EQ10, the programme had sufficiently detailed two-year work plans, but
apparently only since 2021. The work plan for 2021-2022 included activities, sub-activities, geographical
coverage by sub-activity, implementing partner, timeline by quarter as well as budget information such as
amount funded and funds to be mobilised. However, the work plan did not include information on outputs for
all sub-activities, which can be improved to ease results-oriented management.
In line with the documentary evidence, the results from the online survey and phone interviews show that both
programme staff and beneficiaries generally had positive opinions about the programme’s management and
efficiency. In the phone interviews, the beneficiaries were asked the following questions: “To what extent was
support provided in a timely manner?” and “How would you assess the level of transparency of UNICEF’s work?”.
The feedback from the beneficiaries as from the phone interviews was very positive in this sense (average scores
4.4 and 4.6 respectively).
Most of the online-survey participants also evaluated positively (average scores between 3.4 and 3.9) the
programme management quality and efficiency, output delivery timing, output quality as well as management
transparency and accountability. The main areas for improvement according to the participants of the online
survey were related to: a) the extent to which the outputs have been delivered on time, and b) the transparency
33
and accountability under which the programme resources have been managed. While the evaluation did not look
into procurement aspects, one of the participants in the key-informant interviews suggested additional scrutiny
among private contractors (e.g., travel agencies).
Figure 8: Assessment of the extent outputs were delivered on time (phone interviews).
Regarding the result about output timing, it is important to consider that, as described in the EQ11, between
2016 and 2018, the CO reported important delays were due to institutional changes with staff turnover in the
government, insufficient political will and commitment, as well as budgetary constraints from the government’s
side. These factors have had an impact on the timing of outputs, and can explain the low scores for that aspect.
More systematic use of the RBA (rights-based approach), namely building stakeholder interest groups to define
representatives to participate in yearly planning and review workshops, particularly involving beneficiary and
government representatives, can help to improve the programme performance in terms of opinions about the
transparency and accountability towards affected populations.
The results of KIIs indicate a well-planned resource allocation although there were different views about the
overall availability of financial resources. Some participants highlighted that the child-protection is under-
resourced, and that the status of Tajikistan as a lower-middle income country74 makes it difficult to raise funds
compared to other countries in a more critical situation. The interviews suggest that one of the reasons why it is
difficult to acquire funding for child protection is due to the visibility of results only in the long term. However,
another participant mentioned that the country has good access to financial resources, especially for the work
related to violence against women and girls.
Summary – EQ13: The results suggest that the PE programme was adequate in terms of management quality
and efficiency (including work planning, procurement, financial resource management, budget allocation, and
timely outputs), considering the challenges of the COVID-19 pandemic. According to UNICEF, the PE section was
temporarily dissolved and reconvened at some point during the reference period, which the consequences are
unclear from the documentary evidence and data. The PE programme had utilised 88% of the USD 6.4 million
allocated from 2016 until 2022. More systematic use of the RBA (rights-based approach), namely building
stakeholder interest groups to define representatives to participate in yearly planning and review workshops,
particularly involving beneficiary and government representatives, can help to improve the opinions about
transparency and accountability, while supporting increased local ownership. Despite the low budget compared
to other country programme components, PE programme successfully achieved its planned outcomes.
EQ14: To what extent is the programme output data efficiently used for national/regional advocacy?
Since 2019 the programme has been using a system called Activity Info (data aggregator) as well as PowerBI to
collect and visualise the available implementation quantitative data, as informed by the programme staff. This
shows good data-management capacities. However, the evaluation team did not have direct access to the
system. PowerBI has some intrinsic limitations in terms of reproducible processing of raw data in an automated
way (e.g., scheduled cleaning of raw data from Activity Info, which requires cloud-based scripts and running
triggers in servers such as Azure, AWS EC2 or Google Cloud), particularly regarding the integration of qualitative
monitoring data and more up-to-date functionalities (e.g., predictive analytics, natural language processing and
machine learning/artificial intelligence applications). This tends to limit a more agile use of data by the various
users, as the datasets become larger and more complex. There are potential policy contributions in the use of
74 World Bank (2021) New World Bank country classifications by income level: 2021-2022. Available at:
https://blogs.worldbank.org/opendata/new-world-bank-country-classifications-income-level-2021-2022 (last access: 11 June 2022).
34
more advanced algorithms including machine learning/artificial intelligence for regression (e.g., exploring hidden
underlying factors behind key vulnerabilities, behaviours and attitudes, and forecasting aspects such as service
or supply demand), or classification tasks (e.g., faster and more precise classification of areas or beneficiaries
based on vulnerabilities for improved targeting). These are new areas which are becoming increasingly important
for supporting more evidence-driven decisions.
Considering the documentary evidence (e.g., CO annual reports, RAM and study reports during the evaluation
period) as well as results from primary data collection, outputs were systematically and timely registered and
analysed, data was shared with national and regional partners and used to influence government actions and
public policy decisions (see also the answer to the EQ5 section 3.2.2 Coherence and Annex 12 for additional
examples). There are clear examples of the PE programme’s evidence-driven contributions to inform actions by
the government, other development partners and other UNICEF sectors. For example, the assessment of the
2018 CCR and CRU revealed important gaps in the child protection system. The J4C and child protection actions
considered the generated evidence in their implementation, as described in the annual and RAM reports from
2019 onwards.
An important system-level change following advocacy work by the programme was the transformation of the
first baby homes into Family and Child Support Centres in 2019, which increased the chances of new-borns and
young children to stay with their families instead of being sent to residential institutions. The gathered data
coupled with focused lobby and advocacy actions (e.g., study visits to Scotland to make government official
acquaintance with international examples of best practices and models of foster care) has also been important
to support the transition from baby homes to family support centres in terms of identifying immediate
necessities like developing qualified personnel.
The PE programme advocated and provided technical support for the reform of the justice system focusing on
children in contact with the law (e.g., National Plan of Action on Justice for Children System Reform 2017-2021
which included advocacy for legal revision and institutionalisation of J4C in pre-service and on-the-job training
for law enforcement and justice professionals). The programme “On prevention of Offences by juveniles for
2020-2024” is another example that included both advocacy and capacity development of MoIA and other key
stakeholders. The programme also successfully advocated for and contributed to the elaboration and adoption
of the State Programme “On Social reintegration and social rehabilitation of children released from closed and
semi-closed institutions for 2020-2024”, as presented in the answer to the EQ5.
As mentioned in the answer to the EQ11, UNICEF advocacy with the Ministry of Justice has also supported the
revision of two important provisions in the Criminal Procedure Code, namely the obligation to start interrogating
children within 12 hours following their arrest (instead of 24 hours previously); and the reduction of the duration
of police custody upon arrest from 72 hours to 48 hours.
At the start of the COVID-19 pandemic, the official Humanitarian Cash Transfer Programme was informed by data
that allowed the inclusion of low-income families with children under 7 years of age into the programme. identify
vulnerable children/families that would receive help. Those are some examples of how effective advocacy efforts
of the programme have been.
Summary – EQ14: Outputs were systematically and timely registered and analysed, data was shared with
national and regional partners and used to influence government actions and public policy decisions. UNICEF’s
evidence-driven advocacy of policy revision resulted in concrete contributions to national and institutional
policies. Since 2019 the programme has been using a system called Activity Info (data aggregator) as well as
PowerBI to collect and visualise the available implementation quantitative data. This shows good data-
management capacities, and is an example of best practice. To allow for a more agile use of data by the various
users, the system could be improved in terms of reproducible processing of raw data in an automated way,
particularly regarding the integration of qualitative monitoring data and more up-to-date functionalities (e.g.,
predictive analytics, natural language processing and machine learning/artificial intelligence applications).
EQ15: How functional, sufficient, and goal-oriented is the programme-management system (including
technical expertise as well as monitoring, planning, and reporting systems)?
The results from the evaluation indicate that the programme counts with a highly functional, sufficient, and goal-
oriented management system, grounded on UNICEF’s procedures. UNICEF Tajikistan’s End of Year RAM Outcome
and Output Statements are a key source of information about the CP’s performance, including about the PE
programme, and are good examples of the quality of the management systems in place at the moment.
As presented in the answer to the EQ14, the use of Activity Info (data aggregator) as well as PowerBI by the
programme since 2019 is an example of best practice. The KII results confirm that there are systems in place
which allow for the implementation follow up. PowerBI, however, is limited in terms of predictive functionalities
35
(e.g., live forecasts of output and outcome achievement using dashboards based on data from Activity Info),
integration of qualitative data, and more advanced algorithms including machine learning/artificial intelligence.
The evaluation team did not have access to the internal corporate systems (e.g., Etools). Although UNICEF has
its Enterprise-Resource-Planning (ERP) systems and well-consolidated processes, during the document review
and KIIs, we did not find evidence that the PE programme used a specific and more granular digital/cloud project-
management information system/platform to coordinate work internally and with external implementation
partners. The adoption of project/task-management information systems in the cloud, such as Teamwork
Projects, Asana, Trello, or Basecamp can improve the current management systems, including in terms of ongoing
evidence for result-oriented management. With training, this can enable greater efficiency and systematisation
including tasks, responsibilities, among others. These commercial systems help to move away from traditional e-
mail-centric processes, reducing the flow of messages while improving communication and exchange between
programme staff and other partners. This can also support processes to modernise the management,
communication and monitoring of individual programme interventions through more automated reminder and
reporting generation.
Since the programme uses a ToC for communicating its intervention logic, and no logical framework (logframe)
was provided, the programme’s vertical and horizontal logic cannot be directly assessed but inferred from the
ToC. Regarding the vertical logic, outcome and outputs of the ToC are logical and logical consequences of the
activities and the described intermediate changes. However, horizontal logic is not clear in the ToC. While the
programme has clear activities, outcomes, assumptions, targets and indicators, the linkages between them are
not as clear as they would be in a logframe. For example, it is clear that the programme design considered the
intermediate changes and outputs when choosing targets and indicators, but it is not clear which intermediate
change corresponds to which indicator. Furthermore, this connection cannot be done with assumptions, which
have been left out of the ToC diagram. It is recommended to use a Logframe in future programmes to illustrate
this connection and ensure indicator adequateness.
An area for improvement is related to improved tracking and visibility of results in terms of short-term outputs
beyond intermediate changes and long-term changes as highlighted in the programme’s ToC and RAM reports.
In addition to the forms being used in the Activity Info aggregator, structured six-monthly or annual reporting
forms, as well as output delivery and evaluation forms, can be deployed in Activity Info to support implementing
partners to report their activities by providing an harmonised template to report outputs and the factors
affecting implementation of individual interventions by external partners, namely NGOs. This could at the same
time help partners to plan, follow up and manage the implementation of their interventions as part of the PE
programme. Such a system could deliver UNICEF a continuous stream of implementation data which could
support more evidence-oriented programming and visibility of results, with potential benefits in terms of
resource mobilisation, as well as evaluation of results both by internal monitoring staff and external evaluators.
Summary – EQ15: The programme has a highly functional, sufficient, and goal-oriented management system,
grounded on UNICEF’s procedures. Improvements can include the use of a more granular, specific commercial
digital/cloud project-management information system to coordinate tasks internally and with external
implementation partners, and improved tracking and visibility of results in terms of short-term outputs beyond
intermediate changes and long-term changes highlighted in the ToC and RAM reports.
3.5 Impact
Key findings
5.i: There is strong evidence that the PE programme had a good performance against its pre-defined indicator
targets, considering the COVID-19 challenges. Primary data show positive opinions among beneficiaries and
other key stakeholders in terms of impact performance. By April 2022, four out of nine outcome-level indicators
(44%) have been fully achieved. Among the five outcome indicators that have been partially achieved, three have
achieved at least 70%. At the output level, the best performance in indicator achievement was seen in the
alternative care component, followed by the social protection and social work component. The component 3
(J4C and VAC) showed the most areas for improvement in achieving output targets.
5.ii: The PE programme’s advocacy of policy revision and cooperation with the government resulted in important
policy and institutional changes that advanced children’s rights in Tajikistan. Such changes include various policy
revisions in the J4C system, the transformation of baby homes to child and family support centres, improved
focus on children with disabilities, and capacity-development actions that concretely improve institutional
responses to violence against children and emergencies. There is a high level of satisfaction among beneficiaries
and key stakeholders with the programme contribution.
36
As from the OECD/DAC evaluation criteria, the criterion ‘impact’ helps to assess the extent to which an
intervention has generated or are expected to generate positive or negative, intended or unintended, higher-
level effects75. The PE programme had a ‘good’ impact (4.3 or grade B) considering the triangulation of primary
and secondary data sources, as explained in more detail below. The table below presents the scores and weights
per evaluation question around ‘impact’, followed by a detailed account of the reasons for the scores by the
evaluation team.
Table 8: Score for the criterion ‘impact’ by the evaluation team.
KEY QUESTIONS – IMPACT PERFORMANCE WEIGHT
A = 5 B = 4 C = 3 D = 2 E = 1
EQ16: How well has the programme had direct impacts at its
4.0 30%
overall-objective level?
EQ17: To what extent does/will the programme have any
indirect positive and/or negative impacts (i.e., environmental, 5.0 25%
social, cultural, gender, and economic)?
EQ18: How well have the implemented
interventions/activities contributed to ensuring a protective 4.0 25%
environment for children?
EQ19: To what extent has the programme advanced
4.0 20%
children’s rights?
Note: A = very good; B = good; C = fair; D = poor; E = very
Result: 4.3 B
poor.
EQ16: How well has the programme had direct impacts at its overall-objective level?
Although this was a formative evaluation, this question is important for exploring the likelihood that impact
(usually seen as long-term effects) is achieved as expected. Considering the challenges due to the COVID-19
pandemic, there is evidence that the PE programme had a good performance against its pre-defined indicator
targets. The PE programme had as its impact goal to contribute to a better functioning protective environment,
which prevents and responds to deprivation, violence, abuse, exploitation and neglect for children who are most
at risk. The 2021 End of the Year RAM Outcome and Output report include as outcome statement (Outcome
4150/A0/05/884) the following: “By 2020, boys and girls, including those in contact with the law, benefit from
programmes that prevent and respond to VAC and strengthened child-friendly justice system”76. Considering the
extension of the programme duration to 2022, the report presents the outcome as “on track”. It indicates that
solid progress was made in child protection policy, legislative framework, and practice with a decrease in the
number of children placed in institutional care, an increase in the number of children in conflict with the law
accessing rehabilitation services at the community level, together with a strong political will to move forward
social protection reforms in Tajikistan.
The 2021 RAM report shows that four out of nine outcome-level indicators (44%) have been fully achieved or
exceeded as from the report (see also Annex 8 for more information). The programme showed above-target
performance for the indicators 1 (Children 0-17 years living in residential care [117% of its target]) and indicator
4 (Number of CWD receiving community-based care service during the year [200% of its target]). Apart from
these, all other outcome indicators have underperformed their 2021 targets. This suggests that the decision on
declaring indicators as achieved seems to have been made taking into account other context aspects apart from
the target values. For example, two indicators show status as fully achieved although they did not reach their
targets, namely: indicator 7 (Percent distribution of children in formal care by type of care (residential care vs.
family-type care) [91% of its target to increase the number of children in family-type care versus residential care
75 Impact addresses the ultimate significance and potentially transformative effects of an intervention. It seeks to identify social,
environmental and economic effects of interventions that are longer term or broader in scope than those already captured under the
effectiveness criterion. Beyond the immediate results, this criterion seeks to capture the indirect, secondary and potential consequences of
an intervention. It does so by examining the holistic and enduring changes in systems or norms, and potential effects on people’s well-being,
human rights, gender equality, and the environment. Source: https://movimentar.co/oecd-eval-criteria
76 2021 End of the Year RAM Outcome and Output dated from 21 January 2022 and approved on 03 February 2022.
37
to 23% instead of 21% as from the latest data]), and indicator 9 (Number of children with disabilities in residential
care [85% of its target to reduce the number of CWD residential care to 1,653 children instead of 1,937 as from
the latest data]). Among the five outcome indicators that have been partially achieved three have achieved at
least 70% of their planned end-2021 targets. The outcome indicators with the most areas for improvement in
order of priority were: (1) “Number of children covered by social protection systems” [32% of its target], and (2)
“Number of children diverted from criminal and administrative justice” [62% of its target].
Since the evaluation is a theory based one, we need to discuss the result chain in the intervention logic to get to
the likelihood of impact. At the output level, the programme had a better performance. As explained in more
detail in the answer to the EQ10, nine from the programme’s 14 output indicators (64%) have been met or
exceeded. Evidence of impact on the overall objective could be found in the COARs and RAM reports, where
considerable advancements at system and policy levels were described (see EQ5 and Annex 12 for additional
information). The online survey shows that participants (implementing staff) have positive opinions about the
extent to which objectives and results were achieved (10 of 15 participants rated it positively).
Figure 9: Participant opinions on extent to which programme objectives and results have been achieved.
Both the KIIs and FGDs presented a specific question about the main impacts achieved by the PE programme (see
text-network plot below and Annex 10.3 for more detailed information). Key impact areas as from the answers
include: 1) development of capacities of social service staff to improve assistance to beneficiaries including home
visits, psychological and legal support; 2) Increased awareness (including among children) and support related to
children’s rights, gender issues and special needs of children with disabilities in the centres; 3) production of
documented knowledge about the situation of the most vulnerable families; 4) provision of equipment and
support to public child-care facilities. A ministry representative mentioned a “real change” in terms of “regular
involvement and support of children with special needs in the centres that were not [present] in the past”. Some
responses from multiple stakeholder categories mentioned that the programme contributed to reducing
criminality and violence (e.g., reduced bullying). Answers from parents suggest an integrated and comprehensive
approach, including improved knowledge of legal processes (e.g., steps to obtain documents) and support in
terms of job skills and professional orientation (e.g., car repair and electricians) delivered by other interventions.
The results show awareness of UNICEF staff that impact assessment requires further analysis after some time
following the support (e.g., 2-4 years).
Figure 10: Text network plot of impacts achieved by the PE programme (KIIs and FGDs).
38
Summary – EQ16: Considering the challenges due to the COVID-19 pandemic, there is strong evidence that the
PE programme had a good performance against its pre-defined indicator targets. Primary data show positive
opinions among beneficiaries and other key stakeholders in terms of impact performance. By April 2022, four
out of nine outcome-level indicators (44%) have been fully achieved. Among the five outcome indicators that
have been partially achieved three have achieved at least 70% of their planned end-2021 targets. The best
performance in terms of indicator achievement at output level was seen in the alternative care component,
followed by the social protection and social work component. The most areas for improvement in this regard are
in the component for J4C and VAC.
EQ17: To what extent does/will the programme have any indirect positive and/or negative impacts (i.e.,
environmental, social, cultural, gender, and economic)?
The documentary evidence did not highlight unexpected/indirect positive or negative impacts, but includes
strong evidence that the programme generated measurable improvements for beneficiaries (see Annex 8 for
additional information on the achievements against targets). Opinions from key stakeholders did not indicate
any major indirect impacts.
Considering primary data sources, in the online survey, only one participant (from 15) reported knowing about
an unplanned negative impact, while five reported knowing of unexpected positive impacts the programme had.
When asked about elaborating on their answers in open-ended questions, the positive indirect impacts were
actually aspects that had been planned within the programme ToC or indicators. For example, there were
references to increased outreach to remote areas and villages through mobile groups, empowerment of girls
victims of gender violence through development of their soft skills and entrepreneurship, issuance of birth
certificates, and reduction of children in institutional care because of the new family and child support centres.
The KIIs and FGDs presented a specific question about the main impacts achieved by the PE programme, including
unexpected ones. The answers also include a few examples of negative indirect impacts that need to be
monitored and mitigated. A representative of local authorities highlighted the risk of aid dependency and
passiveness from target populations. The same respondent also mentioned the perception that some rights
holders may have misunderstood the awareness raising about their rights. The respondent was concerned that
some people would think that they do not need to take action to obtain documents such as birth certificates and
passports since these were presented as a right (duty bearers are obliged by law to provide documents to rights
holders), no matter if right holders apply for documents or not. These potential negative impacts can be
monitored through activity feedback forms deployed in Activity Info for implementing partners to use for activity
quality control, with increased involvement of beneficiary representatives in moments of reflection about the
performance and yearly planning through participatory workshops (see also Key finding 4.i, under the efficiency
criterion). Increased promotion of awareness about the principle of self-initiative by rights holders can help to
mitigate the risk of misunderstanding about their duties and responsibilities.
Summary – EQ17: The documentary evidence includes strong evidence that the programme generated
measurable improvements for beneficiaries (see Annex 8). Opinions from key stakeholders did not indicate any
major indirect, unexpected impacts. The participant’s responses mentioned two main negative impacts, which
could be further investigated: 1) possible dependency on aid among beneficiaries (sustainability challenges), and
2) misunderstanding among beneficiaries about the need to apply for personal documentation themselves,
considering the rights-based approach awareness that these are rights.
39
EQ18: How well have the implemented interventions/activities contributed to ensuring a protective
environment for children?
The PE programme’s ToC (Annex 6) described the programme’s expected operational, intermediate,
belief/behavioural and development changes towards contributing to a protective environment for children, as
defined in the programme documents and its ToC. The programme’s contributions can be divided into two
interrelated dimensions: 1) at the strategic level, and 2) at the levels of direct changes on the ground.
At the strategic level, the programme focused on creating changes in policy and systems, as described in the
answer to the EQ5. The PE programme successfully generated substantial policy and system level changes that
helped to improve local and national policies (e.g., signature and ratification of the CRPD by the Government of
Tajikistan in 2017, UNICEF/MOHSP joint vulnerability assessment of children outside of the social protection
system, Child Rights Impact Assessment of COVID-19 related measures, and support for the National Plan of
Action on Justice for Children System Reform 2017-2021), and contributed to a better protective environment
for children. The programme also included activities building institutional capacities (e.g., advocacy for legal
revision and institutionalisation of J4C in pre-service and on-the-job training for law enforcement and justice
professionals; 279 social workers were trained with skills to promote social inclusion of CWD; and 281 social
workers were trained on child protection). As presented in the EQ19, the PE programme successfully collaborated
with different partners to produce situation assessments that would later be used to inform policy and decision
making. By collaborating with the government, UNICEF achieved changes in legislation that made progress
towards the programme’s overall objective. Annex 12 includes a comprehensive selection of other system and
policy-level changes that the PE programme contributed to.
At the ground level, the programme directly contributed to supporting vulnerable children (e.g., transformation
of the first baby homes into Family and Child Support Centres in 2019; support to over 1,270 children left behind
by migrant parents to access social welfare services in 26 districts; support for 1,250 vulnerable children to obtain
birth certificates; and establishment of complaint mechanisms in 51 schools and communities). The PE
programme also involved activities that directly benefited beneficiaries in its indicators. By 2021, 124,164
households had benefited from new or additional social assistance as response to COVID-19, 194,130 children
benefited from government cash transfer programmes, the number of children in residential care institution was
reduced by 1,962 and 123 children in contact with the law were diverted to alternative based support. The
Communications for Development (C4D) campaign promoted the rights of children and women with disabilities
to an estimated audience of 2.5 million people. These are some of the examples of the programme’s
contributions based on documentary evidence (e.g., COAR and RAM reports).
The primary data sources support the documentary evidence that the PE programme’s interventions had a
positive impact on its stakeholders and beneficiaries. For example, over 89% of the 203 beneficiaries who took
part in the phone survey, considered that the programme had a ‘very good’ (45%) or a ‘good’ (44%) contribution
to ensure a protective environment for girls and boys (see Annex 10.2.8).
Examples of these benefits can be found in the KIIs/FDGs, where participants were asked to elaborate on the
programme’s contribution to advance child rights and to ensure protective environments to the most vulnerable.
The network plot below suggests a very good contribution with emphasis to children with disabilities, legal
support to parents, promotion of gender issues, capacity building to social workers and beneficiaries on
children’s rights as well as guidance for obtaining birth certificates as well as support to home visits. As presented
in the answer to the EQ16, some respondents highlighted contributions to reduction in the cases of lawbreaking,
improved access to the justice system and legal protection, and increased local awareness on how to protect
children’s rights using the law. A government representative mentioned a “real change” in terms of “regular
involvement and support of children with special needs in the centres that were not present in the past”. Some
responses from multiple stakeholder categories suggested that the programme contributed to reducing
criminality and violence (e.g., reduced bullying), which could be assessed in future impact assessments.
40
Figure 11: Text network plot of contribution to advance child rights and ensure a protective environment (KIIs and FGDs).
Summary – EQ18: The PE programme’s activities successfully contributed to ensuring a protective environment
for children. The programme had a good performance in achieving its outcome indicators, particularly
considering the challenges due to the COVID-19 pandemic. Primary data show positive opinions among
beneficiaries and other key stakeholders about impact performance. There is evidence that the programme has
made progress towards changes detailed as from its ToC, and the primary data confirms documentary evidence.
EQ19: To what extent has the programme advanced children’s rights?
The PE programme achieved important system and policy changes that advanced children's rights and ensured
a better protective environment, as explained and exemplified in the EQ5, EQ16 and EQ18, as well as Annex 12
(selection of system and policy-level changes). The programme supported the revision of normative national
normative and legal frameworks as planned in its ToC. These changes are reflected in the output indicators (see
Annex 8, indicators 1.2, 2.2, and 2.3), and include strengthened shock-response mechanisms for times of crises,
alternative care policy in line with the 2009 UN Guidelines for the Alternative Care of Children, as well as local
policies aligned with these guidelines (e.g., local budget inclusion and operationalisation of FCSCs, training for
secretaries of the Commission on Child Rights in 22 selected districts and orientation packages developed for
maternity wards in the same 22 districts). Furthermore, the programme facilitated a partnership between
UNICEF and the Academy of Public Administration under the President of the Republic of Tajikistan to train public
servants, including high level officials that will strengthen institutionalised approach towards child-rights
promotion and protection.
The COARs include additional evidence of the CO’s measures to advance children’s rights. UNICEF advocated for
policy revisions and closely collaborated with the government for the signature and ratification of the Convention
of the Rights of Persons with Disabilities by the government of Tajikistan. Additional examples are the revision
of policies in the area of J4C, the transformation of baby homes to child and family support centres, the
amendment to the family code that allowed to operationalise the foster-care procedure, and the establishment
of monitoring systems in boy detention centres. The programme also galvanised strong partnerships with the
Ministry of Labour (migration issues), and Ministry of Justice (issues of childhood statelessness). This was
complemented by the CRIA, which took place as a result of the joint work with the European Network of
Ombudspersons for Children, supporting the O4CR to address challenges and concerns faced by children affected
by migration.
Together with the World Bank and the Government of Tajikistan, the programme supported the inclusion of low-
income families with children under 7 years old into the emergency COVID-19 humanitarian cash transfer
programme, who were previously out of the social protection system. In addition, civil-society partners
commissioned within the PE programme ensured that 1,250 children affected by migration were protected and
had access to essential rights including basic services and personal documentation. Together with the network
of Coalition of Associations of Parents of Children with Disabilities, the programme supported the roll out of a
community-mobilisation campaign for social inclusion of children and women with disabilities.
The phone survey with beneficiaries suggests a high level of satisfaction with the support, suggesting ‘good’
programme contributions for beneficiaries to find out their rights (average score 4.5), exercise their rights
(average score 4.6) and protect their rights (average score 4.5), as presented in more detail in Annex 10.2.8.
The KIIs and FGDs also asked the participants to elaborate on the programme’s contribution to advance child
rights and to ensure protective environments to the most vulnerable. The results confirm the positive view of
41
beneficiaries and stakeholders about the programme contribution with emphasis to the rights of children with
disabilities, legal support to parents, promotion of gender issues, capacity building to social workers, civil
servants and beneficiaries on children’s rights as well as guidance for obtaining birth certificates as well as
support to home visits. Some respondents also highlighted contributions to reduction in the cases of lawbreaking,
improved access to the justice system and legal protection, and increased local awareness on how to protect
children’s rights. Responses from local authority representatives mentioned that the programme helped the
government to do its job better and faster, which includes improved focus on the rights of children with
disabilities. Despite that, UNICEF staff and NGO representatives mentioned that the local culture and parents’
attitudes are still important factors limiting the advancement of gender issues and children rights.
Summary – EQ19: There is strong evidence that the PE programme’s advocacy of policy revision and cooperation
with the government resulted in important policy and institutional changes that advanced children’s rights in
Tajikistan. Such changes include various policy revisions in the J4C system, the transformation of baby homes to
child and family support centres, improved focus on children with disabilities, and capacity-development actions
that concretely improve institutional responses to violence against children and emergencies. There is a high
level of satisfaction among beneficiaries and key stakeholders with the programme contribution.
3.6 Sustainability
Key findings
6.i: The programme has successfully influenced local, regional, and national policies and public services. Public
representatives and families clearly identify child protection policies as a public responsibility. Opinions from the
beneficiaries are very positive, and over 87% of the beneficiaries considered that the programme delivered long-
lasting results. Views from institutional stakeholders contrast with the positive views from the beneficiaries in
the phone survey, and suggest: a) concerns about dependency on the programme, and b) requests for
continuation of the support.
6.ii: Local ownership of the programme is one of the main areas for improvement. There is a very good
relationship with the state institutions. However, the evaluation did not identify evidence of kick-off, regular
planning or review meetings with the participation of key stakeholders such as representatives of beneficiaries.
This is a measure for improvement, in line with the key finding 4.i (see section 3.2.4 on efficiency).
6.iii: Opinions from key stakeholders indicate a high likelihood of continuation of the generated benefits, but
also raise concerns about the resource and technical capacity to maintain benefits in the long-term. The
Implementation of suggestions for improvement raised by the participants will require an integrated and cross-
sectoral approach, particularly involving the education sector. This can help to open new possibilities of
cooperation with the MoES around emerging needs (e.g., digital child protection and connected-parenting
support), and can support actions to reduce VAC.
As from the OECD/DAC criteria for development evaluation, the criterion ‘sustainability’ assesses the extent to
which the net benefits of the intervention continue, or are likely to continue77. The overall score for sustainability
by the evaluation team was ‘good’ or 4.0 (grade B), as detailed in the table below.
Table 9: Score for the criterion ‘sustainability’ by the evaluation team.
KEY QUESTIONS – SUSTAINABILITY PERFORMANCE WEIGHT
A = 5 B = 4 C = 3 D = 2 E = 1
EQ20: To what extent have the interventions had a
5.0 25%
sustainable effect on local, regional, and national level?
EQ21: To what extent has the local ownership of partners
4.0 25%
been considered in the implementation of the programme?
77 Includes an examination of the financial, economic, social, environmental, and institutional capacities of the systems needed to sustain
net benefits over time. Involves analyses of resilience, risks and potential trade-offs. Depending on the timing of the evaluation, this may
involve analysing the actual flow of net benefits or estimating the likelihood of net benefits continuing over the medium and long-term.
Source: https://movimentar.co/oecd-eval-criteria
42
EQ22: To what extent will the target groups and beneficiaries
continue to use the benefits after the support has ended 4.0 25%
(long-term orientation)?
EQ23: What is the contribution of the programme to the
4.0 25%
institutional capacity of local partners?
Note: A = very good; B = good; C = fair; D = poor; E = very
Result: 4.3 B
poor.
EQ20: To what extent have the interventions had a sustainable effect on local, regional, and national level?
The PE programme has had a sustainable effect at local, regional and national level. UNICEF has worked closely
with the national government and influenced national policies which in turn have affected institution structure
and responsibilities related to child issues. For example, because of the 2015 child protection law, the MoES
(directorate on child rights) received the attribution for child protection. Through technical support and capacity
building, the programme also helped to create mechanisms that benefit vulnerable children, such as the
complaint mechanism created within the Ombudsman for Child Rights office. As mentioned in the impact section,
through advocacy and cooperation with the national government, the programme also achieved important and
long-lasting policy and system changes, especially in the areas of J4C, child protection and alternative care. These
system level changes are sustainable and, therefore, they demonstrate the programme’s long-term impact
sustainability.
Through situation assessments, the programme identified human-resource needs within institutions, while
supporting evidence orientation and focus on the most vulnerable in the design and management of public
programmes (e.g., hCTP, inclusion of CWD, support to children affected by migration and in contact with the law.
For example, the CO identified in 2014 that baby homes were regarded more as medical institutions where
children would receive treatment,78 that there was a shortage of social workers and psychologists in such
institutions79, and that there was insufficient of human-resource capacity in government institutions to monitor
plans to improve social inclusion of CWD80. The PE programme took this information into account and trained
professionals to satisfy these needs. The programme also had a sustainable effect in public services through the
transformation of protection and alternative care services. This happened, for example, through staff capacity
building activities to paraprofessional social workers responsible for child protection, justice professionals and
law enforcement officials.
Other examples of sustainable contributions are the awareness raising campaigns on prevention of children
institutionalisation, as well as the referral and response mechanisms to promote access of vulnerable families to
state services. This includes examples such as the hCTP as explained before as well as women, girls and boys
accessing GBV risk mitigation, prevention or response services.
As from the phone interviews (see graph below), the beneficiaries showed to be generally very satisfied with the
programme’s work (97% answered ‘very good’ or ‘good’), and over 87% of the 203 beneficiaries considered that
the programme delivered long-lasting results.
Figure 12: Satisfaction of beneficiaries (phone survey).
78 UNICEF (2014) Study Report Children in residential care in Tajikistan.
79 UNICEF (2015) Social Protection in Tajikistan A situational analysis.
80 UNICEF (2020) Study on knowledge, attitudes, behaviours and practices related to children and women with disabilities in Tajikistan.
43
Figure 13: Extent in which the changes are lasting in the beneficiaries’ lives (phone survey).
Despite these very positive results, some participants during the online survey and KIIs expressed concerns about
the sustainability of the support, including in terms of dependency on the support for the continuation of
benefits. From the responses, it is not possible to see which specific components of the programme are the most
affected by such concerns. From the ToC and activities, it seems likely that sustainability challenges are
concentrated around the continuation of cash transfers as well as daily operation of institutions such as family
and child-support centres, and providers of services such as juvenile-support services, community-based
rehabilitation, legal support, and services to child victims of violence.
In the online survey, regarding the sustainability of the effects generated by the PE programme at the local,
regional, and national level, only 40% of the 15 participants answered ‘good’ (33%) of ‘very good’ (7%), while
47% of the participants answered ‘regular’, 7% poor, and 7% very poor. This contrasts with the positive views
from the beneficiaries in the phone survey, but is in line with the results from the KIIs/FGDs, which suggest: a)
concerns about dependency on the programme, and b) requests for continuation of the support.
Regarding the programme’s direct interventions with beneficiaries, the main suggestions for improvement in
future support from the phone survey concentrate mainly around increasing training/seminars to parents
(particularly housewives), teachers (particularly in remote areas) and students. Increased support to and
involvement of poor families with improved targeting of children with special needs is another group of
suggestions. The participants recommended that children, adolescents and youth are more involved in the
programme planning and management, including in terms of health training and collecting more evidence about
their problems and suggestions of solutions. The participants also suggested the establishment of new centres
(particularly in the vicinity of mahallas). Although not all these suggestions are focused on the PE programme
mandate, they indicate potential areas for further support improvement following an integrated and cross-
sectoral approach.
Summary – EQ20: The programme has successfully influenced local, regional, and national policies and public
services. Considering evidence from primary data, public representatives and families clearly identify child
protection policies as a public responsibility. Opinions from beneficiaries are very positive, with 97% of the 203
beneficiaries in phone interviews highly satisfied with the programme, and over 87% considered that the
programme delivered long-lasting results. The views from institutional stakeholders in the online survey contrast
with the positive views from the beneficiaries in the phone survey, and suggest: a) concerns about dependency
on the programme, and b) requests for continuation of the support.
EQ21: To what extent has the local ownership of partners been considered in the implementation?
Considering the primary evidence, the results suggest that implementing partners (institutional stakeholders)
assessed the ownership of the programme as ‘regular’, and this is one of the main areas for improvement.
Although there is evidence of a very good relationship with the state institutions, the evaluation did not identify
documentary evidence of kick-off, planning or review meetings during the implementation with the participation
of key stakeholders such as representatives of beneficiaries. As mentioned in the key finding 4.i (see section 3.2.4
on efficiency), building stakeholder interest groups to define representatives to participate in yearly planning
and review workshops, particularly involving beneficiaries (e.g., children, youths, parents, community leaders,
PWDs and implementing partners), and government representatives, can help to improve the opinions about
local ownership, transparency and accountability.
The online survey with institutional stakeholders had five questions related to sustainability, the overall average
score (3.3) indicated a ‘regular’ sustainability, which means that the implementing staff of the programme assess
the situation as satisfactory. The lowest average score was for the question: “To what extent has the local
44
ownership of partners been considered in the implementation of the programme?” Only 5 out of the 15
participants answered ‘good’ to this question while all other respondents answered ‘average’ (40%), 13% low,
and 7% very low. Considering also the findings from the documentary evidence, and other data sources, this
suggests that this is the most important area for improvement.
Figure 14: Opinions about the ownership of partners (online survey).
Summary – EQ21: Based on the evidence from key-informant interviews and the online survey, institutional
stakeholders assessed the ownership of the programme as ‘regular’, and this is one of the main areas for
improvement. Although there is documentary evidence of a very good relationship with the state institutions
since 2019, the evaluation did not identify evidence of kick-off, regular planning or review meetings with the
participation of key stakeholders such as representatives of beneficiaries. This is an area for improvement, in line
with the key finding 4.i (see section 3.2.4 on efficiency).
EQ22: To what extent will the target groups and beneficiaries continue to use the benefits after the support
has ended (long-term orientation)?
It is clear from the phone survey, and FGDs that beneficiaries and their families identify a sustainable effect on
their lives (see also answer to the EQ20). There is enough documentary evidence that government structures
(local, regional, national) will continue to benefit based on outputs such as system and policy changes (see EQ5
and Annex 12) studies/assessments, capacity building and material support (see EQ20) provided by the PE
programme, particularly in the justice system, SAHUs, FCSCs, and schools.
The opinions from key stakeholders indicate a high likelihood of continuation of the generated benefits, but also
raise concerns about the resource and technical capacity to maintain such benefits in the long-term. As presented
in the EQ20, the views of institutional stakeholders in the online survey about the sustainability of the effects
generated by the PE programme contrast with the very positive opinions from the beneficiaries as from the
phone survey. The results from the KIIs/FGDs suggest: a) concerns about dependency on the programme, and b)
several requests for continuation of the support. However, when asked about the continuation of the benefits
by target groups and beneficiaries after the end of the support 80% of the participants in the online survey with
institutional stakeholders believed that continuation of benefits would take place should the programme
discontinue its support (53% answered regular, 20% good, 7% very good).
The KIIs and FGDs included a question around the sustainability of the benefits, beyond the programme
implementation. In the network co-occurrence graph below, the words ‘centre’ and ‘schools’ are the most
frequent one, indicating that they are key spaces when it comes to sustainability. Activities with parents are also
frequently mentioned in addition to cooperation with state organisations. Some local authorities indicated that
discontinuation of the programme still presents a risk for the sustainability of the results, which is in line with
some of the feedback above that highlighted the potential dependency on programme support. Training
activities, equipment/material support to FCSCs, and support for access to legal documents (e.g., birth
registrations, passports, and identification documents) were seen as types of support with high sustainability
potential by participants. The answers indicate a high likelihood of benefit sustainability beyond the
implementation period.
45
Figure 15: Text network plot of continuation of benefits after the implementation (KIIs and FGDs).
Participants in KIIs and FGDs have been asked what their two main suggestions for improvement would be. The
network graph clearly shows that support continuation is the main suggestion, namely training/seminars
(including remote education) and modern equipment support to FCSCs, as well as further development of
intersectoral cooperation mechanisms with government departments, and increased beneficiary outreach in
terms of districts (e.g., not only six pilot districts in the Sughd region) and also in terms of coverage of remote
areas. Additional screening of child needs and more customised support approaches seem necessary, as well as
continuation of training, mentoring visits to centres and exchanges among child-support department staff, and
creation of centres of psychological assistance. Local authority representatives also suggested increased
awareness raising campaigns on child rights which should include video clips broadcasted in the media, as well
as use of theatrical performances about children’s rights and the reasons why people should have legal
documents such as birth certificates (including in mosques).
Figure 16: Text network plot of main suggestions for improvement (KIIs and FGDs).
Although not all their suggestions are restricted to the mandate of the PE programme, children and adolescent
FGDs also mentioned interest in more teachers of foreign languages, modern equipment in schools and seminars
in technology-based topics such as programming and robotics, which could take place with child-friendly tools
such as Lego robotics sets complemented with the required IT equipment (tablets or computers). A potential
recommendation could be to contact the Lego Foundation an others to explore the potential of the
implementation of pilot projects following a cross-sectoral and integrated approach, which could also approach
the challenges related to abuse of technology and mobile phones by children, adolescents and youths, data
protection and guidance to parents and teachers on how to guide and support safer and healthier use of
technology. Healthy use of technology is becoming a key source of intergenerational conflict, which is highly
relevant for child protection and prevention of violence against children. For example, a recent study by the PEW
research centre on parenting approaches and concerns related to digital devices that parents who have at least
one child under the age of 18 (but who may also have adult children) are more likely to think smartphones, for
example, have the potential to do more harm than good on young children. More than nine-in-ten parents say
46
they have a lot of responsibility in protecting children from inappropriate online content81. Particularly among
conservative families and communities, this represents a challenge as parents, relatives and teachers are not yet
equipped with knowledge and skills to embrace the philosophy of “connected parenting” and help children be
safe online and make the most of new media and technology82.
The suggestions for improvement from the phone survey concentrate mainly around increasing
training/seminars to parents (particularly housewives), teachers (particularly in remote areas) and students.
Increased support to and involvement of poor families with improved targeting of children with special needs is
another group of suggestions. The participants recommended that children, adolescents and youth are more
involved in the programme planning and management, including in terms of health training and collecting more
evidence about their problems and suggestions of solutions. The participants also suggested the establishment
of new centres (particularly in the vicinity of mahallas).
Summary – EQ22: The programme beneficiaries and their families clearly identified a sustainable effect on their
lives, and showed a high level of satisfaction. Government structures (local, regional, national) will continue to
benefit based on outputs such as system and policy changes (see also EQ5 and Annex 12) studies/assessments,
capacity building and material support (see EQ20) provided by the PE programme, particularly in the justice
system, SAHUs, FCSCs and schools. The opinions from key stakeholders indicate a high likelihood of continuation
of the generated benefits, but also raise concerns about the resource and technical capacity to maintain benefits
in the long-term. Suggestions for improvement will require an integrated and cross-sectoral approach,
particularly involving the education sector. This can help to open new possibilities of cooperation with the MoES
around emerging needs (e.g., digital child protection and connected-parenting support), and can support actions
to reduce violence against children.
EQ23: What is the contribution of the programme to the institutional capacity of local partners?
The PE programme provided an important contribution to strengthen the structures (e.g., CRU, SAHU and FCSC)
and capacities of implementing partners beyond the programme implementation. As presented in the EQ18, the
programme included multiple activities building institutional capacities. Some key examples are the programme
contribution to the institutionalisation of J4C in pre-service and on-the-job training for law enforcement and
justice professionals; training of 279 social workers to promote social inclusion of CWD; and training of 281 social
workers on child protection. Another example is the joint programme of UNICEF with UNHCR, EU, OSCE and
other partners for building capacities of State Border Troops on child protection as part of emergency
preparedness and response to the Afghan situation.
The PE programme produced multiple studies and situation assessments that informed policy and decision
making (see details in the EQ5 and EQ19). The programme supported a range of system and policy-level changes,
and contributed to qualify the operationalisation of the FCSCs following the transition from baby homes, for
example. Jointly with the Commissioner on Children’s Rights, Ministry of Labour and Migration and the European
Network of Ombudspersons for Children, UNICEF conducted a Child Rights Impact Assessment (CRIA) of COVID-
19 related measures and children’s right to protection, with a specific focus on children affected by migration
and left behind. These evidence-oriented initiatives helped to improve the institutional capacity of local
authorities to improve focus of programmes such as the hCTP on the most vulnerable, who were out of the social
protection system. The programme also facilitated a partnership between UNICEF and the Academy of Public
Administration under the President of the Republic of Tajikistan to train public servants, including high-level
officials that allows for a more institutionalised approach towards child-rights promotion and protection.
In the online survey, when asked about the contribution of the programme to capacity development of local
partners, 81% of the responses were ‘very good’ ( 7%), ‘good’ (47%) or ‘regular’ (27%), while 14% answered
‘poor’ or ‘very poor’. This suggests that institutional stakeholders are satisfied with the capacity building efforts
by the programme, but that there are potential areas for improvement.
The participatory development of an exit strategy is a standard procedure for sustainability, and is usually seen
as good practice. It should take place ideally at the time of the formulation of a new phase or early in
implementation. An exit strategy is a plan that describes how the programme intends to end its support, ensuring
that the achievement of programme goals (assistance or development) is not compromised and that progress
81 See: PEW Research Centre (2020) Parenting approaches and concerns related to digital devices. Available at:
https://www.pewresearch.org/internet/2020/07/28/parenting-approaches-and-concerns-related-to-digital-devices/
82 See: Harvard University (2020) Experts offer advice on how to become a ‘connected parent’. Available at:
https://news.harvard.edu/gazette/story/2020/12/how-parents-can-manage-children-and-their-technology-use/
47
towards these goals continues83. From the documentary evidence and key-informant interviews, we did not find
evidence of a formal exit strategy for the programme. The results of the online survey and the key-informant
interviews also indicate the need to improve the PE programme’s exit strategy with key stakeholders’
engagement (question: ‘What is your assessment concerning the programme’s exit strategy or approach,
including involvement and agreement of key stakeholders?’). When asked about the exit strategy in this sense,
34% of the institutional stakeholders in the online survey answered ‘very good’ (7%) or ‘good’ (27%), while 33%
answered ‘regular’, and 20% ‘poor’ (13%), or ‘very poor’ ( 7%).
Figure 17: Text network plot of main lessons learnt (KIIs and FGDs).
The KIIs and FGDs included a question about the main lessons learnt as a result of the PE programme
implementation. The network graph above shows that work around disabilities has a prominent role in this
regard. Other aspects that have been frequently mentioned are those related to skills development, learning
above the practice of support to the most vulnerable and problematic children, increased listening
skills/communication with vulnerable families, as well as work with parents regarding problems related to
domestic violence and how to deal with children with disabilities. Another aspect highlighted refers to the use of
group games particularly in schools and also in terms of role playing of the steps to obtain legal documents.
Parents also emphasised the importance of support regarding how best to communicate with their children,
while local authorities highlighted improved capacities to conduct family conferences on protection issues, while
others raised the importance of early screening of children’s development/living standards as well as
psychosocial support. FGDs with children under 13 years in Panjakent indicate activities to help children to
decrease and control aggression. Multiple participants mentioned that a lesson learnt was that the duration
should be extended.
Considering the results of the online survey, improvements seem necessary in terms of setting deadlines that are
realistic/well planned, and take into account limited resources including time and the sustainability of the
implementation (delivery quality). Another area of lessons learnt as from the graph refers to improving targeting
and systems focused on vulnerable adolescents and youth. The third component for lessons learnt involved the
work and stakeholder engagement with NGOs and the state (e.g., Ministry of Justice and Registry Offices) which
was considered successful by the participants, and helped to institutionalise the interventions and improve the
negative attitudes of state institutions towards NGOS. Despite this, the results suggest the need of improving
monitoring of programmes by some state organisations, and communication of a “unified vision for the goals
and objectives of the programme”.
Summary – EQ23: The programme strengthened the structures and capacities of implementing partners beyond
the programme implementation. Opinions from institutional stakeholders about the programme contribution to
building local capacities show a high level of satisfaction, but that suggest the need for improvements. The
programme does not count with a formal exit strategy for the programme, prepared with the involvement of
representatives of beneficiaries and other key stakeholders. The participatory development of an exit strategy is
a good practice for sustainability, and can contribute to improve the programme performance in this sense.
83 Exit strategies, when planned with partners prior to closure, ensure better outcomes and encourage commitment to programme
sustainability. In addition, good exit strategies can help resolve the tension that can arise between withdrawal of assistance and commitment
to achieving programme outcomes. Exit strategies may include knowledge sharing and transfer initiatives, systematisation of implementation
(indicating lessons learnt and hotspots), capacity building and processes for transfer of responsibilities, attracting future support (financial
and technical), defining independent impact evaluations (at least two years after the end of the intervention) and establishing ‘protocols’ for
support and sustainability of results.
48
4 Conclusions
The purpose of this evaluation was to assess the extent to which the Protective Environment programme has
been contributing to ensuring sustainable protective environments for the most vulnerable and marginalised
children. This section presents the main conclusions of this evaluation reflecting its purpose and objectives. It is
followed by forward-looking recommendations as well as identification of lessons learnt and good practices
considering challenges, gaps, and barriers during the period.
1. Approaches, strategies, and interventions have been well designed and implemented.
Findings: 1.i, 1.ii, 2.ii, 2.iii, 4.ii, 5.ii, and 6.iii
The programme was based on a sound intervention logic and theory of change. An analysis of the needs of
vulnerable children and youths informed its implementation strategy, which followed and promoted an
evidence-based approach. The generated body of knowledge supported successful advocacy for changes at
system and policy levels. There are multiple examples of improvements in policy and legal frameworks for child
protection to which the programme provided technical assistance in their revision and development. Such
changes include various policy revisions in the justice for children system, the transformation of baby homes to
child and family support centres, improved focus on children with disabilities, and capacity-development actions
that concretely improve institutional responses to violence against children and emergencies. There is a high
level of satisfaction among beneficiaries and key stakeholders with the programme contribution (see section
3.2.2 ‘Coherence’ and Annex 12).
The results from both primary and secondary data support the programme’s cross-sectoral and integrated
approach. This is in line with the 2020 CPE, which also identified examples of integrated working, such as inclusive
education for CWDs, and psychosocial support through the school system. The results include concrete examples
of the benefits of such an approach, which helped to ensure that vulnerable and marginalised groups had better
access to services that respond to their needs. The PE programme was aligned with the SDGs 1, 5, and 16, with
important synergies with other programmatic areas of the CO (e.g., education sector as well as with the
programme on data and evidence for children).
Opinions from key stakeholders indicate a high likelihood of continuation of the generated benefits but also raise
concerns about the resource and technical capacity to maintain benefits in the long term. The implementation
of suggestions for improvement raised by the participants will require continued effort towards an even more
integrated and cross-sectoral approach, particularly involving the education sector. This can help to open new
possibilities of cooperation with the MoES around emerging needs (e.g., digital child protection and connected-
parenting support) and can support actions to reduce VAC.
2. Strategic positioning and programmatic choices informed and supported government priorities
considering the context and the COVID-19 challenge.
Findings: 1.ii, 2.i, 2.iii, 3.ii, 3.iii, 4.i, 5.i., 5.ii, and 6.i
The PE programme had a very good management quality and efficiency, considering the challenges of the COVID-
19 pandemic. By April 2022, the PE programme had utilised 88% of the USD 6.4 million allocated since 2016.
Output 1 (Social protection and social work) was the largest one in terms of budget throughout the period, except
for 2018, when Output 2 (Alternative childcare) saw a higher allocation in support of the conversion of baby
homes to family and child-support centres.
Primary data show positive opinions among beneficiaries and other key stakeholders in terms of impact
performance. By April 2022, four out of nine outcome-level indicators (44%) had been fully achieved. Among the
five outcome indicators that had been partially achieved, three had achieved at least 70%. At the output level,
the best performance in indicator achievement was seen in the alternative care Output, followed by the social
protection and social work Output. Output 3 (J4C and VAC) showed the most areas for improvement in achieving
output targets.
The PE programme supported important policy and system level changes and reflected the key national policies
and strategies. These include particularly the Mid-term Development Programmes, draft National Programme
for Children 2030, the programme and action plan of the Justice Reform for Children for 2017-2021, the
Programme for Training of Personnel of the Social Protection System for 2030, the Programme on Rehabilitation
and Social Reintegration of Children After Released from Closed Institutions 2020-2024, the National Programme
on the Prevention of Juvenile Delinquency for 2020-2024, the State Programme on Youth Social Development,
National Programme for Rehabilitation of Disabled People of 2017- 2020, and the National Education Strategy,
and the Child Rights Ombudsman Strategy.
49
The programme successfully adapted to major factors influencing the implementation during the evaluation
period. The 2018 ToC revision helped the programme to stay relevant, according to the progress made at that
time and context. UNICEF’s liaison with the government led to a strong partnership from 2019 onwards. UNICEF
recognised and reacted to the new context posed by the COVID-19 pandemic, demonstrating very good capacity
of the PE programme to adapt the context while leveraging resources for the achievement of its objectives and
results (e.g., vulnerability assessment and facilitation of the inclusion of children affected by migration in the
COVID-19 humanitarian cash-transfer programme in partnership with the World Bank). Since 2019, the RAM
reports have started to include a specific section on ‘Evaluations’, which was a very good decision and gives
emphasis to UNICEF’s evidence-driven approach. Documentary evidence indicates that UNICEF has implemented
recommendations from earlier evaluations. However, primary data suggest that this still is an area for
improvement and can help to enhance the programme’s strategic positioning and choices.
The PE programme’s advocacy of policy revision and cooperation with the government resulted in important
policy and institutional changes that advanced children’s rights in Tajikistan. Over 87% of the 203 beneficiaries
that took part in the phone survey considered that the programme delivered long-lasting results. However, views
from institutional stakeholders (UNICEF staff, NGO representatives, local authority representatives, ministry
representatives, and other public international/regional organisations) contrast with the positive views from the
beneficiaries and suggest: a) concerns about dependency on the programme, and b) requests for continuation
of the support. The section on recommendations includes suggestions for action.
3. Good practices contributed to progress towards a protective environment for the most vulnerable
and marginalised children, looking beyond the traditional vulnerable groups.
Findings: 2.ii, 3.i, 4.ii, and 5.i
A range of good practices have been identified through this evaluation and are presented in more detail in section
6 (lessons learnt and best practices). Good practices were found at all levels, from the strategic (e.g., liaison with
government and advocacy) to operational practices that supported progress towards the programmatic goals.
The programme explicitly addressed the most vulnerable, beyond the traditional vulnerable groups. These
included children in contact and conflict with the law, children at risk of institutionalisation, children from war-
affected zones, and children and women with disabilities.
The programme’s cross-sectoral and integrated approach is an example of good practice and was crucial to
ensure that vulnerable and marginalised groups had better access to support and services that respond to their
needs. However, while the programme took sufficiently into account vulnerability assessments in its design and
implementation, the use of objective vulnerability criteria is not fully in place due to data-access issues. A
methodology note exists describing a child-vulnerability index, which attempts to answer the recommendations
from the CPE 2020 and uses a composite approach without weights with indicators at district level, while violence
against children and nutrition indicators are at a provincial level.
Institutional changes and significant staff turnover in the government caused delays and uncertainty regarding
alternative family care, for example, as reported between 2016 and 2018. Reported delays related to the
relationship with the government at that time included the: 1) operationalisation of the new regulation on Family
and Child Support Centres (planned to replace baby homes), 2) submission of the new Social Protection strategy,
and 3) revision of the Criminal Code and Criminal Procedure Code. The programme reports indicated that such
delays were due to insufficient political will and commitment as well as budgetary constraints from the
government’s side. However, primary data suggest that the programme faced initial resistance from government
partners, who saw the support as unnecessary. The programme reacted by increasing liaison efforts, which
allowed it to pave the way for substantial improvements in the partnership with ministries, departments, and
agencies. To overcome political unwillingness, UNICEF sponsored study visits to Scotland to acquaint government
officials with international examples of best practices and models of foster care, supported inter-ministerial
consultations, and advocated with the Ministry of Justice to revise two provisions in the child penal code. This
set of actions is also an example of good practice that allowed UNICEF to build a strong relationship with the
government partners as from 2019. As a result, the programme was successful in overcoming the initial
resistance and delays while achieving major reforms in policies and legislation.
Another good practice at a more operational level were the sufficiently detailed two-year work plans. The work
plan for 2021-2022, for example, included activities, sub-activities, geographical coverage by sub-activity,
implementing partner, timeline by quarter, and budget information such as amount funded and funds to be
mobilised. However, the work plan did not include information on outputs for all sub-activities (e.g., number of
repatriated children from war-affected zones or number of children affected by migration supported to access
essential services, including birth registration). This offers a potential opportunity for improvement together with
50
the increased involvement of beneficiary representatives and key stakeholders in the review and design of such
two-year work plans.
The use of Activity Info (data aggregator) and PowerBI by the programme since 2019 is another example of good
practice. To allow for a more efficient and effective use of data, the system could be enhanced with the use of
cloud computing (reproducible processing of raw data in an automated way) and modern data-science tools,
particularly for the integration of qualitative data, and up-to-date functionalities (e.g., predictive analytics,
natural language processing, and machine learning/artificial intelligence applications). This can contribute to
UNICEF’s evidence-driven advocacy of policy revision and improved public targeting/spending. There are
potential policy contributions in the use of more advanced algorithms including machine learning/artificial
intelligence for regression (e.g., exploring hidden underlying factors behind key vulnerabilities, behaviours, and
attitudes, and forecasting aspects such as service or supply demand) or classification tasks (e.g., faster and more
precise classification of areas or beneficiaries based on vulnerabilities for improved targeting). These are new
areas which are becoming increasingly important for supporting more evidence-driven decisions. This is in line
with the 2020 CPE conclusions, which highlighted the need to further develop a monitoring and evaluation
system for the programme and particularly use of the data and evidence produced for planning and
implementation.
The participatory development of an exit strategy is a standard procedure for sustainability and is usually seen
as good practice. An exit strategy is a plan that describes how the programme intends to end its support, ensuring
that the achievement of programme goals (assistance or development) is not compromised and that progress
towards these goals continues84. From the documentary evidence and key-informant interviews, we did not find
evidence of a formal exit strategy for the programme. This is a potential area for improvement, and it should
take place ideally in a participatory way with key-stakeholder representatives at the time of the formulation of a
new phase or early in implementation.
4. Experiences from the programme can accelerate progress towards the child-protection targets.
Findings: 1.iii, 3.iii, 4.iii, and 6.ii
Based on the documentary evidence, the programme provided direct contributions to priorities listed in the draft
State Comprehensive Programme for Children “Rushdu Numu” 2030 (also known as National Programme for
Children 2030 and pending approval by the government), such as priority 6 (e.g., support to birth certificates and
advocacy related to children affected by migration), priority 8 (e.g., work related to GBV and VAC), priority 11
(e.g., supporting transformation baby-homes into family and child support centres as well as their
operationalisation), priority 38 (e.g., interpersonal and public dialogue with parents’ community and the society
in general regarding prevention of violence against children), priority 39 (e.g., strengthening supervision system
at district level (Commission of Child Rights) for preventing placement of children in institutions; improve
alternative family care mechanisms, such as guardianship and trusteeship, foster care and other types of family
care), and priority 40 (e.g., introduction of community-based rehabilitation approach for children with disabilities
to include them in society).
The programme contributed to the implementation of the recommendations of the 2017 concluding
observations of the Committee on the Rights of the Child. As presented in the answer to the EQ5, advocacy and
technical support activities promoted two important provisions in the Criminal Procedure Code (CPC). The
programme also supported the 2021 amendment of the Code of Administrative Offences to introduce
administrative punishment for parents and/or caregivers for using or threatening to use violence against children
in the process of upbringing and has toughened up the punishment. This helped to ensure alignment with the
provisions of the Convention on the Rights of the Child towards protection for all children. The programme also
worked to strengthen the Commission on Children’s Rights and its representations at the provincial and district
level in order to enable them to better coordinate activities for improving the effective provision of child-
protection services. The 2019 Budgeting, Costing, and Financing Gap Analysis for Children report, which was
commissioned by the programme jointly with the Government of Tajikistan, is an example of a comprehensive
assessment of the budgetary needs for children.
While the PE programme included gender-related activities, its ToC did not mention gender issues and outcomes,
for example. A specific gender action plan for the PE programme, coordinated by the Gender Focal Point, can
84 Exit strategies, when planned with partners prior to closure, ensure better outcomes and encourage commitment to programme
sustainability. In addition, good exit strategies can help resolve the tension that can arise between withdrawal of assistance and commitment
to achieving programme outcomes. Exit strategies may include knowledge sharing and transfer initiatives, systematisation of implementation
(indicating lessons learnt and hotspots), capacity building and processes for transfer of responsibilities, attracting future support (financial
and technical), defining independent impact evaluations (at least two years after the end of the intervention), and establishing ‘protocols’
for support and sustainability of results.
51
help to guide the programme in developing specific activities to track and address gender-related protection
issues, in line with the recommendations of the Country Programme Evaluation (2020). This is likely to accelerate
progress towards child-protection targets focused on the most vulnerable.
Documentary evidence indicates that UNICEF has implemented recommendations from earlier evaluations. Since
2019, the RAM End of Year Outcome and Output reports have included a specific section on evaluation, as
mentioned above. By the end of 2021, the implementation of 8 of the 16 actions from the 2020 CPE
recommendations had been completed. It is also difficult to assess the current extent of the implementation of
the recommendations from the CPE considering its relatively recent finalisation and the more holistic focus on
the country programme. However, in the online survey, the implementation of the recommendations of earlier
evaluations was among the aspects that received the lowest scores (3.4 – regular). The results suggest that this
is an area for improvement for increased learning from past experiences and faster progress towards targets.
The programme has a highly functional, sufficient, and goal-oriented management system, grounded on
UNICEF’s procedures. Improvements can include the use of a more granular, specific commercial digital/cloud
project-management information system to coordinate the PE programme intervention tasks internally and with
external implementation partners. Improved tracking and visibility of results in terms of short-term outputs
beyond intermediate and long-term changes highlighted in the ToC and RAM reports can help to accelerate
progress by capitalising on technology and more agile management tools.
Currently, there is a very good relationship with the state institutions at national level. However, the evaluation
did not identify evidence of kick-off, regular planning, or review meetings with the participation of key
stakeholders such as representatives of beneficiaries. Local ownership of the programme is one of the main areas
for improvement, and a more participatory management approach can support increased relevance and
ownership in line with the RBA (rights-based approach), as highlighted by key finding 4.i (section 3.2.4).
Chapter 5 presents a selection of recommendations considering the evaluation results.
52
5 Lessons learnt and best practices
We attempted to identify positive and negative lessons that reflect the processes, practices, decisions and
experiences acquired, recording, whenever possible, the problems and solutions found.
Lessons learnt 1: Persistence with increased and well-thought liaison efforts with government stakeholders was
crucial to overcome initial resistance and delays in system and policy changes.
Best practice 1: The sponsored study visits to Scotland to acquaint government officials with international
examples of best practices and models of foster care, together with supported inter-ministerial
consultations, and advocacy towards the revision of two provisions in the child penal code are examples of
best practices in the face of resistance and delays. They allowed UNICEF to build a strong relationship with
the government partners as from 2019, and advance changes in policies and legislation.
Lesson learnt 2: The comments obtained through KIIs/FDGs as well as through phone interviews with children,
adolescents and youths suggest a strong support to activities focused on preventing violence against children.
FGDs with children under 13 years indicate that programme activities have helped children to decrease and
control aggression. The results also emphasise the importance of increasing the outreach of VAC, particularly
around capacity building. Children who benefited from the activities were more conscious about their actions
and staff from schools reported being able to see attitude changes in the children after involving them in sport
and other extracurricular activities.
Best practice 2: The combination of capacity building on VAC for teachers, home-visiting professionals,
social workers, and CRU officers in six targeted districts, together with child-friendly complaint mechanisms,
and awareness of children about the O4CR through community meetings and dissemination of advocacy
materials is an example of best practice, which could be extended to other districts.
Lesson learnt 3: The work with schools and local authorities on children rights and how to deal with children with
disabilities, and vulnerable/problematic children, was particularly successful in developing local capacities,
including listening and communication skills to teachers and parents.
Best practice 3: Cross-sectoral and integrated work was important to reach out to beneficiaries and build
local capacities. The use of group games and other participatory activities such as role playing / theatrical
performances are good practices. Social inclusion of children and women with disabilities through
awareness-raising interventions were particularly well assessed by the evaluation participants.
Lesson learnt 4: Interagency partnerships such as UNICEF-UNHCR Coalition on Every Child’s Right to a Nationality,
and the COVID-19 hCTP support with the World Bank, made a difference in increased outreach and synergies.
Best practice 4: The joint work supporting the provision of birth certificates to children at risk of
statelessness and affected by migration, as well as the work to improve access to services, social and legal
aid is a best practice towards increased outreach focused on the most vulnerable.
Lesson learnt 5: Adjustments to the Theory of Change during 2018 improved the programme design and
adaptation to the context. The two-year work plans helped to translate the ToC to operational terms, which
contributed to a clearer understanding and implementation. The use of digital tools was important to manage
data complexity and monitor results
Best practice 5: The use of Activity Info (data aggregator) and PowerBI by the programme since 2019 is an
example of good practice, which can be further developed (see recommendations). Sufficiently detailed
two-year work plans were important, as they presented activities, sub-activities, geographical coverage by
sub-activity, implementing partner, timeline by quarter, and budget information such as amount funded
and funds to be mobilised. Additional information on outputs for all sub-activities can help to improve
result-orientation. The design of work plans also offer a potential opportunity for involving beneficiary
representatives and key stakeholders in the review and design processes (e.g., yearly workshops for work-
plan review and design).
Lesson learnt 6: There are new emerging needs that require attention, such as challenges related to abuse of
technology and mobile phones by children, adolescents and youths, data protection and guidance to parents and
53
teachers on how to guide and support safer and healthier use of technology. Misuse of the internet / mobile
phones is an important source of conflict within households, as indicated by the suggestions for improvement
by the beneficiaries. Intersectoral integration in the support to beneficiaries and schools is important in order to
ensure access to contents using digital technologies. These can improve access to information and education as
long as the equipment and capacities are in place.
Best practice 6: The cross-sectoral and integrated approach, together with the use of digital/phone support
as part of the adaptation to the challenges of the Covid-19 pandemic helped the continuation of the
programme activities, and ensured relevance to beneficiaries’ needs and constraints.
Lesson learnt 7: There is still a long way to go in terms of strengthening data-collection systems on better
coverage of vulnerable children. The use of objective vulnerability criteria is not fully in place due to data-access
issues, and cannot depend only on official data at district and province levels. Its operationalisation will require
independent data collection also at household level for disaggregation as required by the recommendations of
the CRC 2017 concluding observations.
Best practice 7: The programme gave a first step by drafting a methodology note describing a child-
vulnerability index, which attempts to answer the recommendations from the CPE 2020 and uses a
composite approach with indicators at district level, while nutrition indicators are at a provincial level.
54
6 Recommendations
The main recommendations are presented below, indicating possible responsible parties and the suggested
degree of priority. The recommendations have been developed based on consultations and involvement of duty-
bearers, as well as rights holders through the online survey, phone survey, key informant interviews and focus-
group discussions, which included questions about their main suggestions for improvement. The
recommendations were presented and discussed with the CO through the ERG meeting Our key
recommendations are as follows:
Recommendation 1 (Responsible: UNICEF / Priority: High) – Develop narrative descriptions to complement
current programme documents where objectives, intervention logic, planned activities, cross-cutting
approaches, related SDGs and monitoring mechanisms (targets and indicators) are mentioned and explained.
Such a narrative programme document can help to facilitate monitoring and evaluation beyond the indicators
mentioned in the RAM reports, as well as the communication about the programme with external stakeholders.
Recommendation 2 (Responsible: UNICEF and National Government / Priority: High) – Develop a specific gender-
action plan for the programme including specific activities and targets/indicators to track progress. We
recommend explicit reference to the specific cross-cutting issues in the theory of changes of future programmes,
to clarify which aspects they intend to address, including specific activities (inputs).
Recommendation 3 (Responsible: UNICEF and Government at all levels / Priority: High) – There is an emerging
need for introducing a proper case-management system at the ground level, which the programme can
contribute to. We recommend seizing this opportunity to introduce more detailed beneficiary registration forms,
in line with the recommendations of the CRC concluding observations of 2017 around data collection, which also
recommended UNICEF as a source of technical assistance. Integration of data collection in the daily case
management and processes can be a critical step towards improved evidence base for targeted policies and
support. This recommendation can involve an impact evaluation with a larger sample size and preferably at the
household level during and after 2-3 years after receiving the support by the programme.
Recommendation 4 (Responsible: UNICEF / Priority: High) – Taking into account the limitations of official district
and provincial level data, as well as data-access by UNICEF, consider using administrative data or commissioning
primary data collection at household and district level to independently build composite vulnerability indexes
(specific related to protection indicator and ideally including also standard development indicators such as the
poverty probability index, life-satisfaction index or coping strategy index). Data collection can be eased with tools
such as RapidPro, which UNICEF has been successfully using worldwide to build nationally scalable mobile
applications. This can help to build capacities of government partners while validating/triangulating official data,
helping to improve vulnerability targeting and disaggregation of data by multiple demographic variables (e.g.,
sex, age, education) and geospatial variables (e.g., village, jamoat, district and province levels).
Recommendation 5 (Responsible: UNICEF / Priority: High) – We recommend to improve / scale up the
programme outreach to remote villages compared to urban areas. Adaptations to the needs of those participants
in rural areas (e.g., additional focus on households whose livelihoods depend on cattle raising, which may be
more vulnerable to child labour), can help to improve the programme performance. As from the regression
model (see Annex 10.4.2), the participants who live in villages (41%) tended to attribute higher scores (0.15) to
the programme compared to the participants who live in towns (59%). This indicates that the programme has
been successful in answering the needs of participants living in both rural and urban areas, performing best in
rural areas. However, most of the 203 interviewed beneficiaries in the phone survey lived in urban areas. While
the likelihood of a beneficiary to answer phone calls can have an influence on the larger representation of
beneficiaries in urban areas, results from other sources (KIIs/FGDs) also suggest the need to improve the
outreach to rural areas, where the most vulnerable to multidimensional poverty are.
Recommendation 6 (Responsible: UNICEF / Priority: High) – We recommend additional focus on the needs of
primary-grade participants (e.g., age specific materials and contents) as it could help to improve the programme
performance, particularly considering that this group represents most of the respondents, and lower educational
levels are usually correlated with higher vulnerability. The regression model identified a statistically significant
association between education and the scores. Participants with lower secondary (grade 5 to 9) (27%) tend to
have a higher score (0.26) compared to the participants with primary (grade 1 to 4) (71%).
Recommendation 7 (Responsible: UNICEF / Priority: High) – We recommend scaling up activities related to
building capacities and raising awareness for prevention of violence against children. The output 3 (Justice for
children and preventing VAC) was the programme component with the lowest budget share [27% of utilised
budget]). In addition, the outcome indicator 5 (“Percentage of parents who consider physical punishment of their
children acceptable under given circumstances”) saw an increase from 16% in 2017 to 16.4% in 2021 as from the
55
RAM report. As from the regression model (see Annex 10.4.2), respondents who selected “violence against
children” (71%) for the question “Which of the UNICEF programmes have you participated in?” tend to give
higher scores (0.41) compared to participants who did not select that option. This suggests that the topic has
succeeded particularly well from the point of view of the respondents.
Recommendation 8 (Responsible: UNICEF / Priority: High) – Develop an explicit exit strategy in a participatory
way that describes how the programme intends to end its support, ensuring that the achievement of programme
goals (assistance or development) is not compromised and that progress towards these goals continues. The
participatory development of an exit strategy is a good practice for sustainability, and can contribute to improve
the programme performance in this sense.
Recommendation 9 (Responsible: UNICEF and national government / Priority: Medium) – The participants in
KIIs/FGDs suggested that children, adolescents and youth are more involved in the programme planning and
management, including in terms of collecting more evidence about their problems and suggestions of solutions.
Following a RBA (rights-based approach), we recommend building stakeholder interest groups to name
representatives and hold yearly planning and review workshops to involve them, particularly involving
beneficiary and government representatives. Such a participatory management approach can be used to jointly
review and improve two-year work plans, and can improve the opinions about transparency and accountability,
while supporting increased local ownership.
Recommendation 10 (Responsible: UNICEF / Priority: Low) – Children and adolescent FGDs also mentioned
interest in more teachers of foreign languages, modern equipment in schools and seminars in technology-based
topics such as programming and robotics. Although these suggestions go beyond the mandate of the PE
programme, they offer an opportunity to work on emerging digital child-protection issues (e.g., online safety,
connected parenting), which could tap on cross-sectoral work with the Education sector. We recommend to
contact actors such as the Lego Foundation, Google Foundation as well as the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation,
to explore the potential of the implementation of pilot projects in complement to the PE Programme, which
could prepare the Tajik children, adolescents and youth to the digital era, while also approaching the challenges
related to abuse of technology and mobile phones by children, adolescents and youths, data protection and
guidance to parents and teachers on how to guide and support safer and healthier use of technology85.
Recommendation 11 (Responsible: UNICEF / Priority: Low) – The use of Activity Info (data aggregator) as well as
PowerBI by the programme since 2019 is an example of best practice, although they were used only for specific
projects/components. We recommend extending this to all programme interventions for consistent use and real-
time monitoring. To allow for a more efficient and effective use of data, the system could be enhanced with the
use of cloud computing (reproducible processing of raw data in an automated way) and modern data science
tools, particularly for the integration of qualitative data, and up-to-date functionalities (e.g., predictive analytics,
natural language processing and machine learning/artificial intelligence applications).
Recommendation 12 (Responsible: UNICEF and implementing partners / Priority: Low) – Consider the use of
commercial cloud-based project/task management information systems (such as Teamwork Projects, Asana,
Trello, or Basecamp). With training, this would enable greater efficiency and monitoring including tasks,
responsibilities, among others. These commercial systems help to move away from traditional e-mail-centric
processes, reducing the flow of messages while improving communication and exchange between programme
staff and other partners.
Recommendation 13 (Responsible: UNICEF and NGOs / Priority: Low) – Consider the inclusion of new activities
cross-sectoral synergy with other UNICEF sectors, and/or an specific component on labour and job orientation
(e.g., labour rights, financial education for credit consumer protection and micro business legislation). This can
complement the current programme structure, particularly the protection issues which included child labour,
and regarding the support to families to ensure children remain in the safe and protective family environment in
addition to cash transfers. Although UNICEF uses internal corporate systems (e.g., e-tools) such management
systems mentioned here are also involving external stakeholders, and go beyond monitoring tools mentioned in
the recommendation 12.
Recommendation 14 (Responsible: UNICEF / Priority: Low) – We recommend to present the results of this report
to other sectors in support of cross-sectoral work with the Education, Health and Nutrition sectors to support
the PE programme’s children, adolescent and youth beneficiaries with activities focusing on improved diet
(reduced consumption of condiments and sugar and increased consumption of food with high protein content
85 Healthy use of technology is becoming a key source of intergenerational conflict, which is highly relevant for child protection and
prevention of violence against children, and help children to be safe online and make the most of new media and technology. Particularly
among conservative families and communities, this represents a challenge as parents, relatives and teachers are not yet equipped with
knowledge and skills to embrace the philosophy of “connected parenting” and help children be safe online and make the most of new media
and technology. Please see more information in the answer to the EQ22.
56
such as meat/fish and pulses). Nutritional guidance and support can also contribute in part to addressing health
issues. The participants (children, adolescents, and youths until 30 years) in the phone survey most frequently
mentioned ‘health’ as their most critical problem nowadays. We also recommend investigating in more detail
which health needs are required and support synergies and activities to address them following an integrated
and cross-sectoral approach. Although the overall FCS can be considered ‘acceptable’ according to the standard
limit (>35 = ‘acceptable’) of the World Food Programme, 4% of the participants have a ‘borderline’ food
consumption. The data on diet diversity also suggest a high prevalence of inadequate nutrition. The results from
the phone survey suggest that food of low nutritional value such as condiments and sugar tend to be among the
most consumed items in the participant's diet. There was low consumption of food with high protein content
such as meat/fish and pulses.
Lesson learnt 8: The participatory development of an exit strategy for the PE programme is critically important.
This should take place ideally at the time of the formulation of a new phase or early in implementation. An exit
strategy describes how the programme intends to end its support, ensuring that the achievement of programme
goals is not compromised and that progress towards these goals continues.
7 Annexes
Following the requirements of UNICEF, the annexes are presented separately and available at:
https://movimentar.co/annexes-PE-report. For confidentiality and for preserving the anonymity of the
participants, anonymous datasets can be shared upon request and approval from UNICEF.
57