Education In Nigeria
Evaluation of the Effectiveness
and Impact of SDG4
Education in Nigeria
Evaluation of the Effectiveness & Impact of SDG4
Copyright © 2022 OSSAP-SDGs & UNICEF
Published by
The Federal Government of Nigeria
Office of the Senior Special Assistant to the
President on Sustainable Development Goals
(SDGs) and United Nations Children’s Fund
(UNICEF Nigeria)
All rights reserved. No part of this publication
may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system
or transmitted, in any form or by any means,
electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording
or otherwise, without prior permission.
Prelims
Foreword
The Federal Government of Nigeria is fully committed to achieving the global agenda of universal
prosperity for all Nigerian citizens in accordance with the SDGs Equity Principle of “Leaving No One
Behind”. Consequently, the government has made adequate institutional framework for the SDGs to
ensure strong leadership and coordination for the development agenda. This institutional framework,
which has its anchor in the Presidency, is called the Office of the Special Assistant to the President
on Sustainable Goals (OSSAP-SDGs). This Office is decentralized to all 36 States and to key ministries.
The Global Agenda has been fully domesticated in the country through the development of SDGs
Implementation Plan 2020–2021 and is well aligned with the National Development Plan and the
Sectors Strategic Plans. Nigeria has also successfully completed the 2017 and 2020 Voluntary National
Reviews (VNR).
Nigeria is the first country in the Global South to have Government of Nigeria to consider to strengthen policy
undergone independent evaluations of SDG3-Health and improve education financing and learning systems to
and SDG4-Education. With these evaluations, both the meet the ambitious goals and targets of the SDG4. We are
Government of Nigeria and the development partners join positive that the recommendations from the evaluation
forces to reshape evidence-based policies, strategies and will enable the Government of Nigeria to make further
investments that will help Nigeria accelerate its progress progress on achieving SDG4 targets by 2030.
towards achieving these SDGs.
We would like to recognize the leadership role played
The independent SDG4-Education Evaluation is a by OSSAP-SDGs, the Federal Ministry of Finance,
systematic and rigorous policy analysis of the effectiveness, Budget and National Planning, and the Federal Ministry
impact and underlying driving factors influencing the of Education, and we are grateful for the technical and
Education Sector Strategic Plan 2016–2019’s progress financial support provided by UNICEF Nigeria Country
towards SDG4 in Nigeria. The findings of this strategic Office. We thank UNICEF’s Evaluation Manager
evaluation furnish further evidence for improving the and Education Section for shepherding this strategic
rights of children to education in Nigeria and how evaluation in close collaboration with OSSAP-SDGs and
the Government of Nigeria, along with development we appreciate all key players from the academia, civil
partners and civil society, can best address systemic gaps society and development partners (UNDP, UNESCO, UN
and challenges, including the negative effects of the RCO, FCDO, USAID, the World Bank) that contributed
ongoing COVID-19 pandemic, to progress on our shared to the assessment.
commitment to the 2030 sustainable development agenda.
On behalf of the Government of Nigeria and UNICEF
This report documents the evidence of how Nigeria Nigeria Country Office, we take this opportunity to
is progressing in its implementation of its National reiterate our commitment to continue working together
Strategic Education Plan, a roadmap for bringing learning to achieve the ambitious targets of the 2030 Agenda,
skills to all Nigerian children. The report includes including SDG4, which is to improve universal access to
findings, conclusions, and key recommendations for the inclusive quality basic education in Nigeria.
v
Education in Nigeria: Evaluation of the Effectiveness & Impact of SDG4
Mrs. Zainab Shamsuna Ahmed Prince Clem Ikanade Agba
Minister of Finance, Budget and National Planning Minister of State for Budget and National
Planning
Mallam Adamu Adamu Princess Adejoke Orelope-Adefulire
Minister of Education Senior Special Assistant to the President on
Sustainable Development Goals
Peter Hawkins
Country Representative
UNICEF Nigeria
vi
Acknowledgements
This evaluation report for SDG4 Evaluation in Nigeria was developed by the Evaluation Team of the
Consortium Alegre Associates (the contractor) and EdIntersect (subcontractor) based in the USA, which
includes Dr Mary Faith Mount-Cors, President of EdIntersect, Dr Karla Giuliano Sarr, International Team
Lead Consultant, Dr Adeboye Adeyemo, Co-Principal Investigator, Ms. Alice Michelazzi, Education
Advisor, and Dr Michel Rousseau, Expert Statistician. We are very grateful to the SDG4 Evaluation Team
for this comprehensive SDG4 Evaluation Final Report.
This SDG4 Evaluation Report on Nigeria was developed Assistant, OSSAP-SDGs; and Francis Akor, M&E at
by the Evaluation Team of the Consortium Alegre OSSAP-SDGs.
Associates (the contractor) and EdIntersect (subcontractor)
based in the USA, which includes Dr Mary Faith Mount- The Evaluation Team is grateful to the Task Team
Cors, President of EdIntersect; Dr Karla Giuliano Sarr, Thematic Experts for SDG4 Evaluation established by
International Team Lead Consultant; Dr Adeboye the Federal Ministry of Education and chaired by the
Adeyemo, Co-Principal Investigator; Ms Alice Michelazzi, Permanent Secretary, Arc. Sonny Echono. The Task Team
Education Advisor; and Dr Michel Rousseau, Expert comprised Dr O. Ufoegbune, Director of Educational
Statistician. We are very grateful to the SDG4 Evaluation Planning, Research and Development Department; Mrs
Team for this comprehensive SDG4 Evaluation Final Khadijat AA Liman (SDGs Focal Person); CO Ajaegbu
Report. (FME-SDG4); M. A. Arua (FME- SDG4); Mayowa Aleshin
(UBEC); Udo Akpanossom (UBEC); Dr Grace Ajagun
We express our gratitude to the country-led coordination (NERDC); Dr Fredrick Mefun (NERDC); Abdulgarfar
role played by the Technical Working Group of SDGs Otunla (FME/NEMIS); Chidi Okonkwo (FME/Policy);
Evaluation in Nigeria established by OSSAP-SDGs at the S.R. Adeyemi (FME/Research); and Sekinat Yekini
Presidency. This comprises Dr Zakari Lawal, Director of (FME/SDG4).
Monitoring & Evaluation at the FMFBNP; Dr Robert
Ndamobissi, Evaluation Manager at UNICEF; Engr The Evaluation Team also appreciates the solid support
Ahmad Kawu, Secretary of Programmes, Office of the it received from Dr Folake Olatunji-David, Director of
Senior Special Assistant to the President on Sustainable Educational Policy, Research and Statistics, and her team
Development Goals (OSSAP-SDGs); Dr. Bala Yusuf- composed of Mr Suimon Danat (NEMIS), Mr Masud
Yunusa, Technical Advisor to the SSAP, OSSAP-SDGs; Girigisu (M & Learning Assessment), and Mrs Jamila Saad
Dr Ify Ukaegbu, Education Specialist, OSSAP-SDGs; (Principal Statistician, UBEC) who played a critical role
Rose Keffas, Special Assistant MDAs at OSSAP-SDGs; Dr in providing technical support on thematic areas of the
Simon B. Harry, The Statistician General of the Federation; education sector and providing required data, tools and
Mrs. Anne Ibrahim, SDGs Desk Officer, National Bureau information that have been used by the SDG4 Evaluation
of Statistics (NBS); Dr Uzodinma Adirijee, Evaluation Team to conduct the secondary data analysis included in
Consultant and National President Nigerian Association of this report.
Evaluators; Dr. Yahaya Umar, Program Officer/Technical
vii
Education in Nigeria: Evaluation of the Effectiveness & Impact of SDG4
We take this opportunity to extend our appreciation to the Evaluation Office in HQ and the Regional Office in Dakar
UNICEF Nigeria team for their trust, guidance, support, through quality support from Dr George Laryea-Adjei,
valuable insights and quality assurance. Special thanks to Director of UNICEF Evaluation Office in HQ and Dr
Mr Peter Hawkins, UNICEF Country Representative in Michele Tarsilla, Regional Adviser of Evaluation.
Nigeria; Mrs Rushnan, UNICEF Deputy Representative
in Nigeria; Dr Robert Ndamobissi, Evaluation Manager; Most importantly, we would like to express our gratitude
Dr Euphrates Efosi Wose, Chief of Education; and Dr to the children, head teachers and school staff who
Murtala Adogi Mohammed, Education Specialist (Policy, participated in the school-level data collection in the six
Planning and System Strengthening). We also wish to case-study states. We similarly would like to thank officials
thank the colleagues from the FCDO, UNESCO, USAID from the State Universal Basic Education Boards (SUBEBs)
and the World Bank who contributed to this report. and the Ministries of Education, the Civil Society Action
Coalition on Education for All (CSACEFA), and various
The Evaluation Team recognizes the valuable role of the development partners for their support and collaboration,
external oversight Quality Assurance Reference Group including taking part in interviews.
for SDGs Evaluation in Nigeria played by UNICEF
viii
Prelims
ix
Education in Nigeria: Evaluation of the Effectiveness & Impact of SDG4
Contents
Foreword v
Acknowledgements vii
Table of Contents x
Acronyms and Abbreviations xv
Executive Summary xvii
Chapter 1 Introduction and Background 1
Background: Education Profile 3
Historical background of period of implementation 7
Impact of COVID-19 on Education Sector in Nigeria 7
Policy Context and Partnerships 8
Chapter 2 Evaluation Purpose, Objective and Scope 15
Purpose and objectives of the evaluation 15
Scope and focus of the evaluation 16
Evaluation questions 20
Chapter 3 Evaluation and Methodology 25
Overview of sample 26
Instruments 28
Chapter 4 Evaluation Findings and Analysis 38
Relevance of Education Sector Strategic Plan 48
Coherence of Education sector Strategic Plan 46
Efficiency of Education Sector Strategic Plan 2016–2019 52
Chapter 5 Education Policies Analysis and Implementation in Nigeria 137
Emerging Policy Issues 139
Chapter 6 Conclusions, Lessons Learned and Recommendations 143
Conclusions 143
Lessons learned 147
Recommendations 147
Annexes 159
Annex A: Evaluation framework 159
x
Prelims
Annex B: Map of Nigeria with states and regions 163
Annex C: Detailed Sampling Pupil Strategy 164
Annex D: Overall Strength of Evidence Ratings 164
Annex E: Mapping of MSP Objectives and Outcomes 165
Annex F: COVID-19 confirmed cases by state in Nigeria 169
Annex G: Additional Tables 170
Annex H: Tools 176
KII Protocols 179
School-level survey 188
Questionnaires 192
Mapping of literacy and numeracy tools by competency 228
Annex I: Participants of the Review and Validation Workshop in Uyo, Akwa-Ibom State, September 229
2021
Annex J: SDG4 Indicator Definitions 230
Figures
Figure 1.1: Completion rate (per cent) at primary school by State in Nigeria, MICS 2016–2017 5
Figure 1.2: MSP strategic results 6
Figure 1.3: Ten pillars of the MSP 7
Figure 1.4: Details of MSP 2018–2022 result areas 12
Figure 2.1: Theory of change (ToC) of the Education Sector Strategic Plan 2016–2019, with focus 19
on SDG4.1 on out-of-school children and basic education, reconstructed by the evalua-
tion team for the purpose of the evaluation
Figure 3.1: Policy development phases and corresponding evaluation types 27
Figure 3.2: Map of Nigeria showing the six case-study states 28
Figure 4.1: Strategies states are using to address basic education 48
Figure 4.2: Comparison of planned and actual education expenditure for Nigeria as a whole 52
Figure 4.3: Trend analysis of education, public expenditures as per cent of GDP from 2015 to 53
2020
Figure 4.4: Comparison of planned and actual education expenditures within case-study states 54
Figure 4.5: Policy development phases and corresponding evaluation types 57
Figure 4.6: Map of Nigeria showing the six case-study states 58
Figure 4.7: NEDS 2020 results for literacy, comprehension and numeracy 64
Figure 4.8: SDG4 evaluation learning assessment results by state and within a confidence interval 68
of 95per cent
Figure 4.9: Literacy & numeracy proficiency using NEDS benchmarking, in order of results 69
Figure 4.10: Literacy & numeracy proficiency using ESSPIN benchmark, in order of results 70
Figure 4.11: Primary school net enrolment ratio in Nigeria from 1995 to 2019 77
Figure 4.12: Primary school net attendance rate by year 78
Figure 4.13: Completion rates by year 79
Figure 4.14: Comparison of NEDS learning outcomes between 2015 (1st point) and 2020 (2nd 80
point)
Figure 4.15: Pupils’ reported challenges that make it difficult to come to school, by state 88
Figure 4.16: Factors responsible for school dropouts (adapted from NEDS 2020 report) 90
Figure 4.17: Factors contributing to improved learning outcomes, according to head teachers (per 93
cent), by state
Figure 4.18: Factors contributing to weakened learning outcomes, according to head teachers (per 94
cent), by state
xi
Education in Nigeria: Evaluation of the Effectiveness & Impact of SDG 4
Figure 4.19: Average scores for HGSFP schools and non-programme schools by competency and 105
grade level
Figure 4.20: Average scores for HGSFP schools and non-programme schools by competency and 106
grade, by state
Figure 4.21: Proportion of head teachers reporting pupils had access to virtual learning during 109
COVID-related closures, by state
Figure 4.22: Pupil reporting of learning activities during COVID-related school closures by zone 110
Figure 4.23: Comparison of the proportion of head teachers reporting that at least three quarters 112
of pupils had returned to school
Figure 4.24: Comparison of enrolment data by state for academic years 2019—2020 and 2020– 112
2021
Figure 4.25: Proportion of schools within SDG4 evaluation sample where head teachers report 116
training on supporting children with disabilities as well as schools with relevant disag-
gregated enrolment data
Figure 4.26: Proportion of qualified teachers by gender and by state 126
Figure 4.27: Gender parity index by year 127
Figure 4.28: Comparison of completion rates by gender and by state 129
Figure 4.29: Gender parity between results over time (Baseline and SDG4 evaluation) by state and 130
competency area
Tables
Table 1.1: Overview of key players in basic education in Nigeria 9
Table 1.2: Development partner support to sector plan implementation in Nigeria, by MSP out- 10
come area
Table 2.1: Results framework (outputs and outcomes) constructed from action plans within ESSP 17
2016–2019
Table 22: Evaluation criteria and evaluation questions 22
Table 3.1: Summary of data sources and related analysis 27
Table 3.2: Parameters of selection of states for comparative analysis 28
Table 3.3: States and baseline learning data sources 29
Table 3.4: Survey sample by state 29
Table 3.5: Overview of qualitative sample 31
Table 3.6: Overview of SDG4 evaluation tools 31
Table 4.1: Evidence rating category descriptions 38
Table 4.2: Comparison of cited barriers to access and educational quality concerning OOSC and 43
basic education within the MSP (grey indicates commonalities) 48
Table 4.3: Strategies to address OOSC and basic education within the MSP
Table 4.4: Mapping of results, targets and strategies across key policies and SDG goals 49
Table 4.5: Trend analysis of education, public expenditures as per cent of GDP from 2015 to 2020 53
Table 4.6: Trend of education financing in six selected states and Nigeria from 2015 to 2020 (N’bil- 55
lion)
Table 4.7: Comparison of cost-effectiveness analysis in Enugu and Kwara States (2016–2019) 57
Table 4.8: Updated status of achieved results against reconstructed results framework of ESSP 60
2016–2019
Table 4.9: M&E strengthening strategy developed for transition to SDGs 62
Table 4.10: Criteria for NEDS and ESSPIN benchmarks 65
Table 4.11: Criteria for GEP3 literacy (P2 only 66
xii
Prelims
Table 4.12: Literacy and numeracy proficiency using evaluation survey data, by completion rate 67
grouping (score; 98per cent confidence interval score)
Table 4.13: Literacy & numeracy proficiency using NEDS benchmark, by completion rate grouping 69
(score; 98per cent confidence interval score)
Table 4.14: Literacy & numeracy proficiency using ESSPIN benchmark 70
Table 4.15: Disbursement of matching grant to states from 2015–2019 (in Naira) 73
Table 4.16: Indicative fees and levies for newly enrolling students into JSS1 at Unity Schools 74
Table 4.17: Primary school net attendance rate by year 77
Table 4.18: Completion rates by year 79
Table 4.19: Comparison of NEDS 2015 and 2020 results by competency 80
Table 4.20: Comparison of end-of-P2 literacy results, baseline and SDG4 evaluation (continuous 81
score method)
Table 4.21: Comparison of end-of-P2 literacy competency over time using NEDS benchmark 82
Table 4.22: Comparison of end-of-P2 literacy competency over time using ESSPIN benchmark 82
Table 4.23: Comparison of end-of-P2 numeracy results, baseline and SDG4 evaluation (continuous 82
score method)
Table 4.24: Comparison of end-of-P2 numeracy competency over time using NEDS benchmark 83
Table 4.25: Comparison of end-of-P2 numeracy competency over time using ESSPIN benchmark 83
Table 4.26: Comparison of end-of-P4 literacy results, baseline and SDG4 evaluation (continuous 83
score method)
Table 4.27: Comparison of end-of-P4 literacy competency over time using NEDS benchmark 84
Table 4.28: Comparison of end-of-P4 literacy competency over time using ESSPIN benchmark 84
Table 4.29: Comparison of end-of-P4 numeracy results, baseline and SDG4 evaluation (continuous 84
score method)
Table 4.30: Comparison of end-of-P4 numeracy competency over time using NEDS benchmark 85
Table 4.31: Comparison of end-of-P4 numeracy competency over time using ESSPIN benchmark 85
Table 4.32: Possible drivers of differences in key education variables 87
Table 4.33: Summary status of SDG4.1 indicators in Nigeria 88
Table 4.34: Comparative analysis of household financial poverty with education performance indi- 95
cators of basic education in Nigeria and in six case-study states
Table 4.35: Number of primary education classrooms in Nigeria by state (2017–2019) 96
Table 4.36: Pupil-classroom ratios from 2017 to 2019 for primary education, by case-study state 97
Table 4.37: Availability of infrastructure elements within case-study states 97
Table 4.38: School infrastructure in need of repair, by proportion of schools within sample 97
Table 4.39: Availability of toilets at SDG4 evaluation sampled schools (mean) 98
Table 4.40: Teacher coverage in Nigeria from 2015 to 2019 for primary education, by case-study 99
state
Table 4.41: Pupil-teacher ratios from 2015 to 2019 for primary education, by case-study state 99
Table 4.42: School closure dates in six case study states 108
Table 4.43: Basic education performance indicators by state and Federal Capital Territory (FCT) 117
Table 4.44: Primary attendance ratio by socioeconomic quintile for case study states 119
Table 4.45: Country-wide primary net attendance ratio by socioeconomic wealth quintile 119
Table 4.46: Literacy and numeracy rates by socioeconomic status 120
Table 4.47: Regression coefficients by time period for end-of-grade-2 literacy results 120
Table 4.48: Regression coefficients by time period for end-of-grade-2 literacy results 121
Table 4.49: Regression coefficients by time for end-of-grade-4 numeracy results 121
Table 4.50: The proportion of female teachers at primary schools in Nigeria and by state 125
xiii
Education in Nigeria: Evaluation of the Effectiveness & Impact of SDG 4
Table 4.51: Gender parity index by year 127
Table 4.52: Gender parity index by state and Federal Capital Territory (FCT) 128
Table 4.53: NDES gender parity data for case-study states over three previous years 128
Table 6.1: Recommendations 149
Endnotes 233
xiv
Acronyms & Abbreviations
AESPR Annual Education Sector Performance Review
AY Academic Year
BESDA Better Education Service Delivery for All
CSACEFA Civil Society Action Coalition on Education for All
CI Confidence interval
COVID Coronavirus disease
CSO Civil society organization
DAC Development Assistance Cooperation
DFID Department for International Development
DHS Demographic and Health Survey
DP Development partner
ECCD Early Childhood Care and Development
ECCDE Early Childhood Care, Development, and Education
ECDI Early Childhood Development Index
ECOWAS Economic Community of West African States
EFA Education for All
EMIS Education Management Information System
ERGP Economic Recovery and Growth Plan
ESSP Education Sector Strategic Plan
ESSPIN Education Sector Support Programme in Nigeria
EQ Evaluation question
FAO Food and Agriculture Organization
FCDO Foreign, Commonwealth and Development Office
FCT Federal Capital Territory
FMWASD Federal Ministry for Women’s Affairs and Social Development
FMOE Federal Ministry of Education
FRN Federal Republic of Nigeria
GDP Gross domestic product
GEP Girls Education Project
GER Gross enrolment rates
GPE Global Partnership for Education
GPI Gender Parity Index
HGSFP Home-Grown School Feeding Programme
HGSFHP Home-Grown School Feeding and Health Programme
IDP Internally Displaced Person
IQTE Islamiyya Quaranic and Tsangaya Education
IRT Item Response Theory
JICA Japan International Cooperation Agency
JSS Junior secondary school
KADBEAM Kaduna Basic Education Accountability Mechanism
xv
Education in Nigeria: Evaluation of the Effectiveness & Impact of SDG4
KII Key informant interview
LGA Local Government Area
LOE Level of effort
M4P Making Markets Work for the Poor
MDA Ministries, Departments and Agencies
MDG Millennium Development Goal
MICS Multiple Indicator Cluster Survey
MSP Ministerial Strategic Plan
NAE Nigerian Association of Evaluators
NCTP National Cash Transfer Programme
NDES Nigeria Digest of Educational Statistics
NDHS Nigeria Demographic and Health Survey
NEDS Nigeria Education Data Survey
NEG National Education Group
NEJ National Education Judicator
NEMIS National Education Management Information System
NER Net enrolment rate
NFE Non-formal education
NHGSFP National Home-Grown School Feeding Programme
NPA National Personnel Audit
NSIP National Social Investment Programme
OOSC out-of-school children
OPM Oxford Policy Management
OR Odds ratio
OSSAP Office of the Senior Special Assistant to the President
PISA Programme for International Student Assessment
SBMC School-Based Management Committee
SDG Sustainable Development Goal
SES Socioeconomic status
SIP School Improvement Programme
SMOE State Ministry of Education
SMS Short message service
SSA Sub-Saharan Africa
SUBEB State Universal Basic Education Board
TEGINT Transforming Education for Girls in Nigeria and Tanzania
TIMMS Trends in International Mathematics and Science Study
TDP Teacher Development Programme
ToC Theory of change
ToR Terms of reference
TV Television
TVET Technical Vocational Education and Training
UBE Universal Basic Education
UBEC Universal Basic Education Commission
UIS UNESCO Institute for Statistics
UN United Nations
UNESCO United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization
UNICEF United Nations Children’s Fund
USA United States of America
USAID United States Agency for International Development
VNR Voluntary National Report
xvi
Executive Summary
Introduction
In conformity with the protocols and recommendations of the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs)
and the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, countries of the world committed themselves to
ending poverty and hunger everywhere; combating inequalities within and among countries; building
peaceful, just and inclusive societies; protecting human rights and promoting gender equality and the
empowerment of women and girls; as well as ensuring the lasting protection of the planet and its
natural resources. A review of the implementation of the precursor Millennium Development Goals
(MDGs) in Nigeria reveals that the country registered mixed results across the goals, geographic areas
and gender groups. Nonetheless, Nigeria provided leadership on the MDGs within Africa and globally
as institutions, innovations and policies introduced in Nigeria were partly replicated by other countries.
However, showing the same leadership on the SDGs and, in addition, delivering results across all the
goals requires not only proactive planning and implementation, but also proper monitoring and
evaluation1.
The Nigerian Government, through the Office of the (FMOE), the Ministry of Budget and National Planning,
Senior Special Assistant to the President on SDGs (OSSAP- the Ministry of Finance, Parliament, other relevant
SDGs), and UNICEF commissioned this independent Ministries, Departments and Agencies, State Ministries of
evaluation which was implemented by Alegre Associates Education (SMOE), development partners, the Nigerian
and EdIntersect. The evaluation assesses the merit of Association of Evaluations, civil society organizations and
results achieved in Nigeria within the context of the the private sector.
country’s Education Sector Strategic Plan (ESSP) 2016–
2019 toward the attainment of SDG4, which intends to This independent evaluation seeks to fulfil the following
ensure “inclusive and equitable quality education and objectives:
promote lifelong learning opportunities for all”. • Measure the extent to which the Education Sector
Strategic Plan (2016–2019) has been effectively
Evaluation Purpose, Objective and
implemented;
Scope • Assess the level of basic education2 enrolment and
completion for girls and boys (Access);Determine
The purpose of the Independent Evaluation of SDG4 is
the extent to which effective learning outcomes have
to foster learning and accountability to citizens, and it aims
been achieved (Quality);
to serve as high-level evidence-based policy advocacy to
• Understand the driving factors (explanations),
reshape national policies, strategies and investments such
strengths and weaknesses (bottlenecks) in the
as the evolving National Development Plan 2021–2025,
implementation of selected strategic education
the new Education Sector Strategic Plan 2023–2027
programmes; and
and additional innovative measures to accelerate SDGs
• Provide strategic policy recommendations that will
Actions 2020–2030. Evaluation users are the Presidency,
help decision makers and stakeholders of education
including the Office of the Senior Special Assistant to the
development at all levels accelerate progress and
President of SDGs, the Federal Ministry of Education
xvii
Education in Nigeria: Evaluation of the Effectiveness & Impact of SDG 4
achieve SDG4 in Nigeria within the last decade of methodology, the evaluation team employed a variety of
SDGs Action 2020–2030.3 quantitative and qualitative instruments, which included
head teacher questionnaires, end-of-Grade-2 and end-of-
The SDG4 evaluation focused specifically on target 1 Grade-4 literacy and numeracy assessments for students,
of SDG4: “ensure that all girls and boys complete free, key informant interview guides, a school-closures record
equitable and quality primary and secondary education form, and a state cost-effectiveness data form. Two main
leading to relevant and effective learning outcomes” sources of primary data collection informed findings of the
(UNESCO, n.d.) by 2030. Six OECD Development SDG4 Evaluation.
Assistance Cooperation (DAC) criteria as well as two SDG
principles provide an analytical structure for questions and The first field primary data collection was the school-level
guide the evaluation. survey conducted within six case-study states, targeting
primary school pupils and head teachers. This strategy
This SDG4.1 Evaluation in Nigeria focus on Target 1 focused on assessing pupils’ learning outcomes. Data
(SDG4.1) related to access and quality of basic education collection took place between 9 February and 7 April 2021.
as strategic priority of Nigeria to address out-of-school The six case-study states were Enugu, Kaduna, Kano,
children and improved learning outcomes, decided in large Katsina, Kwara and Zamfara. In total, 5,159 pupils and 479
participatory Evaluative Thinking Workshops driven by head teachers participated in the evaluation, covering 480
Government/OSSAP-SDGs during the SDGs Evaluation primary schools. For comparison across time, notably to
Capacity Building Workshop held in February 2019 in Lagos coincide with the beginning of the SDG period in 2016,
and during the SDG4 Evaluation Inception Workshop two previous studies served as baseline proxy measures for
organized in January 2020. This strategic prioritization of Grade 2 and Grade 4 literacy and numeracy competency
the scope of the SDG4.1 Evaluation was endorsed by the levels: The Education Sector Support Programme in
Education Sector Development Partners Group co-chaired Nigeria (ESSPIN) 2015 composite survey, and the Girls
by the Permanent Secretary and Donor’s Lead. Therefore, Education Project (GEP) Phase 3 2015 evaluation.
the SDG4.1 Evaluation in Nigeria assesses the Education
Strategic Plan 2016-2019’s effective contribution to The second main source of primary data is semi-structured
ensuring that all boys and girls complete free, equitable key informant interviews with 67 stakeholders (23 women,
and quality primary and secondary education leading to 44 men). In total, the evaluation team conducted 41
relevant and effective learning outcomes in fulfilment of key informant interviews, which yielded qualitative
the SD4.1 global agenda in 2030. information.
Methodology
Multiple secondary data sources also figure prominently
in the analysis, notably the Education Management
The SDG4 evaluation followed two main approaches: a
Information System (EMIS), Multiple Indicator Cluster
realist evaluation approach, and systems thinking. The
Survey (MICS), the Nigeria Education Data Survey
evaluation team used multiple analytical techniques and
(NEDS) and Nigeria Digest of Educational Statistics
a combination of qualitative and quantitative data from
(NDES) data.4
multiple sources to triangulate information needed to
answer the evaluation questions. The process followed a
Several analytical strategies guided data analysis efforts:
mixed-methods convergent design in which data from both
(1) descriptive analysis of key indicators; (2) multivariate
analytical streams were collected simultaneously. During
regression analysis for quantitative data; (3) education
the analysis, the evaluation team sought to use qualitative
financing and cost-effectiveness analysis; (4) policy process
data to extend and explain quantitative findings and to
development analysis; (5) document and evidence review;
explore points of divergence between data collected when
and (6) analysis of interview data. Finally, the evaluation
relevant.
team mitigated several limitations throughout the process.
The baseline proxy studies did not provide complete data
The evaluation questions required policy content
sets for comparison and, in addition, financial data were
evaluation, implementation evaluation, and impact
not available to the evaluation team, which affected the
evaluation strategies. In line with the evaluation
comprehensiveness of the cost-effectiveness analysis.
xviii
Prelims
COVID-19 restrictions as well as security concerns to constitute a problem. With approximately 20 million
also posed challenges for the study, including limiting out-of-school children globally, Nigeria has the highest
international and in-country travel. The evaluation team number of out-of-school children in the world. Only 61 per
addressed these limitations through close collaboration cent of 6 to 11-year-olds regularly attend primary school
with Nigeria-based team members, including a local data and only 36 per cent of children between three and five
collection firm. attend organized early childhood education programmes
(MICS, 2016). Regarding the quality of education, about 50
Background
per cent of in-school children are not learning as expected,
and therefore cannot read or write. Approximately 63 per
Nigeria is the most populous country in Africa with
cent of children who live in rural areas cannot read at all
approximately 180 million people and also has the
and, similarly, around 84 per cent of children in the lowest
largest economy in Africa, with the 2018 gross domestic
economic quartile also cannot read at all.
product (GDP) estimated at 136 trillion Nigerian naira
(approximately US$356 million). Nigeria’s National Policy
The Federal Government collaborates with subnational
on Education (2004) was a major step in increasing access
governments and the private sector in implementing the
to basic education. In the same year, Nigeria passed the
Education Sector Strategic Plan (ESSP) (2016–2019) and
Universal Basic Education (UBE) Act that made basic
the Ministerial Strategic Plan (MSP) (2018-2022) entitled
education ‘free and compulsory’. Nevertheless, at least
Education for Change.6 The MSP is built on the strategic
12.7 million5 children are reported to be ‘out of school’ in
intent of the UBE Act and SDG4 is integrated into the
Nigeria and gender disparities in basic education continue
ESSP to ensure that all girls and boys complete free,
Es1: MSP Strategic Results
Access
Systems
Quality
strengthening
SUMMARY CONCLUSIONS (Relevance)
SDG4 is interconnected with other SDGs, most notably poverty (SDG1), health (SDG3), gender equality (SDG5)
and sanitation (SDG6).
The federal government recognizes key barriers to achieving SDG4 and addresses them within its strategy
priorities. All states also show evidence of initiatives aimed at addressing barriers, improving school enrolment
and fostering improved quality. Poverty, insecurity and a lack of political will are the most worrying barriers.
xix
Education in Nigeria: Evaluation of the Effectiveness & Impact of SDG 4
equitable and quality primary and secondary education Coherence of the Education Sector
leading to relevant and effective learning outcomes by 2030. Strategic Plan 2016–2019
The MSP recognizes that education is at the heart of all
national development efforts. It acknowledges the human Overall Finding: The ESSP 2016–2019 is only
partially coherent due to the absence of a ToC
capacity needs to achieve sustainable development goals
and results framework
and increase national prosperity, and the needs of Nigeria’s
youth to develop 21st-century skills to competitively
Quality of the Evidence: Medium
participate in the national and global economies. The plan
aims to achieve the three strategic results of access, quality, The evaluation team concludes that the Education
and systems strengthening (see Figure ES1),7 and identifies Strategic Plan 2016–2019 is partially coherent with SDG4
10 pillars necessary to obtaining the strategic results. and established management practices. Policy review
indicates coherence between SDG4 and key education
Findings and Conclusions
sector policies, namely the ESSP, MSP, UBE Act, and the
strategic plans of all six case-study states. All interviewees
Relevance of the Education Sector Strategic
at the federal level, including FMOE officials, SMOE
Plan 2016–2019
officials, development partners and CSO actors, indicated
Overall Finding: The ESSP 2016–2020 is highly they believe the SDG4-supportive strategies to be well
relevant in linking to other SDGs and address- mainstreamed into federal- and state-level education
ing barriers sector policies and strategies. SMOE and SUBEB officials
interviewed from all six case-study states also indicated that
Quality of the Evidence: Strong
strategies were aligned. The FMOE has made concerted
The evaluation team has concluded that the MSP 2016– efforts to encourage and support states in adapting their
2019 is highly relevant to the global agenda and is fully plans to reflect federal plans. Strategies indicated within
interconnected with other SDGs, most notably poverty the MSP support both a reduction in the number of out-
(SDG1), health (SDG3), gender equality (SDG5) and of-school children and an improvement in access and
sanitation (SDG6). The federal government recognizes quality of basic education offerings, thereby demonstrating
key barriers to achieving SDG4 and addresses them coherence with SDG4. Most notable among strategies are
within its strategy priorities. All states also show evidence the 2004 UBE Act and the National Home-Grown School
of initiatives aimed at addressing barriers, improving Feeding Programme (NHGSFP).
school enrolment and fostering improved quality. Poverty,
insecurity and a lack of political will are the most worrying At the same time, the evaluation team has also concluded
barriers. Stakeholders generally described the opportunity that this sector strategic plan does not comply with the
cost to families and how a child attending school results Standard of Results Based Planning and Management (RBM
in loss of revenue for the family, which may be critical to approach) due to the absence of a theory of change and a
daily survival. Similarly, over a quarter of interviews also results framework as well as a comprehensive monitoring
identified insecurity as a major barrier to equitable access and evaluation system for accountability. There is a need for
to quality education. The government addresses these capacity development for the Education Ministry Planning
barriers through strategies aimed at promoting community & Management Staff on RBM practices in order to ensure
engagement, addressing sociocultural barriers, developing a drastic shift from action-oriented strategic planning (10
state-level basic education strategies, and collaborating pillars of action) to results-oriented strategic planning (e.g.,
with development partners. logic model of impact, outcomes and outputs, risks and
assumptions) and the institutionalization of a culture of
accountability for results.
SUMMARY CONCLUSIONS (Coherence)
Policy review indicates and interviewees unanimously confirm that education sector policies and strategies both at the federal and
state levels align with the SDG4.1 target particularly in the formulation of the plans. Most notable is the 2004 Compulsory, free, Uni-
versal Basic Education (UBE) Act. Alignment is deliberate and the product of government and development partner efforts.
xx
Prelims
Efficiency of the Education Sector the universal basic education policy, in designating
Strategic Plan 2016–2019 EduMarshals, for instance, to identify school-age children
in the street and enrol them.
Overall Finding: Low Efficiency – Education Fi-
nancing is insufficient in Nigeria and account-
Gaps between strategy and implementation have also
ability is lacking
hindered Nigeria’s progress at multiple levels. A governance
challenge resides at the heart of the issue. Federal, state,
Quality of the Evidence: Medium
and local governments share responsibility for education
Based on evidence available, the evaluation has concluded in Nigeria. In addition, SUBEBs and SMOEs have
that education financing is much lower than in other African overlapping responsibilities, and coordination between
countries, as indicated in Figure 3.9, and that transparency them was found to be weak. The UBE Act and Universal
about budgeting and spending is very poor. The Education Basic Education Commission (UBEC) lack the mandate to
2030 Framework for Action recommends that countries influence major investments in basic education at the state
allocate at least 4–6 per cent of their GDP and/or at level. Moreover, while the FMOE provides useful guidance
least 15–20 per cent of public expenditure to education to states, by design, states remain autonomous and apply
(UNESCO, 2015, p. 67). With public expenditures for FMOE suggestions at their discretion. Accountability is
education well below 1 per cent of its GDP, Nigeria fails lacking between federal and state governments in terms of
to meet the UNESCO recommendation. Findings also implementation of key programmes. Similarly, a gap exists
indicate that coordination around budget allocation, between the SDG offices and SDG implementing agencies
release, and spending is lacking. These weaknesses also as coordination is weak.
constitute major barriers for the education system.
Effectiveness of the Education Sector
At the state level, actual expenditure regularly falls below Strategic Plan 2016–2019
planned expenditure due to the non-release of capital
Overall Finding: Weak Effectiveness of Expected
funds budgeted. The inability of some states to access
Results of Education MSP 2016–2019
UBE counterpart funding is a lost opportunity to enhance
basic education at the state level. In addition, out-of-pocket Quality of the Evidence: Medium
costs to parents for schooling represent a major barrier in
Given the available evidence from the Nigeria Digest
demand for education and limit the total enforcement of
of Educational Statistics (NDES), FMOE National
the Education Act 2004 related to compulsory and free
Education Indicators (2016), the 2018 UBEC National
primary education in Nigeria. Moreover, conclusions on
Personnel Audit (NPA), the National Nigeria Education
cost-effectiveness are limited by inaccessibility of budget
Data Survey (NEDS), the National Demographic Health
information in three of the six case-study states, and it is
Survey (NDHS) and the National Home-Grown School
not possible to determine a complete calculation for cost-
Feeding Programme (NHGSFP) Performance Review, the
effectiveness. Findings do affirm that the cost per pupil
SDG4 evaluation team concluded that the effectiveness of
decreases as enrolment increases. In addition, Kaduna
the MSP 2016–2019 is low vis-à-vis the intended impacts,
State demonstrates a compelling approach to enforcing
SUMMARY CONCLUSIONS (Efficiency)
Based on evidence available, the evaluation has concluded that education financing is much lower than in other African countries,
and that transparency about budgeting and spending is very poor.
Conclusions on cost-effectiveness are limited by inaccessibility of budget information in three of the six case-study states, and it is
not possible to determine a complete calculation for cost-effectiveness.
Gaps between strategy and implementation have hindered Nigeria’s progress at multiple levels. A governance challenge resides at
the heart of the issue. Federal, state and local governments share responsibility for education in Nigeria. In addition, SUBEBs and
SMOEs have overlapping responsibilities, and coordination between them was found to be weak.
Accountability is lacking between federal and state governments in terms of implementation of key programmes. Similarly, a gap
exists between the SDG offices and SDG implementing agencies as coordination is weak.
xxi
Education in Nigeria: Evaluation of the Effectiveness & Impact of SDG 4
SUMMARY CONCLUSIONS (Effectiveness)
The effectiveness of the MSP 2016–2019 is low vis-à-vis the intended impacts, outcomes and outputs indicated in the reconstructed
MSP results framework. Government-anticipated results of achieving universal access (100per cent) to basic education and to enrol 100
per cent of 10 million out-of-school children by 2020 are not likely to be achieved.
Monitoring and evaluation systems focusing on basic education, and SDG4.1 in particular, are weak and, in some cases, nonexistent.
Results frameworks for SDG4.1 and the FMOE do not exist.
Nigeria’s overall education financing is far below that of other African countries and transparency in financing data is extremely weak.
At the state level, actual expenditure regularly falls below planned expenditure due to the non-release of capital funds budgeted.
Funding for basic education is inherently shared between multiple actors, including the federal government, state governments,
development partners, private actors and parents, among others. Even with basic education declared as free, parents still bear a con-
siderable burden in getting their children to school.
outcomes and outputs indicated in the reconstructed comparisons of pupils’ proficiency over time and between
MSP results framework. Government-anticipated results states:
of achieving universal access (100 per cent) to basic • Access: Enrolment numbers continue to increase
education and to enrol 100 per cent of 10 million out-of- though attendance rates indicate that less than two
school children by 2020 have not yet been achieved. thirds of pupils attend school nationally while rates
vary significantly between states. Similarly, NEMIS
Assessment of achievement of MSP outcomes is limited 2019 data indicate a net enrolment rate of 69.9 per
due to the absence of a results framework, weak monitoring cent. Children in urban areas are nearly 30 percentage
and inadequate statistical data. The evaluation team points more likely to attend school than rural peers,
reconstituted a results framework based on projections suggesting major gaps according to location.
within the ESSP and by drawing updated results from • Quality: The absence of national benchmarks
existing data sets and reports. Based on this reconstituted prevents meaningful comparisons of pupils’
results framework, with the exception of net enrolment, proficiency over time and between states. In the full
indicators show improvement between 2016 and 2018, but report, Table 3.1 collates benchmark criteria from
none of the results were reliably consistent as progress did various assessments and may serve as a starting point
not continue into 2019. for an inclusive consultative process. Among the case-
study states, results from pupils in Enugu and Kwara
In addition, monitoring and evaluation systems focusing States are consistently better and demonstrate that
on basic education in Nigeria, and SDG4.1 in particular, completion rate groupings used for this evaluation
require reinforcement and, in some cases, are nonexistent. are misleading. Using NEDS benchmarking, results
For illustration, monitoring efforts within the FMOE, while are very worrying as across the sample, nearly half of
improved since the launch of the SDGs, remain focused pupils complete Grade 4 without being able to read
at the activity and output levels. Despite espoused plans one word from a flashcard or perform a single-digit
and strategies to update monitoring and reporting systems, addition problem. Pupils in urban areas outperform
notably within the 2021 Nigeria SDGs Implementation pupils in rural areas. Overall, the gender gap is small
Plan, the SDG4 evaluation team saw no indications of with girls generally trailing behind, and more so in
progress. No tracking or monitoring reports were available rural areas.
for review. In addition, the 2020 Voluntary National • Systems strengthening: School-Based Management
Review as well as the 2017 SDG baseline evaluation report Committees (SBMCs) represent a powerful
omitted data on SDG4.18 entirely. Moreover, a theory of coordination mechanism and garner enthusiasm
change and results frameworks for SDG4.1 and the FMOE among education stakeholders. At the federal
do not exist. level, the National Education Group (NEG), a
body made up of government and development
Nonetheless, findings from the SDG4 evaluation provide partners, constitutes a potentially strong coordination
insights into the ESSP outcome areas. The absence of mechanism at the national level, but could benefit
national benchmarks, however, prevents meaningful from further broadening of its scope to expand
xxii
Prelims
beyond specific development partner projects. The gaps in spending, school and PTA (parent-teacher
UBE Act and the UBEC Intervention Fund hold association) levies contradict free education promises and
promise as important structures, but also suffer from pose a serious challenge. They are heavily contested and
implementation flaws and weak coordination. politically charged.
Impact of the Education Sector
Funding for basic education is inherently shared between
multiple actors, including the federal government, state Strategic Plan 2016–2019
governments, development partners, private actors, and
Overall Finding: Insufficient impact of Educa-
parents, among others. Funding for basic education is
tion MSP 2016–2019 – Nigeria is unlikely to
complex and data are incomplete or nonexistent, thus
achieve SDG4
precluding a robust analysis of government funding
sources. Findings show that funding levels vary between
Quality of the Evidence: Medium
states. Yet even with basic education declared as free,
parents still bear a considerable burden in getting their Driving factors negatively impacting the education sector
children to school. While originally intended to cover include inadequate education financing (below 1 per
SUMMARY CONCLUSIONS (Impact)
Quantitative evidence from NEMIS data presented in Figures 18 and 19 (in the main report) on access indicators and findings from
NEDS (2015) on learning outcomes reveals that Nigeria is not likely to achieve the global agenda of universal inclusive and equitable
quality basic education for all (100per cent) school-age children by 2030. The net enrolment rate shows that just over two thirds of
children (69.9per cent) were attending school in 2019. Regarding quality, NEDS 2020 data show that only 41 per cent of P2-age chil-
dren were able to read one word from a flashcard and 44 per cent were able to perform a single-digit addition problem. Results for
literacy remained stable whereas numeracy results decreased by 10 percentage points since 2015 (see Table 29).
Evidence from Primary Data Collection (School-Based Students Learning Outcomes Assessment) completed in 6 cases study States
by the independent evaluation in 2021 revealed that the Pupils Proficiency in Literacy is Higher in only Enugu State (603.38 against a
benchmark of 500) and Lower in the remaining 5 States of Kano (488.77), Zamfara (443.38), Katsina (452.71) and Kwara (493.56). The
Benchmark of the composite indicator used for the measurement of Proficiency in Literacy is 500.
Regarding the Learning Outcomes in Numeracy, findings from the independent SDG4.1 Evaluation school-based primary data
collection done in 2021 in 6 selected states revealed that only two states have higher score of Pupils Proficiency in Numeracy: Enugu
(599.46) and Kwara (565.28 against the benchmark of 500); other remaining four states have lower Pupils Proficiency in Numeracy:
Kano (463.14), Zamfara (437.04) and Katsina (476.70). Primary data collection on pupils learning outcomes wasn’t undertaken in
Kaduna due to insecurity issue.
The Federal Ministry of Education and the Universal Basic Education Commission have not yet developed and adopted the global
standard method of calculating Pupils Minimum Proficiency Level in Literacy and Numeracy for Nigeria. There is also absence of na-
tional benchmarks that prevents meaningful comparisons of pupils’ proficiency over time and between states; However, to address
this challenge, UNICEF’s Nigeria will support the Federal Ministry of Education to establish a Nationally accepted standard for calcu-
lating Minimum Proficiency Level in Literacy and Numeracy for Nigeria including adequate Data Collection Tools.
Inadequate economic power remains a barrier to access, and more so for girls than boys. Government policies recognize sociocultur-
al beliefs and practices as well as the significant challenge of insecurity in some of Nigeria’s states act as barriers. Insecurity poses a
serious threat to Nigeria meeting its SDG4 goals.
Despite MSP-espoused actions to improve school infrastructure, findings show that the absence of infrastructure, notably insufficient
numbers of classrooms and inadequate and poorly maintained structures, continues to serve as a barrier to progress.
Investigation of human resources as a potential driver for improving quality shows that few gains have been made in increasing
teacher coverage within the period of the SDG4 evaluation.
The National Home-Grown School Feeding Programme (NHGSFP) is the most prominent flagship programme related to education.
While NHGSFP reports also demonstrate enrolment increases, analysis of learning outcomes shows little improvement for participat-
ing schools in the SDG4 school sample compared to non-participating schools.
While the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic will continue to emerge, schools experienced at least four months of learning loss and
there is cause for concern that girls may be more adversely affected than boys. More than half of pupils surveyed report not having
participated in an alternative form of learning during school closures. While findings are inconsistent, they indicate that one fifth of
schools had experienced a loss of a quarter or more of their pupils at the time of data collection.
xxiii
Education in Nigeria: Evaluation of the Effectiveness & Impact of SDG 4
cent of GDP), growing insecurity making schools unsafe and inadequate, poorly maintained structures (including
in northern Nigeria, household poverty vis-à-vis real WASH facilities), persist as barriers to progress. Data were
school costs, cultural and social norms, negative impact generally lacking for this analysis and NDES data, though
of COVID-19, violence in school, insufficient key inputs available, suffer from inconsistencies. Investigation of
(teachers and school infrastructure) for education and human resources as a potential driver for improving quality
weak governance. These factors have drastically limited shows that few gains have been made in increasing teacher
achievement of the ambitious intentions expressed in the coverage within the period of the SDG4 evaluation.
MSP 2016–2019.
Driving factors of changes in completion rates:
Gains in learning outcomes: Close study of learning
Analysis of differences in drivers supporting and hindering
outcomes scores over time demonstrates a gain between
success in reaching SDG4 goals during different periods
baseline proxy measures (2015) and SDG4 evaluation
within the time frame of the evaluation is inconclusive as
assessments (2021) for end-of-Grade-2 and end-of-Grade-4
there was variation in experiences and outcomes for the
literacy and numeracy overall and in almost all of the six
different case-study states during these periods. At the
case-study states. Pupils in Enugu State consistently
same time, development partner interventions surface
outperform others, while Grade 4 pupils in Kwara State
as the most common attribute for post-2016 changes,
and Kaduna State show significant improvement.
and to a lesser extent, the National Home-Grown School
Feeding Programme (NHGSFP). The creation and
Barriers: Inadequate economic power remains a barrier
success of SBMCs, a development partner initiative, is also
to access, and more so for girls than boys, according to
notable. Negative drivers include the economic recession,
SDG4 school survey findings, key informant interviews
insecurity, and changes in national and state administration
and NEDS results. Government policies recognize
as well as hampered sustainability of activities when
sociocultural beliefs and practices, including gender
development partner projects recede.
norms, as well as the significant challenge of insecurity
in some of Nigeria’s states, as barriers. All head teachers
Driving factors affecting key education vari-
surveyed in Kaduna State (100 per cent) who reported
ables:
non-COVID closures chose insecurity as the reason,
followed by nearly all of Katsina State head teachers (98.6 Although the analysis of learning outcomes and changes
per cent), 83.3 per cent of Kano head teachers and 60 per in completion rates was inconclusive, the evaluation team
cent of Zamfara head teachers. Insecurity poses a serious studied the differences between the drivers applicable
threat to Nigeria meeting its SDG4 goals. It is likely that to key education variables for only the case-study states
pupils in vulnerable areas will continue to fall behind and with low completion rates (Kano and Zamfara) and high
miss learning opportunities available to their peers in more completion rates (Kwara and Kaduna) based on 2016
stable environments. MICS data. Accordingly, regression analysis reveals that
the demand-side characteristics in Table 3.32 as possible
Despite MSP-espoused actions to improve school drivers for attendance rate, a child having the right age at
infrastructure, findings show that inadequate the end of primary and age-appropriate development.
infrastructure, notably insufficient numbers of classrooms
Table 42: Possible drivers of differences in key education variables
Primary school attendance rate Rate of right-age children at Age-appropriate early childhood development
the end of primary
Bivariate and Multivariate Regres-
sion Analysis
Pupil’s gender Socioeconomic quintile Children receive learning support at home
Socioeconomic quintile Child labour Presence of children’s books at home
Mother attended at least primary
school
xxiv
Prelims
Flagship programme achievements: The NHGSFP is the achieving the universal principle of ‘leave no one behind’.
most prominent flagship programme related to education. Geographic and wealth inequalities still run very deep in
Interview data show great enthusiasm for the school Nigeria, particularly between North and South, between
feeding programme, including stories of parents sending poor and rich families and for children with disabilities.
their children to school as a result of it. While NHGSFP Persisting inequalities hamper access to education for the
reports also demonstrate enrolment increases, analysis disadvantaged groups.
of learning outcomes shows little improvement on those
measures for participating schools within the SDG4 Learning outcomes underline that children in the lowest
school sample compared to non-participating schools. wealth quintiles consistently underperform their peers
Similarly, the programme suffers from implementation and evidence shows no meaningful indication of change
inconsistencies that require attention. At the time of in improving learning and lessening economic barriers
writing, the NHGSFP was still suspended due to the between baseline proxy studies and the SDG4 evaluation.
pandemic. Data also show that southern states consistently outperform
northern states in terms of learning proficiency and gender
Impact of COVID-19 on education system: parity. National- and state-level strategies, particularly
UBE, emphasize education for all and providing services
While the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic will continue
to the most marginalized groups. These strategies support
to emerge, schools experienced at least four months of
principles of equity, universality, and ‘leave no one behind’.
learning loss and the negative impact for girls will likely be
At the state level, where implementation is most critical,
greater than for boys. Of concern, more than half of pupils
however, deliberate strategies are absent and education
surveyed report not having participated in an alternative
programmes are failing to meet the needs of the most
form of learning during school closures. While findings are
vulnerable children, including children with disabilities.
inconsistent, they indicate that one fifth of schools had
The most insidious of the structural barriers are PTA
experienced a loss of a quarter or more of their pupils at the
levies, which are deliberately constructed by schools and
time of data collection. Much needs to be done to support
PTAs. Additional sensitization is required for education
local economies and enhance enrolment campaigns, as
officials to recognize the challenges and structural barriers
well as to establish effective catch-up programming.
that prevent the most marginalized from truly accessing
and benefiting from educational services.
SDG Principle of Human Rights, Equity,
Universality and Leave No One Behind
Gender Equality
Overall Finding: SDG principles of Equity and
Overall Finding: Gender equality is still not met
LNOB are not met for Education in Nigeria
as girls continue to lag behind
Quality of the Evidence: Strong
Quality of the Evidence: Strong
Based on the evidence generated through inequalities
Government policies demonstrate attention to gender
analysis of key education indicators, the evaluation team
equality and the empowerment of girls and women, yet
has concluded that the education sector in Nigeria is not
completion rates of girls continue to lag behind boys overall
SUMMARY CONCLUSIONS (Human Rights)
Learning outcomes underline that children in the lowest wealth quintiles consistently underperform their peers and evidence shows
no meaningful indication of change in improving learning and lessening economic barriers between baseline studies and the SDG4
evaluation.
National and state-level strategies, particularly UBE, emphasize education for all and providing services to the most marginalized
groups. These strategies support principles of equity, universality and ‘leave no one behind’.
At the state level, where implementation is most critical, however, deliberate strategies are absent and education programmes are
failing to meet the needs of the most vulnerable children, including children with disabilities.
The most insidious of the structural barriers are PTA levies, which are deliberately constructed by schools and PTAs.
xxv
Education in Nigeria: Evaluation of the Effectiveness & Impact of SDG 4
and comparison of learning results between baseline proxy partners. In terms of sustainability, the government’s
studies and the SDG4 evaluation shows little progress in espoused commitment to basic education persists since
closing the gender gap. Table 4.9 in the main report shows the establishment of UBE in 2004 and continues to grow.
how the gender parity index (GPI) for the six case-study SBMCs present a particular promise for both effectiveness
states is generally just under 1. This result indicates that and sustainability. Their potential should be harnessed
girls are lagging behind a bit in primary school enrolment, and multiplied in order to continue to improve enrolment,
but the gap is not very wide. Regionally, results suggest that retention and equity in schooling. Though less established,
Zamfara shows the largest gap between girls and boys and the use of technology and public-private partnerships also
Kano and Katsina seem to have closed the gap since about demonstrates promise for sustainability. Nonetheless,
2013 (as suggested by 2013 DHS data and subsequent efforts are not centralized and the extent to which particular
studies). interventions may be sustained is unclear.
Summary Status of SDG4.1 Indicators
At the same time, there has been improvement in
recruitment of female teachers since 2016. In addition, in Nigeria
generally, female teachers are more qualified than their
SDG4.1 Commitment:
male counterparts according to available data. Nonetheless,
entrenched gender norms minimizing the importance By 2030, ensure that all girls and boys complete free,
of girls’ education persist in many areas of Nigeria and equitable and quality primary and secondary education
much remains to be done to make girls more comfortable, leading to relevant and effective learning outcomes
supported, and successful at school over the longer term in
Table 3.32 presents education results from Nigeria against
order to stay in school and complete the basic education
SDG4.1 global and thematic indicators. UNICEF provided
cycle, including more deliberate policies, activities, gender-
the framework and the evaluation team compiled data
sensitive monitoring efforts, and gender analysis.
from multiple sources including SDG4 evaluation data,
computations of MICS (2017) data, EMIS (2019) and
Sustainability
NEDS (2020) findings. Grey highlight identifies the global
Overall Finding: There is potential for sustain- indicators. Analysis shows that Nigeria has met one of the
ability, but it is weak as interventions are dispa- eight indicators included here.
rate
Key Policy Issues for Advocacy
Quality of the Evidence: Medium
A number of key issues need attention from policymakers
In answering this question, the evaluation team focused on
and decision takers in the immediate to medium term
initiatives that surfaced above as positive developments.
if SDG4.1 is to be attained by 2030. Government must
These include political commitment to basic education,
demonstrate strong political will and create substantial
active and sustained SBMCs, the use of technology, state-
innovative fiscal space to drastically increase the level
level monitoring and evaluation processes, partnerships with
of public education financing to support the effective
the private sector and advancements made by development
operationalization of its policy to support free and
SUMMARY CONCLUSIONS (Gender Equality)
Government policies demonstrate attention to gender equality and the empowerment of girls and women, though much remains to
be done to make girls more comfortable, supported and successful at school over the longer term in order to stay in school and com-
plete primary school, including more deliberate policies, activities and gender-sensitive monitoring efforts. Development partners
have put in place a number of initiatives to support girls’ education, with emphasis on improving access to WASH facilities.
Despite an emphasis on girls’ education, completion rates of girls continue to lag behind boys overall and comparison of learning
results between baseline studies and the SDG4 evaluation shows little progress in closing the gender gap. The negative impact of
COVID-19 will likely be greater for girls than for boys.
Analysis of barriers to education continues to point to a perceived lower importance of girls’ education and gender norms as
persistent obstacles, especially in the North. Some boys may also feel societal pressures to leave school in order to enter the labour
market, though likely more in the South than in the North.
xxvi
Prelims
SUMMARY CONCLUSIONS (Sustainability)
In terms of sustainability, the government’s espoused commitment to basic education persists since the establishment of UBE in 2004
and continues to grow. SBMCs present a particular promise for both effectiveness and sustainability and their potential should be
harnessed and multiplied in order to continue to improve enrolment, retention and equity in schooling. Though less established, the
use of technology and public-private partnerships also demonstrates sustainability.
Table 3.32: Summary status of SDG4.1 indicators in Nigeria
SDG4 SDG4.1 Indicators SDG4 target in 2030 Current status of Nige- Finding
No. ria in 2020 (figure)
Proportion of children and young 100per cent Literacy: G2: 41per Nigeria unlikely to achieve SDG
people (a) in Grade 2 or 3; (b) at the cent; G3: 55per cent target in 2030
4.1.19 end of primary education; and (c) at (NEDS, 202011); G2:
the end of lower secondary educa- 1.2per cent (ES-
tion achieving at least a minimum SPIN proficiency
proficiency level in (i) reading and standard12); Maths:
(ii) mathematics10, by sex G2: 44per cent, G3:
60per cent (NEDS,
2020); G2: 2.5per cent
(ESSPIN proficiency
standard)
4.1.2 Administration of a nationally Present Absent13 Nigeria unlikely to achieve SDG4
representative learning assessment target in 2030
(a) in Grade 2 or 3; (b) at the end of
primary education; and (c) at the
end of lower secondary education
4.1.314 Gross intake ratio to the last grade 100per cent 66.4per cent (MICS Nigeria unlikely to achieve SDG
(primary education, lower second- 2017) target in 2030
ary education)
4.1.4a Net enrolment ratio in primary 100per cent 69.9per cent (NEMIS, Nigeria unlikely to achieve SDG
education 2019) target in 2030
4.1.4b Completion rate (primary educa- 100per cent 63per cent (MICS Nigeria unlikely to achieve SDG
tion, lower secondary education, 2017) target in 2030
upper secondary education)
4.1.5 Out-of-school rate (primary educa- 0per cent 31.3per cent (MICS Nigeria unlikely to achieve SDG
tion, lower secondary education, 2017) target in 2030
upper secondary education)
4.1.6 Percentage of children over-age for 0per cent 31per cent (MICS Nigeria unlikely to achieve SDG
grade (primary education, lower 2017) target in 2030
secondary education)
4.1.7 Number of years of (a) free and (b) Present in legal 6 years primary, 3 Target met: All years of basic
compulsory primary and second- framework years junior second- education are, by law, free and
ary education guaranteed in legal ary15 compulsory
framework
xxvii
Education in Nigeria: Evaluation of the Effectiveness & Impact of SDG 4
compulsory basic education. Policy reforms are also needed recent economic recessions, and hidden out-of-pocket
to strengthen educational planning and coordination among education expenses for parents that negate the promise of
various actors at the federal, state and local levels. At the same free basic education. The report also concludes that there is
time, institutional strengthening is necessary to enhance an absence of deliberate government strategies to support
the Educational Management Information System (EMIS) the access of the most vulnerable children, including
for reliable statistical data and monitoring. As indicated children with disabilities, to quality education. Similarly,
above, in response to findings about weak governance and the gender gap persists as girls continue to trail boys in
inadequate accountability for the implementation of free learning outcomes.
and compulsory basic education, the evaluation team urges
a review of existing policies and laws, such as the UBE Conclusions demonstrate that relevant evidence and
Act of 2004, to establish a strong accountability framework monitoring data are also weak within the sector, complicating
among key actors at the federal and state levels to address analyses. There is a lack of education benchmarks, which
governance challenges that tend to widen the gap between constrains meaningful discussions of pupil proficiency,
strategy formulation and implementation. a dearth of disaggregated and reliable data and a lack of
standardized metrics to assess progress and implementation
Policy action is critically needed to address and mitigate towards SDG4.
the dearth of financial data concerning basic education
Recommendations
in order to establish an accountability framework that
will clearly define budget amounts for each education
Twenty recommendations emerge from the findings
level. Furthermore, policymakers should give a clear
and conclusions above. The abridged list here identifies
policy direction and guidance on how PTA levies will be
five top-level recommendations and detailed priority
applied in schools so as not to constitute a serious barrier to
recommendations. The more comprehensive list in the
enrolment, as they are currently. Finally, decision makers
full report (Chapter 5, section 3) also indicates relevant
must enact policy to remove key barriers affecting out-
stakeholders and urgency of implementation.
of-school children and basic education elaborated in this
report to increase enrolment, retention and completion.
The recommendations from the evaluation have been
discussed, revised, and finalized through participatory
Lessons Learned
approaches in many successive meetings: the Technical
The evaluation team developed the following lessons SDGs Evaluation Committee Meeting held at OSSAP-
learned and explanations of shortfalls of effectiveness and SDGs in August 2021; the constructive participatory
impact of the MSP 2016–2019 towards SDG4 that emerged Review and Validation Workshop of the final draft report
as reflections throughout the evaluation process: of the SDG-3 Evaluation organized by OSSAP-SDGs in
Uyo, Akwa Ibom in September 2021 involving experts
Complexity of the education sector: Findings from the from federal and state levels and UN Agencies (UN RCO,
report point to a number of driving factors and contextual UNICEF and UNDP). Annex I includes a list of the
elements that all contribute to a challenging environment participants in the Review and Validation Workshop. In
for basic educational delivery. When any one of these addition, the UNICEF Country Office in Nigeria reviewed
factors is out of balance, the system is likely to suffer. all the recommendations with a strategic lens during
UNICEF’s Evaluation Panel Review Committee meetings
Findings highlight supporting factors that include, from chaired by the UNICEF Country Representative involving
the supply side, Nigeria’s early and continued commitment UNICEF Deputy Representative, Planning & Monitoring
to the Universal Basic Education Act (2004), successful Sections, Chiefs of Health & Nutrition Sections, and the
state contributions to UBEC counterpart funding and the Chiefs of Field Offices and the UNICEF Evaluation
establishment of School-Based Management Committees Manager.
(SBMCs). Notable demand-side factors include gender,
SES, a mother’s education and support for reading at Top-level recommendations for accelerating the attainment
home. Hindering factors include the COVID-19 pandemic, of SDG4 of Education in Nigeria, as Nigeria is unlikely to
increasing insecurity in growing portions of the country, achieve SDG4 by 2030:
xxviii
Prelims
• Government must develop and implement with to reduce social and financial barriers to attract &
adequate resources, a New Results Based Strategic keep children to schools.
Plan 2023-2030 of the Education Sector for Nigeria • Quality: National and state level should define learning
aligned with SDG2030 and the National Development outcome proficiency benchmarks. UNICEF’s Nigeria
Plan 2021-2025 taking into account Covid19 negative should support the Federal Ministry of Education
effects on pupils learnings and lessons learned from to establish a Nationally accepted standard for
SDG4 Evaluation that will enable Accelerated calculating Minimum Proficiency Level in Literacy
Progress of Nigeria towards the global agenda of and Numeracy for Nigeria including adequate Data
Universal Access and Quality of Basic Education in Collection Tools.
2030. In addition, a comprehensive analytical theory • Accelerating the attainment of SDG4: UNICEF
of change and results framework plus road map should support the Federal Ministry of Education
(including indicators, baseline, expected targets for to carry out further deeper analysis to find out
federal level and each state) of SDG4 in Nigeria must the proficiency level of learners in reading and
be developed. mathematics using primary data from the SDG4
• Supply side: Massive investment must be made evaluation completed in six states and the technical
by government, development partners and private agency
sectors and communities to build sufficient • Education Financing: Education Financing: Build
infrastructure, develop and recruit enough teachers the political will and incentives necessary to prioritize
and procure sufficient learning materials that could and increase basic education financing up to 20
enable the country to meet the global commitment percent of Federal Budget, by increasing earmarking
of universal access to basic education considering the budge lines both at the state and federal levels, so that
huge demographic growth of Nigeria basic education is truly free as promised by the UBE
• Demand side: To address the issue of 10 million Act of 2004, by earmarking budget lines both at the
out-of-school children, a major communication drive state and federal levels, so that basic education is truly
should be held and equitable conditions established free as promised by the UBE Act of 2004.
Detailed priority recommendations:
Initiate a collective, consultative process to develop a New Education Sector Strategic Plan 2023-2030 and a Theory of Change and
accompanying results framework for the basic education sector that is gender- and conflict-sensitive and will be incorporated into
the 2022 MSP.
Foster a credible national-level Results Based Education Sector Strategic Plan 2023-2030 using Results Based Management Approach
and to define benchmarking process to develop target proficiency levels that will allow for consistent and contextually sound
comparison of learning outcomes countrywide. UNICEF’s Nigeria should support the Federal Ministry of Education to establish a
Nationally accepted standard for calculating Minimum Proficiency Level in Literacy and Numeracy for Nigeria including adequate
Data Collection Tools. The process needs to take into account a variety of stakeholders including state and federal ministry officials,
education technical staff, policymakers, linguists and development partners. The process should be consultative in order to ensure
buy-in to eventual benchmarks.
Delineate clear policies and strategies that go beyond education for all to strategically target the most vulnerable. These policies
must recognize the structural barriers keeping children out of school, such as economic hardship, distance from schools, insecurity
and unsafe conditions, and sociocultural barriers, such as gender norms.
Review and strengthen states’ abilities to enforce truly free and compulsory basic education. Attention needs to be paid to the hid-
den fees that parents continue to incur, and which are occasionally deliberately levied by PTAs.
Hold reflection sessions on how to ensure access to educational programming amid growing insecurity. Actions might include risk
assessments and flexible and alternative education programming.
Education financing
Education Financing: Build the political will and incentives necessary to prioritize and increase basic education financing up to 20per
cent of Federal Budget, by increasing earmarking budget lines both at the state and federal levels, so that basic education is truly free
as promised by the UBE Act of 2004, by earmarking budget lines both at the state and federal levels, so that basic education is truly
free as promised by the UBE Act of 2004.
xxix
Education in Nigeria: Evaluation of the Effectiveness & Impact of SDG 4
Ensure timely release of funds for budgeted activities. All states should take advantage of UBEC matching grants by making the
required contributions. UBEC and the FMOE can develop systems to incentivize states to make commitments through sharing of best
practices.
Coordination and implementation
Recognizing the important influence that development partner programming can have on the education sector, as well as how
states may experience downturns when projects end, enhance the National Education Group to further harmonize development
partners’ programmes.
Initiate and support a process of long-term planning with a set of standards to hold states accountable for implementation. Devel-
op and strengthen coordination mechanisms that can help tighten collaborations and information sharing between federal- and
state-level entities.
Develop initiatives at the federal and state level to capitalize and promote the success of SBMCs and their operations to support
equity, quality and access to basic education.
Strengthen COVID-19 response strategies to prioritize catch-up. Employ evidence-based strategies that maintain instruction at grade
level rather than repeating missed instruction.
Monitoring & Evaluation
Strengthen EMIS and coordinate with NDES to improve education data management for better planning, implementation, monitor-
ing and evaluation both at the federal and state levels.
xxx
Introduction and Background
Chapter 1
Through the Global Goals and the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, the countries of the
world have committed themselves, beginning on 1 January 2016 and continuing until 2030, to ending
poverty and hunger everywhere, combating inequalities within and among countries, building
peaceful, just and inclusive societies, protecting human rights and promoting gender equality and
the empowerment of women and girls, and ensuring the lasting protection of the planet and its
natural resources. The countries of the world have resolved to create conditions for inclusive and
sustainable economic growth and decent work for all, taking into account different levels of national
development and capacities. Heads of State and Government at a special UN summit adopted the
Global Transformative Agenda 2030 on 25 September 2015. The agenda consists of four sections: (i) a
political declaration (ii) a set of 17 Sustainable Development Goals , 169 Targets and 230 indicators (iii)
Means of Implementation and (iv) a framework for follow-up.16
1
Education in Nigeria: Evaluation of the Effectiveness & Impact of SDG 4
The Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) seek to The evaluation assesses the merit and shortfalls of results
build on and complete the unfinished business of the achieved in Nigeria, within the context of the Education
preceding Millennium Development Goals (MDGs); Sector Strategic Plan 2016–2019, toward the attainment
realize the human rights of all; achieve gender equality of SDG4, which ensures “inclusive and equitable quality
in all sectors and spheres of life; and importantly, strike a education and promotes lifelong learning opportunities
balance between the economic, social and environmental for all”. The evaluation investigates progress towards
dimensions of development. SDG4 within Nigeria’s current policies and goals, namely
the Economic Recovery and Growth Plan (ERGP) 2017–
A review of the MDGs implementation in Nigeria reveals 2020, the Education for Change Strategic Plan 2016–2019
that the country has registered mixed results across the and the Universal Basic Education Act of 2004. More
goals, geographic areas and gender groups. Nonetheless, specifically, the evaluation focuses primarily on target SDG
Nigeria provided leadership on the MDGs within Africa 4.1: “By 2030, ensure that all girls and boys complete free,
and globally as institutions, innovations and policies equitable and quality primary and secondary education
introduced in Nigeria were admired and replicated by leading to relevant and effective learning outcomes.”
other countries. However, showing the same leadership on
the SDGs and delivering results across all the goals requires Research shows that inclusive quality education for all
not only proactive planning and implementation, but also is one of the most important cornerstones of prosperity,
proper monitoring and evaluation (UNDP, 2015). The health and gender equality in every society. This applies
Nigerian government and UNICEF commissioned Alegre particularly to investments in education for girls, where
Associates, in conjunction with subcontractor, EdIntersect, the effects are evident when it comes to promoting
LLC, to carry out an independent evaluation of the inclusive economic development and reduced poverty.
effectiveness and impact of Sustainable Development Education plays an important role in the achievement
Goal 4 (SDG4) in Nigeria. of several goals of the 2030 Agenda and must promote
values, knowledge and skills that contribute to sustainable
2
Introduction and Background
development (Government Offices of Sweden, 2015). The final section, Chapter 5, discusses lessons learned,
Among the various challenges that Nigeria must confront, conclusions and recommendations that can guide the work
the issues of at least 12.7 million children that are currently of the Government of Nigeria and development partners
out of school (the highest number in the world) and gender in the remaining years of the Global Agenda 2030 period.
disparities in basic education are paramount,17 as well as
1.2 Background: Education Profile
growing insecurity in certain areas of the country, which
threatens and thwarts any development gains.
Overview
The evaluation focuses on the first four years of progress Nigeria’s National Policy on Education (2004) was a
towards attaining SDG4 (2016–2019), while also taking major step in increasing access to basic education. In the
into account the unique and highly disruptive context of same year, Nigeria passed the Universal Basic Education
the ongoing COVID-19 global pandemic, which has led to Commission Act that made basic education ‘free and
school closures and a rupture in learning for many pupils compulsory’. Nevertheless, at least 12.7 million children
in Nigeria and, indeed, across the world. SDG4 addresses are reported to be ‘out of school’ in Nigeria (Federal
both access and quality, which was a major shift from the Ministry of Education, 2017, p. 10) and gender disparities
previous MDGs initiative. The evaluation design included in basic education continue to constitute a problem.
both a nationwide focus and comparative case studies from There are approximately 20 million out-of-school children
six states. (OOSC) globally, and Nigeria has the highest number of
OOSC in the world. Only 61 per cent of 6 to 11-year-olds
The evaluation began with Oxford Policy Management regularly attend primary school and only 36 per cent of
(OPM) in 2019 with a high-level inception workshop in children between three and five attend organized early
December 2019. Following the workshop, the evaluation childhood education programmes (MICS, 2016). Regarding
process was paused and then restarted with an updated ToR the quality of education, about 50 per cent of in-school
and a new evaluation team of Alegre and EdIntersect in children are not learning as expected, and therefore cannot
September 2020.18 The current evaluation team collected read or write. Approximately 63 per cent of children who
data between February and April 2021. While preventative live in rural areas cannot read at all and, similarly, around
measures for addressing COVID-19 precluded the travel 84 per cent of children in the lowest economic quartile
of international evaluation team members to Nigeria, the also cannot read at all. At the time of writing, the National
National Evaluator on the EdIntersect team, Dr Adeboye Policy on Education was in its sixth edition, the first having
Adeyemo, led key informant interviews in Abuja as well as been developed in 1977 and then subsequently reprinted
six case-study states. Hanovia Limited conducted a school- in 1981 and 1998 and revised in 2004 and 2007. The most
based survey in the six case-study states with support from relevant version for the SDG4 evaluation is the 2013 sixth
the international evaluation team. The Team Leader and edition (Government of Nigeria, 2013).
National Evaluator held interviews with development
partners remotely. A synthesis of existing studies and an Despite progress made by Nigeria towards gender
in-depth analysis of secondary data delivered in March and parity in education, the dimension of gender equality in
April to UNICEF also inform this final evaluation report. education remains challenging in Nigeria. Evidence from
The SDG4 evaluation report includes four chapters in the Final Evaluation of Girls Education Project 2012-
addition to the introductory section. Chapter 1 presents an 2021 in Northern Nigeria draft report, revealed that the:
overview of the evaluation’s purpose, objectives and scope ‘’most compelling element of change in gender equality
as well as necessary background detail on the educational could be undoubtedly the change in the defined script for
and policy context that frames SDG4 efforts. This chapter a daughter by the different groups from the community;
also presents a review of the Education Sector Strategic the change in script is clearly generational. Perception
Plan (ESSP) 2016–2019 and its nascent theory of change of community members vis-à-vis women role in society
and results framework. Chapter 2 provides an overview of revealed domination of men’s perspective on women:
the design and methodology that guided the evaluation. while both boys and girls mentioned girls becoming
Chapter 3 presents findings and makes up the bulk of the doctors, teachers or lawyers as one of the main outcomes of
report. Chapter 4 presents a synthesized policy analysis. girls’ education, the main outcome mentioned by fathers
3
Education in Nigeria: Evaluation of the Effectiveness & Impact of SDG 4
and men in general was that an educated woman can Female teacher stipends were introduced by GEP
properly look after the house and children and even help and scaled up in five states, institutionalized by state
them with their homework’’. governments. The programme aims to increase the
number of female teachers by allowing them to engage
This lack of clear vision of the benefit of girls education in in extra training and gain new qualifications. School
the society, constitutes a barrier to the acceleration of girls improvement grants have been a feature of many large-
access and completion of basic quality education. scale development programmes and are important tools
to incentivize and empower School-Based Management
The education system Committees (SBMCs) to plan for and manage school
budgets.
There is a substantial body of evidence on the widespread
poor conditions in many schools and there are large
There has also been improvement in the training,
differences in infrastructural conditions between Local
registration and oversight of teachers. In Kano, part-time
Government Education Authority (LGEAs) (Obanya,
training opportunities to allow teachers to complete their
2010; Olaniyan & Obadara, 2009). There is evidence
teaching qualification were enacted (The Nation, 2018),
suggesting that improvements in infrastructure and
and in Kaduna, 20,000 teachers found to not be competent
resource supply are failing to keep pace with increased
were replaced (BBC, 2017).
demand, thus having a negative impact on educational
quality and thereby threatening retention and undermining
Few improvements to the curriculum have taken place
any gains in increased enrolment. Reports suggest recent
over the past 10 years due to underfunding of the National
improvements in the provision of water and gender-
Education Research Development Council (NERDC).
segregated sanitation in project-supported states, but
The main recent change has been support from UNICEF
there are issues around the maintenance and cleanliness of
for the development of an early childhood care and
both (Ikoya & Onoyase, 2008).
development (ECCD) curriculum.
4
Introduction and Background
At the local level, SBMCs have been established in cent to 98.0 per cent, while Nigeria’s overall completion
many states and have improved community-level rate is 63.0 per cent, based on MICS 2016–2017 data.
accountability,21 and school support officer functioning has
been strengthened to improve the quality of teachers in Gender and basic education
the northern states.
The National Policy on Gender in Basic Education (FMOE,
2007) identifies inadequate political commitment, poor
Geographic inequalities
planning and management, gender-insensitive teaching
Education trends, specifically access to education, varies materials and a gender-blind curriculum, girl-unfriendly
greatly among states within Nigeria. Figure 1 provides an school infrastructure, skewed male–female teacher ratios,
overview of state data by completion rate. The variation gender-biased attitudes toward girls, sexual harassment,
demonstrates that completion rates range from 18.7 per poverty and cultural factors as having inhibited female
Figure 1.1: Completion Rate (%) at Primary School by State in Nigeria, MICS 2016-2017
Delta 115.6
100.0
FCT-Abuja 98.0
95.2
Taraba 89.9
86.4
Rivers 85.2
83.5
Plateau 83.0
82.2
Nasarawa 81.5
79.0
Abia 74.3
74.2
Ogun 71.8
70.4
Jigawa 68.3
67. 8
Osun 67.5
65.5
Enugu
65.4
Lagos
64.9
63.7
Nigeria
63.1
63.0
Anambra
59.7
59.6
Borno
59.0
57.4
Adamawa
56.9
56.3
Bauchi
55.9
50.7
Oyo
47.9
47.1
Yobe
43.7
41.8
Sokoto
34.3
18.7
0.0
20.0 40.0 60.0 80.0 100.0 120.0 140.0
5
Education in Nigeria: Evaluation of the Effectiveness & Impact of SDG 4
participation in basic education. In addition, the Federal numerous organizations and individuals have been found
Ministry for Women’s Affairs and Social Development to support schools, often focused around different ethnic
(FMWASD) has produced a compendium of best practices or religious groups, occupations or interests, or traditional
on improving girl-child education in Nigeria (FMWASD, leaders (Poulsen, 2009). At the same time, however, some
2009). There is a sizeable body of literature that CSOs have received criticism for not supporting education
predominantly considers girls’ access to schooling, which sufficiently (Antoninis, 2010).
derives from the GEP and Transforming Education for
Girls in Nigeria and Tanzania (TEGINT) projects, as well Financial sustainability and equity are two important
as from a few independent studies. The evidence base on issues that need addressing to ensure the future of the
gendered reasons for boys’ non-participation in schooling SBMC model of decentralized governance (Oduwaiye et
in Nigeria is not well established. al., 2017). Without government funding, SBMCs cannot
function. More needs to be known about the actual
Community involvement in schooling working of SBMCs in Nigeria, how they differ in different
contexts (e.g., urban/rural; Yoruba/Hausa, etc.), and how
Increasing community involvement in schooling is a
they interact and/or overlap with PTAs.
key strategy in decentralized governance, which aims
to help improve the quality of education, to improve
Education Sector Strategic Plan 2016–2019
school accountability and to share the financial burden
of education. A review of research within sub-Saharan The Federal Government collaborates with subnational
Africa (SSA) and elsewhere has shown that community governments and the private sector in implementing the
participation works well in the rare instances where there ESSP (2016–2019) and the MSP (2018–2022) entitled
is a good understanding and relations between schools, ‘Education for Change’.22 The MSP is built on the
communities and local educational authorities and a strategic intent of the Universal Basic Education (UBE)
genuine commitment to community decision-making Act and SDG4 is integrated into the ESSP to ensure that
(Dunne al., 2007; Academy for Educational Development, all girls and boys complete free, equitable and quality
2002; De Grauwe et al., 2005). primary and secondary education leading to relevant and
effective learning outcomes by 2030. The MSP recognizes
Formal community involvement in public schooling that education is at the heart of all national development
in Nigeria primarily occurs through parent-teacher efforts. It acknowledges the human capacity needs to
associations (PTAs) and, to a lesser extent, SBMCs, although achieve sustainable development and increase national
Figure 1.2: MSP Strategic Results
Access
Systems
Quality
strengthening
6
Introduction and Background
Figure 1.3: Ten Pillars of the MSP
Out of School children Science, Technology, Mathematics (STEM) & Basic Education
(OOSC) Engineering, and Technical, Vocational,
Youth and Adult Literacy Education and
Training (TVET)
Teacher Education, Curriculum and Policy Tertiary Education Educa  on Data and
Capacity Building and matters Planning
Professional Development
Information and Library Services
Communication in Education
Technology
(ICT) in Education
prosperity, and the needs of Nigeria’s youth to develop experienced the worst oil price fall and export reduction
21st-century skills to competitively participate in the of all time. During this period, government revenue was
national and global economies. lowest in more than a decade and this affected the national
budget. Nearly all the sectors of the economy witnessed
The plan aims to achieve the three strategic results of a downturn. Teachers in many states were owed salaries
access, quality and systems strengthening, and identifies for periods ranging from 12 to 18 months. Unemployment
10 pillars necessary to obtaining the strategic results. Pillars was rising and the annual inflation rate hovered around 15
1 (OOSC) and 4 (Basic Education) are the subject of the per cent. By 2017, the inflation rate had peaked at 19.5 per
SDG4 evaluation. Figures 2 and 3 display MSP strategic cent before it began to reduce to 14.3 per cent, in 2018, and
results areas and all 10 pillars of the MSP. 13.7 per cent in 2019 respectively.23 Furthermore, security
challenges have also escalated since 2016, with constant
1.3 Historical background of period
and rampant abduction and kidnapping of schoolchildren
of implementation and teachers.
The 2016-2019 ESSP was implemented during a period 1.4 Impact of COVID-19 on Education
in which the Nigerian economy experienced recessions
Sector in Nigeria
twice with the economy recording a negative growth rate
of -1.58 per cent in 2016 compared to growth of 2.8 per The current COVID-19 pandemic has further exacerbated
cent in 2015. In the second quarter of 2017, the country the complexities of Nigeria’s policy and educational
emerged from recession with a growth rate of 0.83 per delivery environment. (Annex F presents the trend of
cent, which still fell short of the government target of 2.2 COVID cases as of 30 June 2021.) Although the larger
per cent. A 2020 figure shows a 6.1 per cent contraction evaluation does not focus solely on the effects of the
of the GDP as a result of the COVID-induced crisis. pandemic, the impact of COVID-19 cannot be understated.
Meanwhile, the Nigerian population continues to grow In view of this, a specific evaluation question sought to
at an annual rate of about 2.3 per cent. The fall in crude investigate how the pandemic may have affected learning.
oil prices that occurred between 2016 and 2020 and the School closures began on 20 March 2020, with schools
reduction in the quantity of oil exports were also major reopening as early as September 2020. In general, exam
factors behind the decline in the growth rate that caused classes were the exception; they experienced a reduced
government revenue to fall as well. In fact, in 2020 Nigeria period of closures (FMOE, 2020). The evaluation team
7
Education in Nigeria: Evaluation of the Effectiveness & Impact of SDG 4
learned that the exact dates of closures varied among 1.5 Policy Context and Partnerships
states. For some, school closures continued to affect the
2020-2021 academic year as infection rates fluctuated. This section presents an overview of the major policies
Some states closed again in January as a preventative and strategies established within the education sector
measure during COVID-19’s second wave. As mentioned and most relevant to basic education. This policy context
below in response to evaluation questions, Kaduna State is integral for interpreting the findings and conclusions
kept schools closed fully until February 2021 when it below. This contextual background focuses on the analysis
partially reopened to pupils in Grade 4 and above. of the National Policy on Education 2013 and the ESSP
2016–2019, which has since been updated as MSP 2018–
To mitigate the effects of school closures, the Nigerian 2022.
government put into place “high-impact interventions/
National Policy on Education
strategies to cushion the effect of COVID-19 on the
education sector”, including through the development
The 2013 National Policy on Education provides broad-
of an education emergency and accelerated curriculum,
based guidelines on standards, procedures, strategies and
online and radio broadcast education programme, and
the coordination roles necessary to ensure and sustain the
mobilization and partnership with key collaborators from
delivery of quality education at all levels of government
the international development sector, including donor
within Nigeria. This coordination is very important given
agencies as well as the private sector to raise funds for the
that, by constitutional provision, education functions are
COVID-19 response (Federal Republic of Nigeria (FRN),
shared between the federal, state and local governments.
2020). The final impact evaluation question will provide
The national policy on education envisages:
more details and analysis of the effects of COVID-19 on
Nigeria’s delivery of basic education.
An expanded role for education as an investment for
economic, social and political development; a tool of
8
Introduction and Background
empowerment for the poor, and the socially marginalized Education Sector Strategic Plan 2016–2019
groups; an effective means of developing the full
Based on the National Education Policy of 2013, the
capacities and potentials of human resources, as well as
ESSP 2016–2019 primarily developed specific strategic
the development of competent workforce through the
actions that would be deployed to implement the National
acquisition of practical life skills relevant to the world of
Education Policy nationally. As indicated above, there
work. 24
were 10 strategic pillars, with basic education as one of the
pillars. Strategic actions specific to basic education include
The national policy on education builds on the
(i) free and compulsory education; (ii) introduction of
commitment to the global Education for All (EFA)
flagship programmes such as home-grown school feeding
initiative, the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs)
to encourage enrolment, retention and completion; and
and, by extension, the Sustainable Development Goals
(iii) financial intervention through UBEC. Per the ToR for
(SDGs)25 as well as the national development goals
this evaluation, the ESSP 2016–2019 is the focus of this
laid out in the National Economic Empowerment and
evaluation.
Development strategy (NEEDs).
Ministerial Strategic Plan (MSP)
The policy recognized that basic education is, by law,
compulsory for all children of school age in Nigeria.
Like the ESSP, the MSP 2018–2022 (FMOE, 2017) was
The policy reiterates that, in public schools, schooling is
formulated under the administration of President Buhari.
provided free through Universal Basic Education (UBE),
The plan reflected and incorporated the aspirations of the
which is backed by legislation (the Compulsory, Free,
SDGs with well-identified goals and target issues in basic
Universal Basic Education Act 2004). Furthermore, the
education and a list of clear strategies to address them.
policy stipulates a Home-Grown School Feeding and
The MSP recognized that the Universal Basic Education
Health Programme (HGSFHP) that provides basic health
(UBE) programme “was designed to be a veritable
services and a free balanced meal per day for every child
tool for achieving some of the Education for All (EFA)
that attends public primary or junior secondary school, to
goals” connected with MDG goals, the precursor to the
facilitate the success of the UBE programme.
SDGs. Moreover, the MSP referenced the SDG4 goal of
“ensuring inclusive and equitable quality education and
promoting lifelong learning opportunities for all”. It also
Table 1.1: Overview of key players in basic education in Nigeria
Body Remit
Federal Level
Federal Ministry of Education Direction on national-level policy
Quality assurance
Administration of NEMIS
Universal Basic Education Commission Disbursement of UBEC-IF and matching grants (2per cent of CRF funds)
Quality assurance for ECD, primary and junior secondary schools and teachers
State Level
State Ministry of Education Education sector planning
Quality assurance
Collection and compilation of annual School Census Data
State Universal Basic Education Board Administration of ECD, primary and junior secondary schools
Monitoring and planning (overseen by SMoE)
9
Education in Nigeria: Evaluation of the Effectiveness & Impact of SDG 4
Local Government/School Level
Local Government Authorities Responsible for paying teachers
Implementation of SUBEB programmes
Table 1.2: Development partner support to sector plan implementation in Nigeria, by MSP outcome area26 27
Access Quality System strengthening
FCDO/UNICEF Girls’ Education Project ESSPIN (FCDO) aimed to increase the capac- ESSPIN (FCDO) Supported federal and
(GEP3): Provision of furniture and learning ity of schools to provide improved learning state ministries of education, and LGEA, in
materials for primary schools in 6 states outcomes, and improving inclusion policies formulating and operationalizing policies
and practices in basic education was one of on issues that affect children’s learning
Disbursement of grants for school upkeep 4 output areas in ESSPIN inclusion through a series of political
to SBMCs at ECCDE level engagements, trainings, modelling, plan-
Teacher Development Programme (TDP) ning and budgeting, and monitoring and
Oando Foundation Adopt-A-School (FCDO) Building the capacity of in-service evaluation. Used existing structure and
Scholarships for 78 pupils to complete and pre-service teachers staff but with reorganization for greater
basic education
effectiveness and sustainability, encour-
UNICEF Head teacher trainings, early grade
USAID Northern Education Initiative Plus reading interventions, monitoring and aging synergy among all departments at
Established 700 non-formal learning cen- mentoring state and LGEA levels
tres, 100 adolescent girls learning centres,
UNICEF Supported establishment of EMIS;
and 100 youth learning centres USAID Northern Education Initiative Plus
support state development of LSOPs,
Implementation of an early grade reading
Training for facilitators at 1,500 centres, programme in half of LGAs, with materials conducting ASCs, training and capaci-
and for 59 master trainers and approach adopted by UNICEF in other ty-building for SBMC/CBMC, develop-
ment of SESP and MTSS
parts of the state
Feed the Future Development of 35
non-formal education centres to train Girls’ Education Project (UNICEF, FCDO Girls’ Education Project (UNICEF, FCDO
farmers in basic literacy and numeracy funding) Improved capacity of teachers to funding) Improved governance to
strengthen girls’ education
deliver effective learning for girls
Educate a Child Project Supports out-of-
school children through surveys and cash Oando Foundation Adopt-A-School Training DEEPEN (FCDO) Supported government
transfers 266 head teachers; provided instructional to strengthen the regulatory environment
for private schools in Lagos
materials for three schools; renovation of
UNICEF Community mapping and sup-
port for increased enrolment one primary school Better Education Service Delivery for All
(BESDA) (World Bank)
DEEPEN (FCDO) Used an M4P approach to
DEEPEN (FCDO) Used a Making Markets
work for the Poor (M4P) approach to stimulate the private school market and Partnership to Engage, Reform and Learn
ensure the private sector can support increase accountability and competition to (PERL) (FCDO) – reduce inefficiency
government in meeting the demand for improve quality in private schools in Lagos. and corruption in the use of Nigerian
education in Lagos Better Education Service Delivery for All resources
(BESDA) (World Bank)
Better Education Service Delivery for
All (BESDA) (World Bank) Allocation of Adolescent Girls Initiative for Learning NIPEP – Nigeria Partnership for Education
programme funds based on results; active and Empowerment (AGILE) (World Bank) Project (NIPEP) (GPE) – Strengthening
in 17 states; emphasis on data – enhancing learning, life skills education, planning and management systems in-
Adolescent Girls Initiative for Learning strategy development to incorporate girls’ cluding learning assessment and capacity
and Empowerment (AGILE) (World Bank)– education development
enhancing girls’ enrolment, classroom NIPEP – Nigeria Partnership for Education SEPIP-State Education Program Invest-
construction Project (NIPEP) (GPE) – promoting school ment Project (SIPEP) (World Bank) – a)
NIPEP – Nigeria Partnership for Education effectiveness and improved learning out- needs-based teacher deployment; (b)
Project (NIPEP) (GPE) – Increasing access comes school-level management and account-
to basic education for out-of-school girls ability; and (c) measurement of student
learning
Access Quality System strengthening
10
Introduction and Background
FCDO/UNICEF Girls’ Education Project ESSPIN (FCDO) aimed to increase the capac- ESSPIN (FCDO) Supported federal and
(GEP3): Provision of furniture and learning ity of schools to provide improved learning state ministries of education, and LGEA, in
materials for primary schools in 6 states outcomes, and improving inclusion policies formulating and operationalizing policies
and practices in basic education was one of on issues that affect children’s learning
Disbursement of grants for school upkeep 4 output areas in ESSPIN inclusion through a series of political
to SBMCs at ECCDE level engagements, trainings, modelling, plan-
Teacher Development Programme (TDP) ning and budgeting, and monitoring and
Oando Foundation Adopt-A-School (FCDO) Building the capacity of in-service evaluation. Used existing structure and
Scholarships for 78 pupils to complete and pre-service teachers staff but with reorganization for greater
basic education
effectiveness and sustainability, encour-
UNICEF Head teacher trainings, early grade
USAID Northern Education Initiative Plus reading interventions, monitoring and aging synergy among all departments at
Established 700 non-formal learning cen- mentoring state and LGEA levels
tres, 100 adolescent girls learning centres,
UNICEF Supported establishment of EMIS;
and 100 youth learning centres USAID Northern Education Initiative Plus
support state development of LSOPs,
Implementation of an early grade reading
Training for facilitators at 1,500 centres, programme in half of LGAs, with materials conducting ASCs, training and capaci-
and for 59 master trainers and approach adopted by UNICEF in other ty-building for SBMC/CBMC, develop-
ment of SESP and MTSS
parts of the state
Feed the Future Development of 35
non-formal education centres to train Girls’ Education Project (UNICEF, FCDO Girls’ Education Project (UNICEF, FCDO
farmers in basic literacy and numeracy funding) Improved capacity of teachers to funding) Improved governance to
strengthen girls’ education
deliver effective learning for girls
Educate a Child Project Supports out-of-
school children through surveys and cash Oando Foundation Adopt-A-School Training DEEPEN (FCDO) Supported government
transfers 266 head teachers; provided instructional to strengthen the regulatory environment
for private schools in Lagos
materials for three schools; renovation of
UNICEF Community mapping and sup-
port for increased enrolment one primary school Better Education Service Delivery for All
(BESDA) (World Bank)
DEEPEN (FCDO) Used an M4P approach to
DEEPEN (FCDO) Used a Making Markets
work for the Poor (M4P) approach to stimulate the private school market and Partnership to Engage, Reform and Learn
ensure the private sector can support increase accountability and competition to (PERL) (FCDO) – reduce inefficiency
government in meeting the demand for improve quality in private schools in Lagos. and corruption in the use of Nigerian
education in Lagos Better Education Service Delivery for All resources
Better Education Service Delivery for (BESDA) (World Bank) NIPEP – Nigeria Partnership for Education
All (BESDA) (World Bank) Allocation of Adolescent Girls Initiative for Learning Project (NIPEP) (GPE) – Strengthening
programme funds based on results; active and Empowerment (AGILE) (World Bank) planning and management systems in-
in 17 states; emphasis on data – enhancing learning, life skills education, cluding learning assessment and capacity
development
strategy development to incorporate girls’
Adolescent Girls Initiative for Learning
and Empowerment (AGILE) (World Bank)– education SEPIP-State Education Program Invest-
enhancing girls’ enrolment, classroom NIPEP – Nigeria Partnership for Education ment Project (SIPEP) (World Bank) – a)
construction Project (NIPEP) (GPE) – promoting school needs-based teacher deployment; (b)
school-level management and account-
effectiveness and improved learning out-
NIPEP – Nigeria Partnership for Education ability; and (c) measurement of student
comes
Project (NIPEP) (GPE) – Increasing access learning
to basic education for out-of-school girls
acknowledged that EFA targets had largely not been met • Pupils’ learning outcomes that are unsatisfactory.
and that it was necessary to review and set new milestones According to the MSP, “mean scores in literacy, nu-
and targets. The MSP specifically noted the need to meracy and life skills are very low and range from 30
address: per cent to 52 per cent” (FMOE, 2017, p. 58).
• The issue of 12.7 million children that are currently With the advent of a new administration in 2015, the FMOE
out of school (the highest number of any country in reviewed the education sector strategy and a launched a
the world). new four-year MSP for 2018–2022. Close analysis of the
• Gender disparities in basic education that persist plans shows that there is not much difference between
even after 14 years of implementation of UBE and the ESSP 2016–2019 and the MSP 2018-2022 plans. The
the UBE Law in 2004. main noticeable difference is that the 2018–2022 plan has
11
Education in Nigeria: Evaluation of the Effectiveness & Impact of SDG 4
a framework for activity monitoring and estimated cost for Decentralization
each activity. Furthermore, the MSP identified the three
Nigeria has a decentralized structure of governance with
result areas indicated above, presented in greater detail in
responsibility for education administration divided among
Figure 4 (FMOE, 2017, p. 26).
the federal, state and local governments. Each level of
State-level plans government has a set of responsibilities. The federal
government sets policy, assures the quality of education
It is important to note that the National Policy on and administers the National Education Management
Education allows each state of the federation to design Information System (NEMIS). A range of actors share
their Education Sector Strategy Plan to take into account responsibility for education administration and delivery
the particular education needs of the state. For the six at the state level. The UBE Act created the Universal
states included in this study, policy review shows that Basic Education Commission (UBEC) at the federal level,
their education sector strategies broadly reflect National State Universal Basic Education Boards (SUBEBs) at the
Education Policy directions in terms of emphasizing the state level and Local Government Education Authorities
three main result areas of access, quality and system- (LGEA) at the local level. Moreover, the act created the
strengthening. The degree of emphasis within a strategy UBE-Intervention Fund responsible for disbursing funds
to achieve access, quality and system strengthening differs through UBEC to SUBEBs for improving the access and
from state to state. For instance, the four states of Kano, quality of basic education. To highlight the differing
Katsina, Zamfara and Kaduna lay more emphasis on how responsibilities of education service provision in Nigeria,
to increase access to all children who are of school-going Table 1.1 outlines the remit of various key actors.
age because the northern part of Nigeria accounts for the
highest number of out-of-school children. This is not a Partnerships
challenge for Kwara and Enugu states. Thus, emphasis
In addition to government actors, a range of development
in those states is on quality and system-strengthening.
partners (DPs) have implemented activities which support
State-level plans also address barriers to education. The
the MSP outcomes areas throughout the evaluation
response to the second evaluation question on relevance
period. These are outlined in Table 1.2. This table is
below provides further details.
not exhaustive but does reflect key interventions as
informed by document review as well as interviews with
development partners.
Figure 1.4: Details of MSP 2018-2022 result areas
Access Quality Systems strengthening
Nigeria's formal and non- formal Strengthened human capacity Improved evidence-based
education systems provide for child-centered interactive decision-making that will assist
qualitative access to100% of teaching and quality assurance transparency, and innova  on
out -of-school and school-aged at all levels of educational in educa  on delivery
children, girls and boys in development in Nigeria
basic education
Enhance innovativeness,
70% of eligible youths have access functionality, relevance, market-
to Technical Vocational Education
skills acquisi  on and
and Training (TVET) and Tertiary
transi  oning into formal and
education
non-formal educa  on
75% of adults have access to
non-formal education and lifelong
earning opportunities
12
Evaluation Purpose, Objectives,
and Scope
Chapter 2
2.1 Purpose and objectives of the evaluation
The Independent Evaluation of SDG4 is commissioned by the Government of Nigeria, through the
Office of the Senior Special Assistant to the President on SDGs (OSSAP-SDGs) for the purpose of:
• Learning: To assist the government (national, state and local) and other key stakeholders in de-
veloping and improving the implementation modalities of the new Education Strategic Plan
(2020–2022) for acceleration of progress towards SDG4.
• Accountability: To provide sound evidence on whether the implementation of the Ministerial
Strategic Plan (MSP) has contributed to achieving SDG4; and
• Evaluation: Users are the Presidency, including the Office of the Senior Special Assistant to the
President of SDGs, the Federal Ministry of Education (FMOE), the Ministry of Budget and National
Planning, the Ministry of Finance, Parliament, other MDA, State Ministries of Education (SMOE),
development partners (DPs), the Nigerian Association of Evaluators (NAE), Civil Society Organiza-
tions (CSOs) and the private sector.
15
Education in Nigeria: Evaluation of the Effectiveness & Impact of SDG 4
Objectives of the evaluation 2.2 Scope and focus of the evaluation
The specific objectives of this independent evaluation are
to: Thematic scope
• Measure the extent to which the Education Sector
The SDG4 evaluation focused specifically on target 1
Strategic Plan (2016–2019) has been effectively
of SDG4: “ensure that all girls and boys complete free,
implemented with regard to the provision of access,
equitable and quality primary and secondary education
equity and quality basic education for girls and boys;
leading to relevant and effective learning outcomes” by
• Assess the level of completion for girls and boys
2030. One global indicator informs progress towards the
at basic education (in Nigeria, defined as six years
target and is multifaceted. It is stated as follows:
of primary and three years of junior secondary
education) (Access);
Indicator 4.1.1:
• Determine the extent to which effective learning
outcomes have been achieved (Quality); Proportion of children and young people: (a) in grades
• Understand the driving factors (explanations), 2/3; (b) at the end of primary; and (c) at the end of lower
strengths and weaknesses (bottlenecks) in the secondary achieving at least a minimum proficiency level
implementation of selected strategic education in (i) reading and (ii) mathematics, by sex.
programmes; and
• Provide strategic policy recommendations that will Investigation yielded a dearth of evidence to inform
help identified evaluation users, such as national and this important indicator. Nigeria’s 2017 baseline SDG
subnational governments, development partners and indicators study found data on this indicator to be
non-state actors to accelerate progress and achieve missing and that data could not be captured through field
SDG4 in Nigeria within the last decade of SDGs visits nor data mining (OSSAP-SDGs & NGS, 2017). In
Action 2020–2030.20 addition, neither the 2017 nor the 2020 National Voluntary
Reviews directly included this indicator as stated above,
The findings from the independent evaluation are also but rather discussed secondary education and early
expected to enhance national evidence-based policy childhood development indicators in detail. Reference
advocacy and ensure the credible participation of Nigeria to the global indicator stated above is necessary for
in strategic debate at the international level. In addition, findings from this independent evaluation to enhance
the results generate in-depth evidence for better learning the credible participation of Nigeria in strategic debate
of what worked or did not work in the education sector and at the international level – one of the expectations of the
identify key drivers of success in achieving the strategic evaluation. Evaluation findings may also address a gap in
objectives of the Education Sector Plan. Findings also information about pupil learning outcomes in Nigeria.
inform the FMOE’s current process of reviewing and Specifically, the scope of the evaluation is limited to a
updating its Education Sector Plan as well as the Federal review of progress towards basic education and includes
Republic of Nigeria’s next National Development Plan. three major thematic areas. The evaluation will measure the
Nigeria is the most populous country in Africa with level of access to primary and basic education nationwide
approximately 180 million people and also has the and assess the quality of education. The evaluation
largest economy in Africa, with its 2018 gross domestic highlights the link between SDG4 and other related
product (GDP) estimated at 136 trillion Nigerian naira SDGs, with a focus on gender and skills acquisition. The
(approximately US$356 million). Its governance structure evaluation assesses the gender dimensions of access and
comprises a Federal Government, 36 states and the equity, and the implications for Nigeria’s commitments to
Federal Capital Territory and 774 Local Government human rights and leaving no one behind.
Areas (LGAs). Nigeria’s arms of government include the
Executive, Legislature and the Judiciary.
16
Evaluation Purpose, Objectives, and Scope
Geographic and temporal scope available impact indicators. In particular, the evaluation
questions seek to identify drivers of improving trends
The evaluation focused nationwide on Nigeria’s efforts to
in the 2011–2013 period, with decreasing trends from
address SDG4. At the same time, six states are the focus
2013–2018. In addition, the evaluation team sought out
of an in-depth case study comparative analysis: Enugu,
relevant information and conducted analyses from 2020,
Kaduna, Kano, Katsina, Kwara and Zamfara. The evaluation
particularly in order to document the ongoing COVID-19
focused predominantly on the 2016–2019 period; however,
pandemic and its implications for the education sector in
a long-term 10-year period was used for trend analysis of
Nigeria.
Table 2.1: Results framework (outputs and outcomes) constructed from action plans within ESSP 2016–2019
Pillar Strategic Objective Expected results in 2019
Enrol 2,875,000 pupils annually for the next four
years;
Ensure that all of out-of-school children
are enrolled in basic education schools in
1.Out-of-school Children the next four years
Raise the current enrolment of girls in basic educa-
tion schools by 1.5 million girls annually
Raise the current enrolment in nomadic schools
from the present 17per cent to 30–40per cent
Construct and furnish an additional 71,875 class-
rooms annually for the next four years to accom-
modate the anticipated increase in enrolment
Recruit an additional 500,000 qualified teachers
(promised by the federal government) in tranch-
es, to cater for the anticipated increase in pupil
enrolment
Recruit 37,500 qualified female teachers (or 7.5per
cent of the new teachers promised by federal
government) annually
Implement school feeding programme
Reactivate the initiative on the out-of-school
boy-child syndrome in the South-East and South-
South geopolitical zones, which was inexplicably
abandoned in 2014
Net enrolment ratio is increased to 100per All (100per cent) children of primary school age
cent (engagement to Universal Education (girls as well as boys) will be enrolled in primary
2.Basic Education 2015) school or its equivalent.
Completion rate is improved by 30per cent to
an overall rate exceeding 90per cent of those in
schools
50per cent increase in the number of children with
disabilities mainstreamed into primary school
Transition rate from primary to junior secondary
school to reach 90per cent.
80per cent of children up to the age of 15 will
be enrolled in school or an equivalent education
programme
17
Education in Nigeria: Evaluation of the Effectiveness & Impact of SDG 4
Theory of Change of Education Sector Strategic taken as an exercise to aid the analysis and understanding
Plan 2016–2019 of the evaluation questions. This did not include inputs
of the stakeholders as the Strategic Plan was not designed
The ESSP 2016–2019 does not have an official Theory of
based on results-based management principles.
Change (ToC). The heart of the plan was its identification
of 10 pillars to drive the goal of the sector. In order to better
The desired change envisioned in the plan is that over the
understand how the Strategic Plan intends to achieve the
four-year period of 2016 to 2019, enrolment would increase
expected results in terms of impact and outcomes, the
significantly towards achieving the longer-term SDG4.1 of
independent evaluation team reconstructed a ToC as an
100 per cent completion rate by 2030, with zero children
entry point of the evaluation.28 This exercise is a step in
being out of school.
the right direction but, as UNICEF also acknowledges, the
formulation of theory of change requires the participation
As Figure 1.5 indicates, the ToC builds on results-chain
of all relevant stakeholders who are most informed about
logic, which places impact at its highest level of result.
the assumptions and their validity. Such a consultative
The outcome level is divided between immediate and
process also develops ownership for the ToC and
intermediate outcomes informed by a set of outputs. This
generates shared understanding among key implementers.
approach has been employed as a means to facilitate the
Therefore, the ToC presented in this report should be
presentation of the vertical linkages between different
18
Evaluation Purpose, Objectives, and Scope
Figure 2.1: Theory of Change (ToC) of the Education Sector Strategic Plan- 2016 -2019, with focus on SDG4.1 on out-of-
school children and basic education, reconstructed by the evaluation team for the purpose of the evaluati on
Impact By 2030, All girls and boys
complete free, equitable and quality
primary education leading to relevant
and effective learning outcomes
Strategic Objective 2:
StSrtaratteeggiicc OObbjejecc  tviev e1 :1:
All girls and boys learn foundational
All girls and boys a re enrolled in primary skills-literacy and numeracy
school ( based on credibly established national
benchmarks )
Intermediate Outcome 1 Intermediate Outcome 2: Intermediate Outcom:e 3 Intermediate Outcome 4
Access to primary education Quality of primary scho ol Communities’ and parents Gov ernment capacity to plan,
increased, including knowledge, skills, and implement, and manage
fosteringinclusive education improved, including attitudes to support primary education, with
emphasis on inclusive primary education, attention to inclusive
(genderinclusion, disability educa  on Including inclusive education, strengthened
inclusion,& social inclusion) education, increased’
Sub-Outcome 1.1: Sub-Outcome 2.1: Sub-Outcome 3 .:1 Sub-Outcome: 4.1
Primary sc hools and Primary education Parents’ and care
Education policies
alternative education curricula developed givers’ awareness, implemented a
programs equipped with and used, and knowledge, and capa- sub-national
p fo e r d p a r g im og ar ic y a e l d to u o ca ls t ion fostering inclusive city to advocate for level to support quality
education and support their girls’
primary education,
and boys’ right to
education increased including inclusive
Sub-Outcome 1.2: Sub-Outcome 2.2: education policy
Primary
Pedagogical skills
schools staffed with of primary school Sub-Outco:me 3.2 Sub-Outcome 4.2
teachers and teachers increased,
a
a
d
tt
m
en
in
ti
i
o
st
n
r a
to
to
g
rs
e
,
n
w
d
i
e
th
r
s
le
u
a
p
r
p
n
o
in
r
g
ti n
a
g
n d
a ctive
a
E
n
n
d
ro
O
llm
OS
e
C
n
,
t
g
o
i
f
r l
a
s
t
a
r
n
is
d
k
G
fe
o
d
v
e
e
r
r
a
n
l,
m
st
e
a
n
te
t
,
c
a
a
n
p
d
a c
lo
it
c
y
a
a
l
t
parity inclusive education boys with disabilities, levels for monitoring,
and other
marginalized groups implementing education
Sub-Outcome Sub-Outcome 2.3:
increased plans, systems, and
1.3: Primary school
Infrastru cture of primary administrators’ supervision of teachers
schools improved, management skills and school administra-
including basic improved
tion strengthened
WASH for girls
levels of results based on a number of corresponding • The right governance, budget, policies, and
assumptions and risks. Close review of the Strategic Plan, National Education Management Information
however, demonstrates that the plan does not reflect these System (NEMIS), information, communication and
assumptions and risks. Recognition of these factors is technology are available as inputs.
necessary to properly inform different interventions in the • In terms of demand for education, social norms and
basic education sector if these results are to be achieved. family behaviours are positive, school costs/fees are
In addition, the evaluation team judged that certain critical affordable and the school feeding programme is well
assumptions must be made in order to attain the expected implemented alongside other initiatives to improve
output envisaged in the sector plan: the quality of teaching and learning, among others.
19
Education in Nigeria: Evaluation of the Effectiveness & Impact of SDG 4
• To improve the completion and transition rate, it the ESSP, as well as to lay out critical assumptions that will
is assumed that the quality of basic and secondary guide interventions.
education curricula, pre-service teacher education,
WASH conditions and child protection in school are Expected Results of the Education Sector Stra-
improved. tegic Plan 2016–2019
In the absence of a results-based planning approach, the
These assumptions can be clustered around the demand
ESSP 2016–2019 (FMOE, 2016)contains several tables of
for education services, the supply of education services
action plans built around the 10 pillars, using the activity-
and the enabling environment.
based approach for planning, which describes the activities
required to achieve a set of objectives. The plan does
Therefore, the ToC, describes the causal pathways through
indicate that “the ten pillars are the core strategic and
which interventions in the basic education sector produce a
measurable goals that need to be attained. And for each
set of outputs, which in turn contribute to the achievement
of the pillars, there are clear and well-defined objectives
of the outcome and impact. With each transition between
together with the strategies to be employed in achieving
levels (e.g., from outputs to outcome, and from outcomes
them” (p. 2). A comprehensive table in Annex E maps out
to impact) the number of stakeholders involved grows,
how the three outcome areas come together with strategic
as does the number of factors that must coalesce for
objectives and outcomes statements. The plan makes
visible progress. Therefore, certain assumptions are made
reference to expected results to be achieved at the end of
about conducive or constraining environmental, supply
the plan period in 2019. There are also multiple references
and demand conditions that must hold for the transition
to a results framework, including the following quote from
between levels to occur as expected. This nature of ToC
the MSP:
analysis is consistent with the practice of UNICEF in the
2014–201729 Strategic Plan.
The Framework remains a work in progress as the
baselines, annual and final year targets for the outcome-
However, each of these assumptions may not hold true
level indicators are yet to be established. Data from across
exactly as predicted. As a result, the causal link between
the sector will have to be collected to inform the process.
the outputs and the outcome could be threatened, either
However, the basis for a strong performance management
entirely or in part, as reflected in underperformance
system has hereby been established along with this plan
in a subset of indicators. Therefore, it is important to
(FMOE, 2016).
understand the key risks to each assumption. However,
However, a systematic results measurement framework
no risk analysis was conducted for the Strategic Plan of
matrix with clearly defined, impact, outcomes, indicators,
2016–2019. The relevant assumptions and risks are always
baseline and milestones is absent from the plan. The
an integral part of a ToC.
evaluation team inquired with government officials about
an updated matrix without success, indicating that this
Future education planning in Nigeria should start with the
framework never came to fruition. There is no record that
design of a theory of change so that it can fully understand
the results framework was further developed, and neither
what assumptions and risks need to be addressed through
was any documentation to show how the plan’s targets
its interventions if the desired change is to be achieved
were achieved annually. Table 3 provides a summary of
and accounted for. While a ToC should be included as part
the expected results, which are mixture of outputs and
of a results-based strategic plan, it should not be taken as
outcomes. Within the effectiveness section below, the
a static document, but one that may be reviewed, adapted
evaluation team provides further analysis of the extent to
and revised to reflect ongoing and emergent challenges,
which these expected results have been achieved.
considerations and priorities.
2.3 Evaluation questions
Finally, the evaluation team notes that the ToC developed
here represents but one of the 10 pillars within the ESSP. Four high-level key questions provided framing for more
Further deliberation is necessary to elaborate and visualize specific evaluation questions. They are:
the connectedness between the 10 pillars that undergird • Is the MSP (Ministerial Strategic Plan) content clear
20
Evaluation Purpose, Objectives, and Scope
21
Education in Nigeria: Evaluation of the Effectiveness & Impact of SDG 4
and relevant and in coherence with SDG4? The key questions provided a framework for the evaluation
• Was the policy implemented as intended and did questions (EQs) that guided the process. The EQs are
it facilitate the equity and ‘leave no one behind’ the product of an iterative process that involved multiple
principles of SDG? If not, why not? stakeholders, including participants in the December
• What progress has been made towards SDG4 in 2019 inception workshop. As Table 4 indicates, OECD
Nigeria? Development Assistance Cooperation (DAC) criteria as
• Did the policy produce the intended outcomes and well as SDG principles provide an analytical structure for
impact? questions.
Table 2.2: Evaluation criteria and evaluation questions
Key question Evaluation criteria Evaluation questions
KQ1: Is the MSP content Relevance R1: What is the relationship between SDG4 and other related SDGs?
clear and relevant and in
coherence with SDG4? R2: To what extent were the barriers (and their causes) to achieving SDG4 identi-
fied and addressed in the strategy priorities?
Coherence C1: Are overall Education Sector policies and strategies in coherence with SDG4
well mainstreamed into ESSP 2016–2019?
KQ2: Was the policy imple- Effici1: To what extent has the MSP (2016–2019) been efficiently implemented?
mented as intended?
Effici2: What is the cost-effectiveness of interventions?
Efficiency
Effect1: To what extent have the outcomes of the MSP been achieved?
Effectiveness Effect2: What are the funding sources available to implement the plan?
KQ3: Did the policy Imp1: To what extent has the MSP contributed to observed changes in education
produce the intended access, completion, equity and quality in Nigeria?
outcomes and impact?
Imp2: How and why? What are the drivers?
KQ4: What progress has
been made towards SDG4 Imp3: To what extent did the following flagship policies and programmes of the
in Nigeria? education sector achieve the overall expected results? (For example: Home-
Grown School Feeding Programme, Social Cash Assistance to poorest families).
Impact
Imp4: What are the main driving factors of increased completion rates at the
primary school level during the 2011–2013 period?
Imp5: What are the driving factors of decreased primary school completion rates
in the 2013–2018 period?
Imp6: How has COVID-19 impacted the education system, particularly in terms of
access to education, retention and completion?
KQ4: What progress has Human Rights HR1: To what extent did the programme target the poorest and help reduce
been made towards SDG4 & ‘leave no one inequalities between the wealthier groups and the poorest groups?
in Nigeria? behind’, equity and
universality
Cross-cutting Sustainability Sus1: To what extent can any observed changes be maintained?
Cross-cutting Gender Equality GE1: To what extent did the Education Sector Strategic Plan and flagship pro-
grammes incorporate considerations of gender equality and the empowerment
of women and girls into the design, implementation and monitoring of interven-
tions?
22
Evaluation Methodology
Chapter 3
The SDG4 evaluation followed two main approaches: a realist evaluation approach and systems
thinking. The realist evaluation approach guided the pursuit of evidence of what is working, for
whom, and under what conditions within the education sector at national and subnational levels. The
evaluation team assumed interventions are based on theories, even if emergent, but understood that
interventions are also flexible to change and are part of a social reality that influences implementation
and stakeholder response. Application of a systems-thinking approach allowed the evaluation team
to go beyond the education sector and assess linkages between SDG4 (education) and other related
SDGs (i.e., SDG1-poverty and SDG3-health) as well as the dimensions of equity, gender and human
rights in relation to the attainment of SDG4 targets in Nigeria.
25
Education in Nigeria: Evaluation of the Effectiveness & Impact of SDG 4
The evaluation team used multiple analytical techniques The conceptual framework (Figure 2.1) for the evaluation
and a combination of qualitative and quantitative data follows the stages of policy development.
from multiple sources in order to triangulate information
to answer the evaluation questions (see Table 2.1). The Annex A provides an evaluation matrix that lays out
process followed a mixed-methods convergent design the key evaluation questions, DAC criteria, indicators,
in which data from both analytical streams are collected analytical techniques and data sources for each evaluation
simultaneously. During the analysis phase, we sought question in detail. In a more summarized fashion, Table
to use qualitative data to extend and provide nuance to 2.1 indicates the data sources that informed this study
quantitative data where applicable, and explored points of and the type of analysis performed. In addition to policy
divergence between data collected when relevant. analysis, data collection involved interviews with key
stakeholders as well as a school-level survey in six case-
The evaluation questions required policy content study states: Enugu, Kaduna, Kano, Katsina, Kwara and
evaluation, implementation evaluation and impact Zamfara. Various federal-level government officials and
evaluation strategies. While there are many similarities, development partners also participated in interviews.
there are important differences between a programme Analyses draw from secondary documents, primary
evaluation and a policy evaluation. A policy evaluation interviews, and survey and learning assessment data.
demands systemic analysis and does not have the clear Subsequent sub-sections provide an overview of analysis
boundaries present in programme evaluations. The methods used to inform preliminary findings. A further
evaluation of national policies allows for no control group section presents an overview of the qualitative and
as all citizens receive “the intervention” and therefore quantitative samples.
experimental and quasi-experimental methods are
3.1 Overview of sample
ruled out. Policy interventions have a greater focus on
administrative data and usually involve significantly more
Two main sources of primary data informed findings.
stakeholders.
The first was the school-level survey conducted within
26
Evaluation Methodology
Table 3.1: Summary of data sources and related analysis
Source Type of analysis
Government policies Policy content analysis
Government financial and allocation data Education financing analysis; Cost-effectiveness analysis
Interviews (41 in total) Thematic analysis
UN documents, government documents, development part- Thematic analysis
ner documents, academic reports, etc.
Primary learner assessment data, surveys (sample of 5,159 Descriptive analysis, trend analysis, multivariate regression analysis
pupils)
Head teacher questionnaires and schoolgrounds observation Descriptive analysis, trend analysis, multivariate regression analysis
(Sample of 479 head teachers)
Secondary quantitative data (EMIS, MICS, NDHS, NEDS) Descriptive analysis, trend analysis, causal multivariate regression
analysis
six case-study states. In total, 5,159 pupils and 479 head of this evaluation, “low-performing” cases were interpreted
teachers participated in the evaluation, representing 480 as states with completion rates that are below the national
primary schools. The second concerned stakeholders who average (63 per cent). “High-performing” states were
participated in key informant interviews (41 KIIs). interpreted as states with completion rates above the
national average. “Transitioning” states were those states
School survey in comparative case-study states with completion rates near the national average. Table 2.2
provides further information about the final states selected:
The evaluation design includes a comparative case study
Kwara, Kaduna, Katsina, Enugu, Kano and Zamfara. The
of six states purposively sampled. Selecting six states
table also indicates the region in which the state is located.
allowed for comparisons of pairs of states that fall into
Figure 2.2 below shows the location of the six case-study
three categories: “low,” “high” and “transitioning” in
states in Nigeria. (Annex B includes a map of Nigeria with
terms of their performance in achieving the global agenda
states and regions.)
of SDG4.1. Designations were made according to states’
primary education completion rates according to the
As indicated above, having learning outcome data was a
2016–2017 Multiple Indicator Cluster Survey (MICS). In
key criterion for selection of the case-study states. Table
addition, the government of Nigeria’s SDGs Evaluation
2.3 identifies the studies that served as an initial time
Technical Committee considered additional criteria in the
point for analysis, a baseline if you will, for comparison
final deliberation in selecting the six case-study states.
with SDG4 evaluation findings. It was acknowledged
In choosing among Nigeria’s 36 states, eight emerged
during the December 2019 inception workshop that two of
as fulfilling the necessary criterion of having learning
these states (Katsina and Zamfara) use non-representative
outcome data available for the 2014–2015 time period
data; however, it was decided then that having a
(immediately prior to the MSP). A next step identified six
purposive sample of states performing quite differently
states according to completion rate data. For the purposes
27
Education in Nigeria: Evaluation of the Effectiveness & Impact of SDG 4
Table 3.2: Parameters of selection of states for comparative analysis
Case type State selected Region Completion rate Difference between com-
(MICS 2016–2017) pletion rate and national
average
High-performing Kwara North Central 95.2 +32.2
Kaduna North West 79.0 +16
Transitioning Katsina North West 65.5 +2.5
Enugu South East 65.4 +2.4
Low-performing Kano North West 56.9 -6.1
Zamfara North West 47.9 -15.1
in terms of completion was more important than state numeracy at the end of Grade 2 (P2) and Grade 4 (P4).
representativeness. Due to the disruption in two successive academic years
caused by COVID-19-related school closures, pupils had
Through collaboration with the FMOE, the evaluation team been promoted to the next grade at the time of field data
was able to obtain data sets for the pupil assessments for collection for this evaluation. The school survey thus
ESSPIN and GEP3 studies through OPM. Unfortunately, targeted Grade 3 (P3) and Grade 5 (P5) pupils as proxies for
due to staff turnover, it was not possible to obtain the TDP end-of-year Grade 2 and Grade 4 pupils. At the school level,
data set. Schools in Katsina had participated in the GEP3 data collectors implemented a head teacher questionnaire,
evaluation as well, so it was possible to compare outcomes learning assessments (literacy and numeracy) to six pupils
in that state with that ‘baseline’ level. (three girls/three boys) from Grade 3 and six pupils (three
girls/three boys) from Grade 5 and pupil contextual
Details of school-level survey sample questionnaires for those same pupils. Data collectors also
obtained enrolment and teacher attendance data from
The school-level survey targeted 80 schools per state,
head teachers and conducted a schoolgrounds observation.
for a total of 480 schools. The evaluation team sought to
In total, the survey reached 5,159 pupils and 479 head
understand pupils’ learning competencies in literacy and
28
Evaluation Methodology
Table 3.3: States and baseline learning data sources
State Baseline learning data sources
Kwara ESSPIN 2015 Composite Survey
Kaduna ESSPIN 2015 Composite Survey
Katsina TDP evaluation 2014 (not available); GEP3 evaluation 2015 was used instead
Enugu ESSPIN 2015 Composite Survey
Kano ESSPIN 2015 Composite Survey
Zamfara GEP3 evaluation 2015
Table 3.4: Survey sample by state
State Schools P3 Assessments P5 Assessments Head
(proxy for end- (proxy for end- Teacher
of-year P2) of-year P4) Inter-
views
Male Female Total Male Female Total Male Female Total
Enugu 80 230 237 467 232 233 465 17 63 80
Kaduna 80 0* 0* 0* 246 227 473 46 34 80
Kano 80 241 237 478 233 246 479 72 8 80
Katsina 80 230 249 479 231 247 478 71 8 79
Kwara 80 224 229 453 236 222 458 33 47 80
Zamfara 80 247 218 465 237 227 464 77 3 80
Total 480 1172 1170 2342 1415 1402 2817 316 163 479
teachers. Table 2.4 gives a breakdown of the sample by states where sample size was lower than the target sample
state. The next section provides additional information of 80 schools by state, additional schools were selected
about school and participant selection. using the school population list obtained from the SMOEs.
For this random selection, MOS was useful for drawing a
Sampling frames probability proportionate to size (PPS) sample of schools.
To avoid sample size losses, the evaluation team drew
Since the target units of the populations are nested within
a sample of replacement schools also through random
a hierarchical structure, the evaluation selected units using
selection. As described below, a total of 29 replacement
a sampling frame by stage using a three-stage stratified
schools were required for this study.
cluster sample design. Schools represented the first stage
and classes represented the second stage, while pupils
Second stage sampling units: Classes
within selected classes comprised the last stage.
Sampling at the class level took place while in the field.
First stage sampling units: Schools If there was more than one class in each target grade,
enumerators randomly selected one class in each target
Through collaboration with the FMOE and SMOEs, the
grade to participate in data collection. Random selection
evaluation team obtained school lists from each of the
was not necessary in schools where there was only one
six case-study states, which included information about
class within the target grade.
a) the type of school, b) the degree of urbanization, and
c) measure of size (MOS) of a school (pupil enrolment).
Third stage sampling units: Pupils and head teachers
The team also obtained a school list outlining who had
participated in previous ESSPIN and GEP3 studies in Upon arrival at a school, data collectors selected a total of
each of the targeted states. At first, sample schools were 12 pupils (P3: three boys and three girls; P5: three boys
randomly selected from the list of previous schools. For and three girls) to participate in the evaluation. They also
29
Education in Nigeria: Evaluation of the Effectiveness & Impact of SDG 4
identified the head teacher or, as necessary, the assistant including both federal and state-level education officials,
head teacher in case of absence. A random sampling non-state actors (i.e., CSOs), development partners and the
technique was used to select pupils in each of the target OSSAP-SDGs as well as the SDG Evaluation Technical
grades. (See Annex C for precise sampling protocol.) Working Group. Table 2.5 provides the breakdown of
respondents.
Sampling precision and sample size
2.2 Instruments
Decisions regarding sample size are critical as they have a
direct impact on the precision of the survey estimates. A In line with the evaluation methodology, the evaluation
larger sample size will produce a smaller margin of error. team employed a variety of quantitative and qualitative
The selected sampling frame did not produce a simple instruments. Table 2.6 gives an overview of the tools
random sample, but a multi-stage cluster sample that central to the SDG4 evaluation.
required a much larger sample of pupils to achieve the same
level of precision than a simple random sample. Because Qualitative tools consisted of key informant interview
pupils from the same schools tend to be more like each guides as no focus group discussions were conducted as
other than like other pupils in the population, sampling part of this evaluation. KII guides were semi-structured
a cluster sample of pupils will yield less information per in nature and were tailored to the stakeholder group and
pupil than a random sample of pupils drawn from all mapped to the evaluation questions.
pupils in the population. Intraclass correlation (ICC) is the
statistic used to indicate how much pupils in a group are The development of the school-based survey tools
similar on an outcome measure. ICC is then used to adjust required particular attention. Because the independent
the clustering effect when planning sample size. evaluation sought to make comparisons with previous
The following formula provided the effective sample size studies determined to constitute a baseline for each case-
for the cluster sample: study state, the evaluation team constructed the SDG4
evaluation tools using question items from those studies
a=(NC*CS)/((1+(CS-1)*ICC)) (see Table 2.1 for more details). In doing so, the evaluation
team attended to competencies central to literacy and
Where NC is the number of clusters (schools), CS is the numeracy as well as keeping in mind the length of the tool
cluster size (the number of pupils per school) and ICC is and time it would require for each assessment given the
the intraclass correlation. Using the computed effective age of the pupils, the length of the data collection period,
sample size, the evaluation team was then able to compute and the number of data collectors to be engaged by the
the expected margin of error of the estimates using the local data collection firm. Recommendations within the
following formula: original inception report developed by OPM in 2019 also
ME=2*√((50*(100-50))/((a-1) )) informed items selected. The objectives of the baseline
studies differed, however, from the SDG4 evaluation as
The value of 50 in this formula indicates that the proportion the ‘baseline’ studies were part of ongoing project work.
used to estimate the margin of error is 50 per cent, which The evaluation team determined that shorter instruments
represents the proportion that will require the largest were appropriate for the SDG4 evaluation framework and
sample size to achieve the value of the margin of error. questions and it was necessary to keep tools under 40
In other words, with a similar sample size, any proportion minutes per child. For this reason, too, separate pupils sat
below 50 per cent will produce a smaller margin of error. for the literacy and numeracy assessments. All tools were
This means that the computed level of precision is the in English, per the ToR, though enumerators provided
largest margin of error that will be observed once the data instructions in appropriate national languages to ensure
are collected. understanding of the tasks at hand.
Key informant interviews Data collection
In terms of qualitative data, the evaluation team conducted Prior to school-based data collection, enumerator training
41 interviewees with 67 participants (23 women, 44 men). took place in Kano State for five days from 8–12 February
Participants represented multiple stakeholder groups 2021. A total of 54 data collectors comprising 35 females
30
Evaluation Methodology
Table 3.5: Overview of qualitative sample
Stakeholder type Female Male Total
Development partners 7 3 10
Federal-level education officials 2 4 6
Non-state actors 3 10 13
OSSAP-SDGs/Presidency officials 0 1 1
SDG Evaluation Technical Working Group Members 1 1
State-level education officials 13 23 36
Grand Total 25 42 67
Table 3.6: Overview of SDG4 evaluation tools
Component Tool
School-based survey Head teacher questionnaires including school grounds observation
Grade 3 and 5 pupil questionnaires (end-of-Grade-2 and end-of-Grade-4 level instruments)
Grade 3 and 5 numeracy assessments (end-of-Grade-2 and end-of-Grade-4 level instru-
ments)
Grade 3 and 5 literacy assessments (end-of-Grade-2 and end-of-Grade-4 level instruments)
SUBEB/State MOE tools School-closures record form
State cost-effectiveness data form
Key informant interview guides SDG4 Working Group
FMOE
State education officials
State education officials (gender focus)
Development partners
Federal CSOs
State CSOs
and 19 males were trained (including one extra data follow during data collection. School-level data collection
collector in each state to provide a back-up in the event began on 18 February and continued through March
of any unavoidable personnel attrition). Training covered 15, lasting four weeks. Data collectors were expected to
an introduction to the project and to data collection upload data daily to the server as internet connectivity
tools and methods, practical application among trainees, allowed. Enumerators continued to practise COVID-19
field practice, debriefing and quiz sessions, constructive protocols throughout in-person data collection.
feedback and logistics. Training also allowed data collectors
to become familiar with SurveyCTO, the application used As mentioned, qualitative and quantitative data collection
to collect data in schools. occurred simultaneously. For the qualitative data
collection, the evaluation team began key informant
The evaluation team implemented COVID-19 prevention interviews (KIIs) with critical stakeholders on 9 February
measures for the duration of the training. During training and continued until 7 April. The National Evaluator led
sessions, trainees and trainers were required to wear the KII process with the support of two in-country research
face masks at all times and a handwashing station was assistants. All KIIs within the states and with government
placed outside the training venue. During school-based and CSO officials took place in person while interviews
practical exercises, enumerators were required to practise with development partners were conducted remotely.
implementing the COVID-19 protocol that they would The Team Leader and National Evaluator conducted
31
Education in Nigeria: Evaluation of the Effectiveness & Impact of SDG 4
these interviews. In addition to taking notes, evaluators on unit-level data on the inputs (disbursed funds per child,
recorded interviews, which they later uploaded to Trint, if available), process, outputs (based on implementation
a subscription-based transcription service. Evaluators status reports), outcomes (access, OOSC and completion)
then reviewed and corrected the interview transcripts. and impact (learning assessment outcomes) of the MSP.
The evaluation team then carefully reviewed and refined
transcripts. Qualitative analysis
Qualitative data analysis included policy process
Quantitative analysis
development analysis, document review, and thematic
Two main quantitative analysis strategies guided data coding of interview transcripts.
analysis efforts: 1) descriptive analysis of key indicators
and 2) multivariate regression analysis. The evaluation Policy process development analysis
team used statistical software (Stata 17) to run analyses.
The evaluation team carefully reviewed policy documents
Descriptive analysis: The first phase of the quantitative
as well as qualitative interview data collected at the federal
analysis was descriptive in nature and provided information
and state levels. The evaluation sought to assess/appreciate
on the status of key indicators at the national and state
the adequacy and relevance of existing policies in their
levels.
effectiveness to ensure universal access by children to
quality education without discrimination of socioeconomic
Multivariate regression analysis: Where relevant, the
status, gender, geographic location, etc., as experienced
evaluation team employed multivariate ordinary least
by children, caregivers and a range of stakeholders at the
square (OLS) regression in order to better understand
national and international levels.
findings relevant to inequality and to describe differences
between states in relation to SDG4.1 in Access and
A strategic review of key documents reviewed as part
Quality of Basic Education. Multivariate OLS regression
of the secondary data analysis deliverable provides
is a method used to measure the degree to which more
additional contextualization and triangulation for findings
than one independent variable (predictors) and more than
that emerge from quantitative analysis of the MICS and
one dependent variable (responses) are linearly related.
DHS data sets. Documents include both quantitative and
By modelling, we try to predict the value of the outcome
qualitative studies as well as policy documents.
(Y) based on values of a set of predictor variables (Xi).
Multivariate OLS regression analysis does not attribute
Document and evidence review
change in the value of the dependent variable to the
independent variables, but rather describes the association The evaluation team conducted a literature review on
between multiple factors. The regression analysis formula the conceptual and empirical evidence regarding the
is as follows. relationship between SDG4 and other related SDGs. The
evaluation team identified key words in order to produce a
Y ̂=b_0+ b_1 X_1+b_2 X_2…b_i X_i+e compilation of both academic and grey literature relevant
to evaluation questions. Document review focused also
Y ̂ is the predicted value on the outcome and ̂ is the on the evaluation questions that examine change within
regression coefficient for each predictor (x). The regression the basic education sector and drivers and barriers to that
coefficient represents the expected change on the outcome change. The evaluation team used an analytical matrix to
for a change of one unit in the predictor variable. organize findings from the literature review.
Education financing and cost-effectiveness analysis Analysis of interview data
The evaluation took two approaches to examining the The evaluation team used semi-structured interview
financial health of Nigeria’s approach to basic education. protocols to guide interviews with key education
The evaluation assessed the level of education financing stakeholders at the state and federal levels. Instruments
in Nigeria based on public expenditures for education began with requesting information on the informant’s role
sector at the national level and in six case study comparison and previous roles in order to ascertain early in the interview
states. In addition, the cost-effectiveness analysis focused where the participant’s input would be most valuable to
32
Evaluation Methodology
the evaluation. Evaluators then tailored the exchange to ensured informed consent and assent from all school-level
elicit responses corresponding to evaluation questions. as well as key informant interview participants as well as
The team recorded interviews and once the interviews appropriate storage of data and maintaining confidentiality.
were transcribed the team used NVivo, a qualitative data Efforts complied with all UNICEF norms and guidelines
analysis software, to perform thematic coding aligning for evaluation and protection and safeguarding of children.
with the evaluation questions and objectives.
Limitations
Evaluation team
Several factors constituted limitations and challenges for
The evaluation team was composed of four key this evaluation of Nigeria’s pursuit of SDG4 and relate
individuals, with regular technical support from both Dr to three main categories: 1) methodological or research
MaryFaith Mount-Cors of EdIntersect and Mr Juan Carlos limitations, 2) COVID-19 restrictions, and 3) security
Alegre of Alegre Associates. While the core team structure challenges.
was horizontal and team members worked together
throughout the entire evaluation process, the roles of Methodological or research limitations: By design, the
the team members were slightly differentiated. Dr Karla scope of the evaluation is quite broad and many entities
Giuliano Sarr served as Team Leader for the evaluation. and variables interact within the education sector, making
She assumed responsibility for the coordination of the it challenging to absolutely isolate the effectiveness and
evaluation activities and led the qualitative data collection the impact of Nigeria’s MSP. The sample also could not
and analysis, mixed-methods analysis, report-writing and accommodate very small schools, including those serving
dissemination. Dr Adeboye Adeyemo, National Evaluator, largely nomadic communities. In total, 11 schools originally
a senior consultant in Nigeria, played an invaluable role in selected needed to be replaced because they did not have
leading evaluation activities from Nigeria when other team both a Grade 3 and a Grade 5 class.
members could not travel due to COVID-19 restrictions.
Dr Adeyemo conducted key informant interviews, policy The evaluation also builds upon the work of previous
analysis and financial and cost-effectiveness analyses. Ms. studies (OPM’s ESSPIN and GEP3 studies). The
Alice Michelazzi, Education Advisor, led the development evaluation team communicated with OPM in order to
of school-level survey tools, including the adaptation promote more consistent usage of tools throughout the
of pupil assessment tools, training of data collectors and process. The original OPM tools were designed to measure
oversight of the school survey data collection process. project performance but not necessarily to measure pupils’
Dr Michel Rousseau, Education Advisor and seasoned reading and numeracy against a minimum standard.
statistician, provided expertise on quantitative study Similarly, due to staff turnover and the long-term nature
design, and led primary and secondary quantitative data of the scope of this study, some individuals with greater
analysis. All team members provided inputs for the report. historical knowledge were not available for interview.
Hanovia Limited, a data collection firm based in Nigeria, As will be explained further below, some data were not
conducted the school-based survey implementation. collected during baseline studies that resulted in SDG4
evaluation analyses not being able to present a full picture
Ethical approach of change over time in learning competencies.
EdIntersect and Alegre Associates submitted the
In regard to financial data, a major limitation to this
evaluation protocol to the National Health Research
evaluation was the inability to source the data from a
Ethics Committee of Nigeria in accordance with best
central source. Multiple actors fund basic education,
practice and in order to demonstrate adherence to ethical
cutting across federal, state and local governments and
norms for the participation of human subjects. The
there is no central repository for financial information. A
committee determined that the evaluation met the criteria
lack of data forthcoming to the evaluation team limited the
for exemption, according to the National Code for Health
analysis of financial data, which would be required for a
Research Ethics, and the study received approval as exempt
more comprehensive cost-effectiveness analysis in the six
from NHREC oversight on 21 January 2021. Despite this,
states included in the study.
throughout the data collection process the evaluation team
33
Education in Nigeria: Evaluation of the Effectiveness & Impact of SDG 4
COVID-19 restrictions: Out of concerns for safety and for end-of-year Grade 2 and 4 pupils. Also, only Grade 5
health, international evaluation team members were not pupils were able to be assessed in Kaduna State due to
able to travel to Nigeria at critical points within the process ongoing school closures for younger grades. The addition
as planned; namely, to train data collectors and to conduct of the sixth impact question focusing on the impact of
key informant interviews. As a result, team configuration COVID-19 attempts to further clarify limitations.
and the means of conducting the study shifted while
work was ongoing. International team members provided Security challenges: Prior to and during field data
remote support during training and participated in collection, there were kidnapping incidents and reports
interviews as possible using remote means. The expertise of banditry across Katsina, Kaduna and Zamfara States.
of Nigeria-based team members magnified in importance This made it impossible to survey schools within the
as a result and maintained evaluation rigour as originally affected communities. The evaluation team took great
intended in spite of the pandemic. In addition, COVID-19 care and relied extensively on the local data collection
school closures and other lockdowns have greatly affected firm’s expertise to exclude schools from the sample as
the Nigerian context, and schools and children’s lives, needed out of safety concerns. In total, 28 schools required
in particular. Notably, the evaluation team conducted replacement for security reasons.
assessments with Grade 3 and Grade 5 pupils as proxies
34
Evaluation Findings
and Analysis
Chapter 4
This chapter presents the findings and analysis of the 16 evaluation questions that guided the
SDG4 evaluation. Findings rely upon both primary and secondary data and, in particular, draw from
the school-based survey, key informant interviews, financial data and review of key documents. As
appropriate, we have merged discussion of findings for some questions due to their interrelatedness.
We have also categorized the strength of the evidence that informs the response for each evaluation
question. Table 3.1 describes the ratings used to establish the strength of the evidence. (See Annex D
for a full overview of evidence ratings for all questions.)
37
Education in Nigeria: Evaluation of the Effectiveness & Impact of SDG 4
Table 4.1: Evidence rating category descriptions
Evidence Rating Descriptor
Strong Strong evidence is characterized by having definitive sources of information that corroborate it, including an
independent assessment that meets established quality criteria for the data collected. Evidence includes con-
vincing and rigorous source outside of present study. It is clear and definitive on perspectives and positions
gathered from key stakeholders.
Medium Medium evidence is characterized by having corroborative sources of evidence, including triangulation of
interviews and survey data collected systematically with documented evidence. It is typified by having more
range and difference in the perspectives and positions gathered from key stakeholders. Some external evi-
dence exists on this topic that supports claims from present study.
Weak Weak evidence is characterized by having limited sources of evidence which are subjective (i.e., only small
number of interviews/survey data). There is little substantive clarity on perspective and positions gathered
from key stakeholders. There is no evidence of other studies that support findings.
4.1 Relevance of Education Sector Conclusion
Strategic Plan
SDG4 is interconnected with other SDGs, most notably
Overall Finding: The ESSP 2016–2019 is highly poverty (SDG1), health (SDG3), gender equality (SDG5)
relevant in linking to other SDGs and address- and sanitation (SDG6). Intersectionality between
ing barriers education, gender and poverty is most present within
documents reviewed while intensified awareness of the
Quality of the Evidence: Strong
importance of good health to education has become even
more prominent during the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic.
According to the OECD, the DAC criterion of relevance
Moreover, both NEDS and SDG4 evaluation school
addresses the “extent to which the intervention objectives
survey findings point to illness as the number one reason
and design respond to beneficiaries’, global, country, and
for children not attending school.
partner/institution needs, policies, and priorities, and
continue to do so if circumstances change”. Two questions
Overall, there are 17 SDGs that together seek to provide
inform the analysis of the ESSP’s relevance. The first
a “shared blueprint for peace and prosperity for people
focuses on the linkages between SDGs most relevant to
and the planet” (United Nations, n.d). Inherent within
education while the second examines how government
the SDGs is the assertion that the goals are interconnected
education policy addressed barriers to universal and
and need simultaneous address in order for efforts to be
equitable quality education.
meaningful and effective. The response to this question
SUMMARY CONCLUSIONS (Relevance)
SDG4 is interconnected with other SDGs, most notably poverty (SDG1), health (SDG3), gender equality (SDG5) and sanitation (SDG6).
Intersectionality between education, gender and poverty is most present within documents reviewed while intensified awareness of
the importance of good health to education has become even more prominent during the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic. Moreover, both
NEDS and SDG4 evaluation school survey findings point to illness as the number one reason for children not attending school.
The federal government recognizes key barriers to achieving SDG4 and addresses them within its strategy priorities. All states also
show evidence of initiatives aimed at addressing barriers, improving school enrolment and fostering improved quality. Poverty, in-
security and inadequate political will are the most concerning barriers. The government addresses these barriers through strategies
aimed at promoting community engagement, addressing sociocultural barriers, developing state-level basic education strategies
and collaborating with development partners. In addition, the evaluation found education financing to be lower than in other
African countries and that transparency about budgeting and spending is very poor. Findings also indicate that coordination around
budget allocation, release and spending is lacking. These weaknesses also constitute major barriers for the system.
38
Evaluation Findings and Analysis
R1: What is the relationship between SDG4 and other related SDGs?
Evaluation question (Relevance) Likely strength of evi- Data sources
dence
What is the relationship between SDG4 and other related SDGs? Strong Literature review, MICS,
NDHS, KIIs
specifically investigates the relationship between and how schools offer an arena for addressing other goals
SDG4 and other related SDGs including SDG5 Gender (like hunger through school feeding, and health and well-
Equality within the context of Nigeria, first through policy being through school-level provision of health insurance).
documents and then through an analysis of secondary data At the same time, external factors related to the goals
from the education sector. also have repercussions for the school environment. For
instance, gender norms and beliefs about girls’ right to
Nigerian policy education affects girls’ enrolment and persistence in
school. The World Food Program (WFP) 2020 State of
The Government of Nigeria recognizes that a holistic
School Feeding report also makes the case that school
approach is required to meet the needs of its citizens.
feeding programmes foster social cohesion and peace.
An illustration of this holistic approach is evident in the
The report argues that school feeding programmes “can
description of Nigeria’s Social Investment programmes.
become an essential safeguard by contributing to a sense
The National Cash Transfer Programme, for instance, is an
of normalcy and educational continuation” (WFP, 2020,
economic program that addresses poverty (SDG1) while
p. 14). Similarly, a family in a dire economic situation
it also has as its objectives to address health and nutrition
may be less able to afford the real and/or opportunity
services (SDG3), school enrolment and attendance
cost of sending their child to school. An education team
(SDG4), SDG5 (Gender Equality) and sanitation (SDG6).
member with one of the developing partners interviewed
Table 3.4 demonstrates how interdependent the goals are
identified interconnectivity of the SDGs as an inevitable
39
Education in Nigeria: Evaluation of the Effectiveness & Impact of SDG 4
characteristic that education programming needs to that there is not much difference between states, except
properly address: for Zamfara where the gender parity index is much lower
than for the other states at 0.81 followed by Kaduna State at
When you take the SGD4 all of the indicators and 0.88. While some states like Enugu, Kaduna or Kwara show
targets are linked. For example, the out-of-school issue little variation since 2007, other states show better gender
should be mainstreamed to all the targets of SDG4.
parity in 2018 than what was observed in 2007, indicating
This question relates to social causes, economic causes,
that there may be some improvement. In 2018, Enugu
cultural causes, also. Having to develop one of the
targets without looking at others may be one of the and Katsina had both achieved parity. A result showing
obstacles towards moving towards achievement of the gender parity may reflect more effort made by states to
SDGs. (DP Representative) increase girls’ primary school attendance, but the change
could also reflect that boys’ attendance is decreasing. As a
The Government of Nigeria has indicated that it prioritizes
consequence, these findings require careful interpretation.
seven of these goals, including SDG4. In 2020, Nigeria
A later evaluation question focusing specifically on gender
completed its second Voluntary National Review (VNR),
equity will provide additional exploration.
the report of which stated that the choice of the seven goals
“was based on Nigeria’s current development priorities
In addition to gender, secondary data analysis also reveals
and the cardinal development objectives of President
greater nuance concerning socioeconomic status. Analysis
Buhari’s administration” (Government of Nigeria, 2021, p.
demonstrates that the socioeconomic status of a child’s
30). The seven priority goals are:
family in Nigeria is also associated with the primary school
attendance rate. This relationship is present at the national
• SDG1 – No poverty
level as well as for each of the case-study states, again
• SDG3 – Health and well-being
with the exception of Enugu. For these five states, the
• SDG4 – Education
attendance race is higher for children in wealthier families
• SDG5 – Gender equality
than for children in poorer families. For example, survey
• SDG8 – Decent work and economic growth
responses indicate that only 26.4 per cent of children
• SDG16 – Peace, justice and strong institutions
in the poorest quintile attended primary school at the
• SDG17 – Partnerships for the goals
national level while the attendance rate is at 91 per cent
for families in the richest quintile. Nationally and across
At the same time, the VNR fails to present data relevant to
the six states, the attendance rate for children within the
4.1, indicating a major data gap. This was the same for the
poorest families is about half the rate of children from the
2017 baseline report.
wealthiest families. The relationship between wealth and
education is reflected internationally as well, for instance
Connections within secondary data
within UNESCO’s Global Education Monitoring reports
A review of secondary data from MICS and NDHS studies (for example, UNESCO, 2020).
reinforces the findings above and provides further insights
into the intersectionality between education, gender and The connection between health and education may be
economic power. As an illustration, the gender parity index even more obvious, as illness or other complications
compares the primary and secondary school attendance for learners or their families may result in absence from
of girls and boys. A value greater than 1 signals that the school. The COVID-19 pandemic has also made schools’
attendance rate of girls is higher than boys while a value roles as mass gathering venues and possible spreaders of
less than 1 signals that boys’ attendance rate is higher than disease even more apparent. At the same time, schools
girls. Given this explanation, an overall national value also play a critical role in providing information about
of 0.97 in 2018 means that the attendance rate of boys illness and preventative practices to pupils, school staff
is slightly higher than the attendance rate for girls. The and families. The pandemic also has made clear the
difference is not large, however, and we may conclude connection between health and the economy (WFP, 2020).
that the attendance rate of girls is at 97 per cent of the This evaluation report later addresses how health (SDG3)
attendance rate for boys. At the national level, the gender and education are related in Evaluation Question (Impact)
parity index shows little variation. Comparing across the 6, as it will address the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic
six case-study states for this evaluation, we could conclude on the education sector.
40
Evaluation Findings and Analysis
R2 To what extent were the barriers (and their causes) to achieving SDG4 identified and addressed in the strategy priorities?
Evaluation question (Relevance) Likely strength of evi- Data sources
dence
To what extent were the barriers (and their causes) to achieving SDG4 Medium Literature review, KIIs
identified and addressed in the strategy priorities?
Conclusion including weak monitoring and data management
systems and mismanagement of funds
The federal government recognizes key barriers to
• inadequate funding of education
achieving SDG4 and addresses them within its strategy
priorities. All states also show evidence of initiatives
in Table 3.2, blue colour indicates demand-side factors
aimed at addressing barriers, improving school enrolment
while black indicates supply-side factors. Key informant
and fostering improved quality. Poverty, insecurity and
interviews overwhelmingly raised the same five issues
inadequate political will are the most concerning barriers.
when asked to identify the three most pressing barriers.
The government addresses these barriers through strategies
Stakeholders placed emphasis first on inadequate funds
aimed at promoting community engagement, addressing
followed by insufficiencies of qualified teachers and social
sociocultural barriers, developing state-level basic
norms and practices antithetical to formal education. In
education strategies and collaborating with development
addition, stakeholders identified poverty and insecurity as
partners. In addition, the evaluation found education
two significant barriers that threaten SDG4.
financing to be lower than in other African countries and
that transparency about budgeting and spending is very
Poverty
poor. Findings also indicate that coordination around
budget allocation, release and spending is insufficient. Although poverty figures within the MSP as a barrier to
These weaknesses also constitute major barriers for the schooling for out-of-school children, the emphasis is not as
system. strongly noted as a barrier to basic education. Discussions
with state- and federal-level stakeholders made clear,
The response to this question relies upon policy analysis however, that poverty is a significant barrier to achieving
as well as data from interviews with state- and federal- SDG4. Stakeholders generally described the opportunity
level education officials and non-state actors. We first cost to families and how a child attending school results
present acknowledged barriers to achieving SDG4 and in loss of revenue for the family, which may be critical to
then methods to address the barriers. daily survival and not affordable. Children often help their
parents with farming, tending livestock and petty trade. As
Barriers to achieving SDG4 a senior education official at the federal level pointed out:
Analysis of the MSP 2018–2022 shows that the strategy So, even if you make education free without the
identified problems specific to the issue of out-of-school enforcement of the compulsory component, they will
children and provision of basic education services. Table still not send those children…because they will be losing
money by sending their child to go to school. Otherwise,
12 presents these challenges side-by-side. Five barriers are
that child will be the one selling water, they will be the
common to both issues and highlighted in grey within the
one helping them on the farm, will be looking after cattle
table:
for them… So, that contribution of the child to their very
• sociocultural barriers and beliefs that impede girls’ meagre economic basket will be lost if they send him to
education school. (Senior FMOE Official)
• inadequate and unfriendly school environments –
It is worth noting that the issue of poverty was not as
infrastructure, teaching and learning materials
strongly articulated by stakeholders in Enugu State as it
• teacher shortage and low capacity of existing teachers
was in the other five case-study states and at the federal
• inadequate political will and capacity to support
level.
basic education, in particular the UBE Act of 2004,
41
Education in Nigeria: Evaluation of the Effectiveness & Impact of SDG 4
Insecurity to go to one of those hard-to-reach communities. It’s a
problem for them because until the contractors go in
Similarly, over a quarter of interviews also identified
and come out safely, they are not at peace. If it is maybe
insecurity as a major barrier to equitable access to
giving grants to the SBMCs; School Based Management
quality education. Interviewees from across four of the Committee, it’s a problem, because once the funds are
case-study states (Enugu, Kaduna, Katsina and Kwara) released, it’s possible that the SBMC chair could be
mentioned insecurity as a barrier, as did three federal-level abducted … it’s a bit dicey and difficult because of what
stakeholders and two representatives from developing was going on. (State-level CSO representative)
partners. The excerpts below from an interview with a
state-level CSO representative describes in detail how Stakeholders further noted that insecurity has been a major
insecurity is affecting project interventions. concern in the North, but responses indicate that insecurity
is now more geographically widespread. Stakeholders also
Because the plan is to reach every child, every single child spoke of parents losing confidence as extremist groups
and now the with insecurities, some of our hard-to-reach
target schools. They noted the sensitivity of the education
communities, it’s difficult…Three weeks ago, I was in one
sector. The quote below illustrates awareness among
of the Local Government Areas (LGAs) that is affected by
federal government officials of the potential lasting impact
the insecurities, and the Local Education Authorities are
that insecurity may have as well as the need to work
concerned that any time any construction work comes
collectively to address it.
up, or any infrastructural work comes, that they need
42
Evaluation Findings and Analysis
Table 4.2: Comparison of cited barriers to access and educational quality concerning OOSC and basic education within the MSP (grey
indicates commonalities)
Pillar 1) OOSC Pillar 4) Basic Education
Longstanding patterns of discrimination in access to
education (girl-child, nomadic-child, almajiri-child,
displaced children)
Negative perceptions of the importance and value
of western education
Negative perceptions and value of girls’ education Sociocultural barriers that impede female participation in basic education
coupled with early marriage
Over-emphasis on academic qualifications
Economic demand related to poverty, child labor,
distance from school, limited employment oppor-
tunities
Non-availability of schools in some communities
Learner-unfriendly school environment Dilapidated and inadequate classrooms, furniture, sanitary and toilet facilities
Dearth of textbooks and other instructional materials
Inadequate deployment of ICT in basic education delivery
Lack of provision for the education of special needs
learners in basic education
Teacher strikes, shortage of teachers and caregivers Poor quality of teachers
Inadequate number of physical education teachers in schools
Low level of political will, politicization of basic Lack of enforcement of the UBE Act of 2004 on enrolment and retention
education
Mismanagement of funds meant for basic education
General lack of capacity at State and LGEA levels to implement UBE
Weak monitoring system at three tiers of government
Lack of reliable data for planning and evaluating progress against targets
Weak school-level governance
Poor financing of education Inadequate funding
Inability of some States to access the UBE Intervention funds
Inadequate provision of physical education and school sports facilities and
equipment
Inadequate funding of physical education and school sports
Poor attitude and low interest of school administrators, proprietors and par-
ents in sports
Non-adherence to criteria for establishing sports in schools
Lack of deliberate programme to promote sports in schools
43
Education in Nigeria: Evaluation of the Effectiveness & Impact of SDG 4
Of course, the issue of insecurity is something that we you are talking of policy *laughs* they may even want to
must address through collective means, by an integrated start changing it to suit them. (State-level Official)
process that involves the community, religious leaders,
the parents and the local school and government at
Lastly, some stakeholders argued that the appropriate
all levels. So, if we don’t address this security thing, it is
allocation and release of adequate funds would
the ripple effect on the other that matters … because
people now will not want to send their children to school demonstrate commitment to education strategy. On
anymore and what impact it will have in the years the other hand, a senior-level FMOE official also spoke
ahead. (Senior FMOE Official) openly about corruption and how “we are using education
as a smokescreen” and how teacher salary funds and UBE
Stakeholders also made connections between insecurity
funding are susceptible to diversion. A non-state actor
and economic instability and sexual violence.
similarly spoke about school feeding money being used
for other purposes.
Insufficient political will
Measures to address barriers
Just over a quarter of interviews also identified weak
political will as a barrier to achieving SDG4. Here, political
Within this challenging context, findings also include
will refers to commitment on the part of government to
measures that federal and state governments are taking
take the necessary steps to implement policies as intended.
to address the barriers listed above. We specify whether
Political will is one of the barriers common within the
these measures can be categorized as demand side (family
MSP for both OOSC and basic education pillars. It bears
and community) or supply side (government) to further
additional mention here because of the importance
clarify.
of political will for policy implementation. The actors
identifying weak political will as one of the three most
An informal appraisal of needs (Supply side)
significant barriers to achievement of SDG4 included
four high-level federal officials as well as education The first of these is recognizing how the government
officials from three of the six case-study states and CSO approached the ESSP 2016–2019 development process.
representatives. One respondent emphasized how Nigeria A review of the plan as well as key informant interviews
is a federal operating unit and that the FMOE can only indicate that there was no formal situation analysis or needs
make recommendations to the states, but it is the state assessment in the development process of the ESSP. The
education bodies, namely the SUBEB, who have the power process of the development of the plan is well elaborated
and responsibility of implementation. Others identified on the first page of the plan where it is mentioned that
weak coordination on multiple levels: between the federal
government and state governments and coordination of The content of the Strategic Plan derives from six
the various partners operating within the same zone. main sources – the objectives that the All Progressive
Change (APC) set out to achieve in the education sector
as stated in its manifesto; the campaign promises of
Policy implementation is also vulnerable to political cycles.
President Muhammadu Buhari, GCFR, during the 2015
One respondent argued that the return on investment for electioneering campaign; contributions from parastatals
education is seldom readily visible during the same political and departments of the ministry; the numerous reports,
term and, therefore, provides little tangible results useful plans and documents that were produced in the past;
interventions from our development partners; and
in campaigning. Other stakeholders identified challenges
our thoughts and plans. These were then synthesized
when political appointments place people in power without
and articulated into this document which will be the
the appropriate technical background in education. As an
roadmap to guide the sector from the end of 2016 to
illustration, a state-level official expressed his frustration 2019. (FMOE, 2016, p. 1).
when he said,
Those of us who are civil servants for instance may Though there was no formal situation analysis or needs
understand, but when the person –… because they are assessment conducted in the development process of
not sure of how long they will be there – wants to do all ESSP 2016–2019, the ministry led the drafting of the
these things first whether its right or wrong and when ESSP with inputs from relevant stakeholders. A former
44
Evaluation Findings and Analysis
FMOE official took part in KIIs and had played a key role strategy of integrating Quranic schools into conventional
in shepherding the ESSP through its development. She schools. These structures have become important
explained further how with a change in administration mechanisms in mobilizing and sensitizing parents to allow
in 2015, the new minister initiated sitting sessions with a their children, particularly girls, to enrol in schools and
consultative group of experts and professionals to discuss complete. For Enugu State, policy, strategy, and initiatives
the key issues and challenges of the education sector and focus largely on increasing children’s enrolment, retention
chart a way forward. The FMOE also initiated sessions and transition to higher levels of education; and improving
with stakeholders including state governments, ministries school infrastructure to make them accessible to all.31
of education, SUBEBs, development partners, CSO and SMOE officials explained that the challenge is to get
other stakeholders countrywide. boys to transition from junior secondary school to senior
secondary school and tertiary institutions as they are
Precise strategies to address barriers often lured into less-skilled trade work or engaging in
commercial activities.
More precisely, Table 3.2 details the various strategies
indicated within the MSP to achieve SDG4. They include
Development of state-level basic education strategy
mass sensitization campaigns, school feeding, promotion
(address supply-side factors): An interview with Zamfara
of access to textbooks, addressing current teacher supply
SUBEB officials shed light not only on how the State’s
gaps, and expanding and strengthening the UBE Act and
Education Sector Plan aligns with SDG 4.1 targets, but
State counterpart funding. Qualitative data from KIIs also
how the State developed a separate three-year Medium-
underline the importance of full implementation of the
Term Basic Education Strategy for the period 2017–2019
UBE Act and the establishment of the UBEC to provide
(a draft is in progress for 2020–2022). According to state
direct funding interventions for school improvement
officials, it is the only state that has developed a separate
infrastructures. Additionally, stakeholders recognized
basic education sector strategy.
the value of other forms of funding support from the
federal government to build capacity in education sector Administrative restructuring to support SDG4 (address
management both at the state and federal levels. Such supply-side factors): In Kaduna State, it emerged that the
funding comes from multilateral loans and grants from FMOE is responsible for all sectors of higher and tertiary
development partners. We further identify strategies education starting from junior secondary school, which is
below: part of basic education, while the SUBEB is responsible
only for primary school education. The state is, however,
Community engagement (address demand-side
reviewing its education sector plan to make it more SDG
factors): Findings highlight the prominence of community
compliant by ensuring that every child has 9 years of
engagement strategies as ways to address barriers. Among
basic education (6 years of primary and 3 years of junior
other projects, senior FMOE officials emphasized the
secondary school) without a break. This will resolve the
success of two interventions supporting SBMCs, notably
challenges of transition from primary to junior secondary
UNICEF and FCDO’s ESSPIN project. Stakeholders
and also increase the number of pupils who complete 9
emphasized strong community engagement efforts have
years of basic education. The SUBEB will be mandated
helped in overcoming cultural barriers and parental
to fully manage the basic education sector and the FMOE
pushback.
will be responsible for senior secondary school to tertiary.
The change in strategy will enhance progress towards
Addressing sociocultural barriers (address demand-
attaining SDG4.1. The new strategy was scheduled to
side factors): Barriers such as culture, religion, poverty,
be approved by the State Executive Council hopefully
and parental negligence are common in Kano, Katsina,
before midyear 2021, which would allow the state to be
Zamfara, Kaduna, and, as such, strategies are incorporated
implementing a 9-3-4 education system (9 years of basic, 3
to address these barriers, according to SMOE officials in
years of senior secondary and 4 years of tertiary) as opposed
these states. To address early girl child marriage, the Kano
to the national system of 6-3-3-4 (6 years of primary, 3 years
State developed a Girl Child Education Policy in 2018.30
of junior secondary, 3 years of senior secondary and 4 years
To address religious barriers, the four states adopted the
of tertiary). 32
45
Education in Nigeria: Evaluation of the Effectiveness & Impact of SDG 4
Collaboration with development partners (address both government education policies with the goal of ensuring
supply- and demand-side factors): One of the main access to free, equitable and quality primary education in
tactics to address the barriers identified is partnerships and Nigeria.
collaborations with development partners. Nearly all donor
interventions in the four states have focused on addressing Conclusion
these barriers. Both in Katsina and Zamfara, UNICEF
Policy review indicates and interviewees unanimously
interventions, such as SBMC, Mother’s Associations,
confirm that education sector policies and strategies both
Girl for Girl (G4G) and He for She (H4S), were singled
at the federal and state levels align with the SDG4.1 target
out has having contributed largely to the completion rate
particularly in the formulation of the plans. Most notable
observed from 2016-2018. Other donor interventions
is the 2004 Compulsory, Free, Universal Basic Education
include Girls Education Programme (GEP), the World
(UBE) Act. Alignment is deliberate and the product of
Bank Global Partnership for Education (GPE), and Better
government and development partner efforts.
Education Service Delivery for All (BESDA), and the
Quarter Foundation cash transfer programme in Zamfara
In order to respond to this question, we examine the ESSP
(conditional and unconditional). Evidence suggests that
as well as other key policies including the Ministerial
some of the measures will be incorporated in state and
Strategic Plan (MSP), the Universal Basic Education Act
national education sector strategies. As an illustration,
(UBE) and the strategic plans of the six case-study states.
Zamfara has incorporated some of the interventions from
The earlier policy background section already identified
development partners in its Draft Basic Education Policy
several ways in which the MSP emphasizes strategies
2020–2022. Similarly, officials in Kwara State boasted of
aimed at achieving SDGs. We further highlight those
how they took ownership of SBMC developed initially
strategies here as well as providing a detailed table that
through the ESSPIN project. These adoptions suggest
presents the coherence between the ESSP, the Economic
some promise of sustainability.
Recovery and Growth Plan (ERGP 2016–2019) and other
relevant SDGs.
4.2 Coherence of Education sector
Strategic Plan
General consensus of alignment
Overall Finding: The ESSP 2016–2019 is only
Interviews with key stakeholders at the federal and state
partially coherent due to the absence of a ToC
levels demonstrate a general consensus that the overall
and results framework
education sector policies and strategies align with the
Quality of the Evidence: Medium SDG4.1 target. All interviewees at the federal level,
including FMOE officials, SMOE officials, DPs and
The OECD DAC criterion of coherence addresses the CSO actors, indicated they believe the SDG4-supportive
compatibility of the intervention with other interventions strategies to be well mainstreamed into federal- and state-
in a country, sector or institution.33 For the SDG4 level education sector policies and strategies. SMOE and
evaluation, we focus specifically on the alignment of SUBEB officials interviewed from all six states indicated
SUMMARY CONCLUSIONS (Coherence)
Policy review indicates and interviewees unanimously support that education sector policies and strategies both at the
federal and state levels align with the SDG4.1 target particularly in the formulation of the plans. Most notable is the
2004 Compulsory, free, Universal Basic Education (UBE) Act. Alignment is deliberate and the product of government
and development partner efforts.
C1: Are overall education sector policies, strategies in coherence with SDG4 well mainstreamed into ESSP 2016–2019?
Evaluation question (Coherence) Likely strength of evi- Data sources
dence
Are overall education sector policies, strategies in coherence with SDG4 Medium Literature review, KIIs
well mainstreamed into ESSP 2016–2019?
46
Evaluation Findings and Analysis
that strategies were aligned. The alignment is deliberate Free, Universal Basic Education Act 2004). The UBE Act
and the FMOE has made concerted efforts to encourage broadly defines basic education in Nigeria to include early
and support states in adapting their plans to mimic federal childhood care and development education (ECCDE),
plans. A former FMOE official who played a critical role in nine years of formal schooling (six years of primary and
the MSP 2016–2019 development shared how the FMOE three years of junior secondary education), adult literacy
initiated a series of meetings with state counterparts to this and non-formal education, skills acquisition programmes
end: and the education of special groups, such as nomads and
migrants, girls and women, almajirai (children attending
After development of the national plan, we went to Quranic schools), street children, and disabled groups.34
States. We had a meeting of a collection of states... Like
State education officials as well as interviewed state-level
I said, because every state has its own peculiarities so
CSO representatives reiterated that education is free and
when you look at out-of-school children, the strategy
compulsory within their states. In some states, like Kwara
developed by that particular state that has a huge
number would be different from a state that does not and Kaduna state, the law goes so far as to make it a crime
have that as an issue. They now contextualized their own if a parent does not send their child to school. The UBE
plans, not word for word what the MSP has proposed approach meets the expectation of 9 years of compulsory
but drawing from the MSP and contextualizing it and
schooling as laid out in the Education 2030 Framework
ensuring so that their own plans will go with achieving
for Action, but falls short of providing 12 years of free,
SDG4. (Former FMOE Official).
publicly funded, inclusive, equitable, quality education as
A Zamfara official spoke of having attended these recommended. In addition, evidence suggests that families
meetings, providing triangulation. Other FMOE officials incur other costs when they send their children to school,
similarly underlined how SMOE were expected to align such as development levies,35 and charges that mean that
their plans, including that they reflect the 10 pillars central basic education is not completely free. This experience
to the federal plan. Zamfara and Kwara officials explicitly varies from state to state. We will revisit this finding below
mentioned the 10 pillars. A Kano official also spoke with the second evaluation question on effectiveness
emphatically about their efforts to align Kano’s strategic examining funding sources.
plan with the MSP, as he indicated in the quote below:
Policy analysis reveals strategies indicated within the MSP
Yes, it is already aligned. Like I told you earlier. There’s the to support both a reduction in the number of out-of-school
Ministerial Strategic Plan. And we are being informed children and improvement in access and quality of basic
by our mother body, that is UBEC, Universal Basic education offerings, thereby demonstrating coherence
Education Commission, that whatever plan we are with SDG4. Table 3.3 lays out the various strategies.
putting [into place] we have to align it with Ministerial
Strategic Plan as well as the SDG goals. You know, the
In complement to these policy-based strategies, key
Ministerial Strategic Plan contains all this aspect of SDG,
informant interviews shed light on additional strategies
which comprises of access, equity and also in particular,
represented in Figure 8 that stakeholders see as important to
the girls’ education and out-of-school children… They
improving basic education access and quality. The asterisk
are the priority in the Ministerial Strategic Plan that as
indicates strategies that often require the involvement of
well as the core aspect of the SDG goals. So we focus
development partners. Officials in four of the six states
our relentless focus on those three key areas because we
identified SBMC as an important strategy to promote
have access and equity and we have issue of policy and
community engagement as well as to support schools.
planning, as well as the issue of out-of-school children.
These are the three key areas that Kano aligned its They also provide an illustration of how an initiative
plan with the Ministerial Sector Plan. (State Education originally driven by development partners, in this case
Official, Kano) FCDO through the ESSPIN project, gains momentum
and becomes part of a state strategy. An education official
Key education sector strategies in Zamfara provided additional explanation:
The most obvious policy supporting access to education
is UBE, which is backed by legislation (the Compulsory,
47
Education in Nigeria: Evaluation of the Effectiveness & Impact of SDG 4
Table 4.3: Strategies to address OOSC and basic education within the MSP
Pillar 1) Increase net enrolment rate in order to reduce the number Pillar 4) Basic Education
of OOSC
conduct of a National Survey on out-of-school children (OOSC); ensure that the national education sector provides unhindered
access to quality basic education for all children of school age;
conduct of community and household mapping of OOSC in 774
LGAs to identify underserved and unreached areas; ensure that all basic education learners have access to textbooks
to attain the learning outcome benchmarks;
conduct of mass sensitization campaigns annually in 19 focal
states in line with the National Enrolment Drive Framework to broaden the scope of the UBE Act and include the ECCDE, Basic
mobilize communities to increase girl-child enrolment in basic Education in matters of funding and management; Adult and
education; Non-formal Education; and Nomadic Education in matters of
funding only;
establishment of neighborhood schools and promotion of
community schools; removal of every form of payment (levies) in address current teacher supply gaps in basic education schools;
basic schools;
improve the capacity of state counterpart funding;
provision of a meal per day to schoolchildren as an incentive to
increase enrolment in basic education schools at a ratio of 25per make FEQAS, supervisors and quality assurance officers in the
cent in year 1, 45per cent in year 2 and 30per cent in year 3; states more effective;
reactivation of 14 Vocational Training/Special Schools for out- enhance the quality of teachers, head teachers and school super-
of-school boys in the South-East and South-South geopolitical visors in basic education schools;
zones;
undertake Whole School Evaluation of Basic and Post-Basic
establishment of 4 vocational skill acquisition centers in each of Schools to ensure that quality and set standards are maintained
the 774 Local Government Areas; in schools nationwide;
assessment and certification of trainees based on the National recruit and train specialized nomadic teachers;
Skills Qualifications Framework (NSQF) to enhance their status;
engage sport experts to organize programmes to encourage
recruitment and training of 287,500 new basic education teach- participation in sports;
ers over the next three years (2019–2021); and
recruitment, training and re-training of required personnel for
recruitment and training of 21,562 new female basic education school sports;
teachers over the next three years (2019–2021).
provision of facilities/equipment and conducive environment for
school sports; and
organize sporting competitions among students including those
with disability.
48
Evaluation Findings and Analysis
Yeah, we have captured issue on the strengthening with the national plan and policies and the SDGs at the
of SBMC, the trainings on SBMC on their role and level of expected results and priorities. Table 3.4 presents
responsibilities. So, we have captured that in the plan.
a matrix to demonstrate the coherence and alignment of
(Zamfara Education Official)
ESSP 2016–2019 with the national development plan
known as ERGP 2016–2019. The ESSP and the ERGP
The Home-Grown School Feeding programme (HGSF36)
were developed during the same time period. The table
also merits particular mention. The HGSF is a government-
also demonstrates interconnectedness between SDG4 and
supported initiative that provides a free lunch to pupils in
the most related goals SDG1 (no poverty), SDG2 (zero
primary grades 1–3. The programme is clearly identified
hunger), SDG3 (good health and well-being), and SDG5
within the MSP and was raised by state-level stakeholders
(gender equality). As is demonstrated within the table, at
as a strategy that supports SDG4 objectives of increasing
the results and strategy levels, the ESSP and ERGP are in
enrolment. A later evaluation question (Impact 3) will
perfect alignment and therefore, fully coherent. Similarly,
address the achievements of the HGSF in greater detail.
the ESSP and SDG4.1 are aligned both at the results and
Furthermore, this evaluation explored how the key
strategy levels.
strategies for the basic education sector recognize and align
Table 4.4: Mapping of results, targets and strategies across key policies and SDG goals
ESSP 2016–2019 ERGP 2016–2019 SDG4 – Quali- SDG1 – No Pov- SDG2 – Zero SDG3 – Good SDG5 – Gender
ty Education erty Hunger Health & Equality
Well-being
Expected Results &
Targets
1. All (100per cent) 1.Net Enrolment: Tar- 4.1.1 Per- 1.1.1 9,041,393 No target Proportion of wom-
children of primary get by 2015-100per centage of pupils fed by identified en aged 15-49 years
school age (girls as cent; Actual-54per children of Proportion of June 2020. who were married
well as boys) will be cent secondary population or in a union before
enrolled in primary school age below the No actual age 15
school or its equiv- 2. Primary Six Com- currently international target
alent. pletion: Target by attending poverty line, by
2015-100per cent; Secondary geographical This is a
2. Completion rate is School or location (urban/ cumulative Actual:
i c m en p t r o to v e a d n b o y v e 3 r 0 a p ll e r Actual-82per cent higher rural) fi 20 g 1 u 6 re -2 f 0 ro 2 m 0 2016-18.5per cent
3. Improved Literacy:
rate exceeding Target by 2015- 2017-18.5per cent
9 in 0 s p c e h r o c o e l n s t of those 100per cent; Actual 2016- Actual-Overall 2018 15.7per cent
Actual-67per cent 46.9per cent 2016-62per cent Source: MICS5
3. 80per cent of
children up to the 2017-46.9per 2017-62per cent 2016/17
age of 15 will be cent
enrolled in school or Source: HNLSS NDHS 2018
Source:
an equivalent educa- 2010
MICS5
tion programme
(Absolute pov-
2016/17
erty
rate)
Strategies
49
Education in Nigeria: Evaluation of the Effectiveness & Impact of SDG 4
1. Net enrolment 1. Improve teacher By 2030, Strengthening National Pilot the
ratio is increased quality by incentiviz- ensure that health and edu- Home-Grown Public
to 100per cent ing performance and all girls and cation systems School Primary
(engagement to building capacities boys com- (Actions from Feeding Pupils So-
Universal Education plete free, ERGP&ESSP) Programme: cial Health
2015) 2. Improve the equitable Source: 2nd VNR All children Insurance
quality of education and quality June 2020 aged 6 to 11 Programme
2. Ensure that all by strengthening primary and (grades 1 to to provide
of out-of-school quality assurance secondary 3) attending quality
children are enrolled education Govern- health
in basic education 3. Prioritize educa- leading to ment-owned services to
schools in the next tion for girls and relevant and public pri- pupils in
four years infrastructural devel- effective mary schools middle-and
opment
learning are to receive lower-in-
Source: ERGP outcomes one meal come socio-
a day to (i) economic
Source: 2nd Improve levels who
VNR June School En- are less
2020 rolment and likely to
Completion have insur-
and (ii) Im- ance (ESSP
prove Child & ERGP
Nutrition and Converging
Health: with Health)
Source: ESSP/ Source:
ERGP/ ERGP
NHGSFP
Reports
Source: Compiled
from ESSP 2016–
2019; ERGP 2016–
2019; NVR 2020
Analysis of the goals and indicators of the most related Implementation challenges limit effects of co-
SDGs shows that only some selected indicators in SDG 1 herent policies
and 2 address education specifically and thereby align with
When discussing policy – specifically SDG4-supportive
the expected results and strategy of implementation in the
strategies – with stakeholders, a common refrain emerged
ESSP. Also, the expected results of SDG5, which focuses
that implementation challenges can limit the effects of
on the empowerment of women and girls, is coherent
coherent policies. The majority of development partners
with ESSP strategy to empower women and girls through
and state-level CSO representatives made this observation
education. The health- and well-being-focused SDG3 does
along with two senior-level FMOE officials. Differences in
not include any specific mention of education within its
application across states, coordination between the multiple
expected results. On the other hand, one of the espoused
entities working in basic education, and budget allocation
strategies of ESSP is to pilot a Social Health Insurance
and release are all aspects that complicate implementation,
Programme for all public primary pupils in order to provide
according to those interviewed. The quote below from a
quality health services to pupils in middle- and lower-
senior official powerfully illustrates the disconnect that may
income socioeconomic levels who are less likely to have
exist between articulated strategy and policy and action.
insurance. This demonstrates a strong interconnectedness
This same official went on to question the commitment in
between the two goals and indicates the importance
some states to basic education delivery in general.
of schools as venues for connecting individuals to state
services. Unfortunately, this strategy was not implemented
at the time of writing.
50
Evaluation Findings and Analysis
SUMMARY CONCLUSIONS (Efficiency)
Based on evidence available, the evaluation has concluded that education financing is much lower than in other African countries,
and that transparency about budgeting and spending is very poor.
Conclusions on cost-effectiveness are limited by inaccessibility of budget information within four of the six case-study states, and it is
not possible to determine a complete calculation for cost-effectiveness.
Gaps between strategy and implementation have hindered Nigeria’s progress at multiple levels. A governance challenge resides at
the heart of the issue. Federal, state and local governments share responsibility for education in Nigeria. In addition, SUBEBs and
SMOEs have overlapping responsibilities, and coordination between them was found to be weak. The UBE Act and UBEC lack the
mandate to influence major investments in basic education at the state level. Moreover, while the FMOE provides useful guidance to
states, by design, states remain autonomous and apply FMOE suggestions at their discretion.
Accountability is weak between federal and state governments in terms of implementation of key programmes. Similarly, a gap
exists between the SDG offices and SDG implementing agencies as coordination is weak.
Effici1: To what extent has the Education Sector Strategic Plan (2016–2019) been efficiently implemented?
Evaluation question (Efficiency) Likely strength of evi- Data sources
dence
To what extent has the Education Sector Strategic Plan (2016–2019) been Medium Literature review, education
efficiently implemented? financing analysis, KIIs
51
Education in Nigeria: Evaluation of the Effectiveness & Impact of SDG 4
Yes, in the sense that where we have the policies, they overlapping responsibilities, and coordination between
are usually aligned. But in a number of states, we don’t them was found to be weak. The UBE Act and UBEC
even have the policies being implemented. So, there is
lack the mandate to influence major investments in basic
haphazard approach to issues of education because
education at the state level. Moreover, while the FMOE
there is no coherence in terms of a blueprint that they
provides useful guidance to states, by design, states
are working on. And they have not sufficiently aligned
or adopted the national policy or domesticated it as it remain autonomous and apply FMOE suggestions at their
were. (Senior FMOE Official) discretion.
Accountability is weak between federal and state
4.3 Efficiency of Education Sector
governments in terms of implementation of key
Strategic Plan 2016–2019
programmes. Similarly, a gap exists between the SDG
Overall Finding: Low Efficiency – education fi- offices and SDG implementing agencies as coordination
nancing is insufficient in Nigeria and account- is weak.
ability is weak
Education financing
Quality of the Evidence: Medium
In responding to this question, we focus specifically on
According to the OECD DAC definition, efficiency refers
education financing in Nigeria, drawing comparisons
to “the extent to which the intervention delivers, or is
internationally. We present findings specific to case-study
likely to deliver, results in an economic and timely way”.
states where possible. How governments allocate funds to
For this evaluation, two questions address efficiency. The
education is of concern to the international community and
first explores the general implementation of the ESSP and,
has been addressed by multiple efforts. The Education
specifically, education financing. The second question
2030 Framework for Action reiterates various calls to
examines cost-effectiveness.
increase and reinforce financing of education. Accordingly,
Conclusion
Full realization of the SDG4-Education 2030 agenda
requires sustained, innovative and well-targeted
Gaps between strategy and implementation have hindered
financing and efficient implementation arrangements,
Nigeria’s progress at multiple levels. A governance
especially in those countries furthest from achieving
challenge resides at the heart of the issue. Federal, state
quality education for all at all levels and in emergency
and local governments share responsibility for education
situations. (UNESCO, 2015, p. 66)
in Nigeria. In addition, SUBEBs and SMOEs have
52
Evaluation Findings and Analysis
While noting that contexts differ, the framework Education finance trends in Nigeria
references international benchmarks that were established
Document review demonstrates that Nigeria faces
as part of the Addis Ababa Action Agenda. Specifically, it
significant challenges in providing transparent data
is recommended that countries allocate at least 4–6 per
regarding education financing. The absence, unavailability
cent of GDP to education; and/or at least 15–20 per cent of
and/or unreliability of data are major impediments to
public expenditure to education (UNESCO, 2015, p. 67).
financing education. Evidence is sparse on how much
The framework suggests various strategies can be used to
money is spent by governments on education, and on how
increase spending:
it is spent. A deeper understanding is needed of public
• Increasing and improving domestic financing for
expenditure on education, on the relationship between
education: increase public funding, prioritizing those
planning and budgeting systems, and on their relationship
most in need, increase efficiency and accountability;
with pupils’ learning outcomes. Most accountability
• Increasing and improving external financing:
is upwards to higher levels of government rather than
including reversing the decline in aid to education,
outwards toward communities, although decentralized
improving aid effectiveness through harmonization
school governance through SBMCs is attempting to
and better coordination, improve the equity of
address this. Crucial to its success are consistent funding
external financing; and
and LGEA support (Obanya, 2011; Obanya, 2010). Primary
• Innovating, with a focus on partnership, transparency,
data from this SDG4 evaluation support these assertions.
equity and efficiency.
Table 4.5: Trend analysis of education, public expenditures as per cent of GDP from 2015 to 2020
Country 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020
South Africa 5.96 5.94 6.11 6.16 6.51 n/a
Ghana 4.51 4.49 3.62 3.99 n/a n/a
Kenya 5.27 5.36 5.37 5.31 n/a n/a
Senegal 5.46 5.11 4.62 4.83 n/a n/a
Nigeria 0.59 0.54 0.47 0.51 0.44 n/a
Source: UIS Statistics37
53
Education in Nigeria: Evaluation of the Effectiveness & Impact of SDG 4
National-level financing State-level financing
At the national level, as Figure 3.2 demonstrates, a trend In investigating education financing at the state level, the
analysis of Nigeria’s education financing shows little evaluation team sought the breakdown of total education
change between 2015 and 2018 and that there was a slight expenditure and the amount allocated to basic education
increase in 2019. Nigeria data are calculated using federal and the actual expenditure. Basic education is funded
budgeted rather than spent amounts as these data were mainly from the federal government intervention through
not available. the UBEC, state budget allocation, local government
budget, and many other non-state sources like support
Moreover, comparing Nigeria’s spending on education from development partners, and contributions from
against similar countries demonstrates that Nigeria trails parents, philanthropists and others. Philanthropists
woefully behind. Cambridge Education’s (2020) report include Nigerian private donors to educational
on out-of-school children in Nigeria finds that Nigeria’s foundations, and political constituency projects sponsored
education funding is “well below the Sub-Saharan by politicians and individual businesspeople. In summary,
African average of 4.6 per cent” (Cambridge Education, there is no single source of data on expenditure on basic
2020, p. 14) With public expenditures for education well education and, therefore, it is difficult to provide validated
below 1 per cent of its GDP, Nigeria fails to meet the consolidated information on public expenditure allocated
UNESCO recommendation. Table 3.5 compares Nigeria’s to, and effectively and efficiently spent on, basic education
expenditures with four other African countries during in Nigeria. In a study by the World Bank in 2015, it was
the evaluation period. These data draw from UNESCO noted that “consolidated budget information would
Institute for Statistics. The absence of that information for require the harmonization of charts of accounts used across
Nigeria is a key finding. As an alternative, the evaluation levels of government, the functional reclassification of
team calculated the figures for Nigeria using federal budget expenditure and systematic audited reporting on
budgeted amounts rather than spent amounts. Calculations budget execution.” The study concluded that “for lack
are unable to reflect the education budgets of 36 states and of such standardized budget information, it is practically
the federal capital of Abuja, as those data were unavailable. impossible to assess the effectiveness of financial resources
allocation in basic education” (World Bank, 2015, p.
33). Note that the second effectiveness question below
explores in greater detail funding sources within Nigeria
54
Evaluation Findings and Analysis
that support SDG4. Here we present findings specific to Analysis of Table 3.6 as well as the accompanying Figure
financing trends. 3.4 shows that the trend of education financing in the six
case-study states and Nigeria as a whole share a similar
The evaluation team produced Table 3.6 to explore pattern. For the period of the ESSP 2016–2019, the
education financing in Nigeria during the evaluation actual expenditure is consistently lower than the planned
period. Calculations draw from state compilation data from expenditure except for Zamfara and Enugu. For these two
the World Bank’s Abuja office, the Budget Office of the states, in 2017 and 2018, actual expenditure was higher
Federation as well as primary data submitted upon request than the planned expenditure. For instance, for Zamfara,
from Kwara and Enugu states. Unfortunately, the other the planned expenditure in 2017 was N12.8 billion, and
four case-study states did not provide financial data. Data the actual expenditure was more than double that at
for the federal level are also incomplete, as noted, as these N28.0 billion, representing a 118.8 per cent increase.
figures do not include state education budgets or special Similarly, in 2018, the planned expenditure was N21.7
intervention funds. billion, while the actual was N27.0 billion, representing
an increase of 24.4 per cent. For Enugu State, in 2017,
Table 4.6: Trend of education financing in six selected states and Nigeria from 2015 to 2020 (N’billion)
Geograph- Budget Budget Budget Budget Budget Budget
ic scope
2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020
Planned Actual Planned Actual Planned Actual Planned Actu- Planned Actual Planned Ac-
al tual
Kano 48.8 30.5 54.6 29.1 50.4 39.2 58.5 43.8 N/A N/A N/A N/A
Katsina 20.9 14.7 33.2 13.0 26.9 17.8 42.4 17.2 N/A N/A N/A N/A
Kaduna 39.4 25.2 48.9 30.6 64.9 29.3 51.7 20.0 N/A N/A N/A N/A
Kwara 26.2 10.0 N/A N/A 19.1 4.9 14.7 5.7 16.2 5.2 12.9 4.0
Zamfara 14.8 11.2 13.8 7.7 12.8 28.0 21.7 27.0 N/A N/A N/A N/A
Enugu 20.5 18.6 20.5 23.4 18.4 19.8 17.9 27.1 21.2 18.1 N/A N/A
Nigeria* 551.6 472.8 557.4 465.6 540.9 430.5 651.2 439.3 634.5 601.1 N/A N/A
(ex-
clud-
ing
capi-
tal)
Sources: (1) Data for Kano, Katsina, Kaduna, and Zamfara was extracted from World Bank and various states’ compilations obtained
from their Abuja Offices.
(2) Data for Kwara and Enugu were submitted by the States.
(3) Data for Nigeria was obtained from Budget Office of the Federation for years 2015–2018 and from FMoE NEMIS 2019 for 2019.
*Figures for Nigeria do not include the education budget of 36 states and the Federal Capital territory.
3.3.2 Effici2: What is the cost-effectiveness of interventions?
Evaluation question (Efficiency) Likely strength of evi- Data sources
dence
What is the cost-effectiveness of interventions? Weak Literature review, education
financing analysis, KIIs
55
Education in Nigeria: Evaluation of the Effectiveness & Impact of SDG 4
the planned expenditure was N18.4 billion and the actual the UBEC intervention funds to states. This information
expenditure was N19.8 billion, representing an increase of provides the amount of funding available as well as the
7.6 per cent. The deviation between planned and actual structure of financing, which is published on UBEC’s
expenditure in 2018 was quite significant. The planned website. At the time of writing, only two states, Kwara and
expenditure was N17.9 billion, but the actual was N27.1 Enugu, were able to submit a reasonable level of financial
billion, representing an increase of 51.4 per cent. The data and enrolment information for implementation
planned education budget for the federal government of basic education services. The cost-effectiveness
for the period 2015–2018 was consistently higher than calculations below are based upon those data.
the actual expenditure. It is important to note that, while
the planned budget is not meeting the international State comparisons of cost-effectiveness
requirement as specified by UNESCO and education is
The evaluation team calculated cost-effectiveness by
considered underfunded in Nigeria, the actual expenditure
identifying total expenditures on basic education per year
is consistently lower than planned, except for the states
and dividing this amount by enrolment at the basic levels.
of Zamfara and Enugu for a two-year period. During the
key informant interview sessions, many education officials
Enrolment
informed the evaluation team that not only are the planned
budgets small compared to the needs of the sector, but that Table 3.7 and Figures 3.5a and 3.5b depict both enrolment
capital funds budgeted are often not released in a timely and cost per pupil for Enugu, Kaduna and Kwara states.
fashion and sometimes not at all, leading to many planned Enugu demonstrates a consistent increase in enrolment,
capital projects not being implemented. This is why actual with the exception of a decrease between 2017 and 2018
budget figures often trail planned budgets. The capital that was then overcome by a wide margin in 2019. Kwara
budget often covers infrastructure developments in the demonstrated more volatility in its enrolment rate, but like
education sector. Thus, with poor infrastructure in schools, Kwara, the biggest drop was between 2017 and 2018, which
the quality of learning is often compromised. it then recovered from in 2019. (The evaluation provides
further discussion of these rates in subsequent sections,
Conclusion including possible anticipated effects of the COVID-19
pandemic.)
Based on evidence available, the evaluation has concluded
that education financing is much lower than in other African
In Kaduna State, there is a consistent increase in enrolment
countries, and that transparency about budgeting and
from 2015–2019, with a drop in 2020. Even with a drop
spending is very poor. Conclusions on cost-effectiveness
in 2020 probably arising from the COVID-19 pandemic
are limited by inaccessibility of budget information within
crisis the enrolment figure is still higher than the period
three of the six case-study states, and it is not possible to
of 2015–2017 year-on-year. When compared to other two
determine a complete calculation for cost-effectiveness.
states of Kwara and Enugu, Kaduna state posted the
From examination of Enugu, Kaduna and Kwara records,
largest enrolment of pupils. This amount is more than the
data confirm that as enrolment increases, per pupil cost
figures of the other states combined. For the period under
decreases.
review, neither Enugu nor Kwara attain enrolment of a
million pupils per year. Kaduna State not only attained this
In complement to the education information findings
threshold but demonstrated enrolment of over two million
above, this question further investigates the issue from
between 2017 and 2020. The factors accounting for this
the perspective of cost-effectiveness. Cost-effectiveness
increase may be related to the state’s initiatives to increase
analysis is a technique that compares the relative costs
enrolment in both primary and junior secondary schools.
of an intervention to the outcomes.38 In the case of basic
For instance, during interviews with state officials, they
education, we are comparing the cost of education services
identified how Kaduna established EduMarshal to enforce
with enrolment rates.
the state’s universal free education policy. EduMarshal is
a taskforce that operates a motorized patrol during school
The cost-effectiveness analysis also suffered from the data
hours to arrest children of school age who are roaming the
availability challenges that affected analysis of education
streets. These children are taken to their parents who,
financing in Nigeria. The most easily accessible data are
together with EduMarshal officers, enrol the children
56
Evaluation Findings and Analysis
in the nearest school to their home. If the child is found of Education and the Education CSOs Chair. Through
roaming the streets again, the parent will be jailed or KADBEAM, both the state and non-state actors carry out
fined. To also demonstrate the government’s commitment joint planning, monitoring and review of the sector.
to improving public schools, the governor of the state
enrolled his son in a public school in 2016. There was also Furthermore, Kaduna State is in the process of reviewing its
provision of a meal a day to encourage enrolment of pupils, education sector plan to make it more SDG-compliant by
and massive investment in improving school facilities. ensuring that every child has nine years of basic education
Moreover, nearly 25,000 teachers who failed competency (six years of primary and three years of Junior Secondary
examination were fired and replaced with more qualified School) without break. This will resolve the challenges of
teachers. All these measures combined may have transition from primary to JSS and also increase the number
contributed to the significant increase in enrolment as of students who complete nine years of basic education.
they signal government’s strong commitment to promote SUBEB will be mandated to fully manage the basic
school enrolment in basic education. education sector and the state ministry will be responsible
for senior secondary school to tertiary. At present, the State
In addition, the state, in collaboration with all CSOs Ministry of Education is responsible for managing junior
working in the education sector established Kaduna State secondary school up to higher institutions. The change in
Basic Education Accountability Mechanism (KADBEAM). strategy is aimed to enhance progress towards attaining
It is co-chaired by the Permanent Secretary Ministry SDG4.1. Should the new strategy be approved by the
Table 4.7: Comparison of cost-effectiveness analysis in Enugu and Kwara States (2016–2019)
2015 2016 2017 2018 2019
Enrolment Enugu 560,673 605,265 662,047 616,749 896,308
Kaduna 1,499,997 1,907,048 2,114,326 2,334,356 2,418,030
(pupils)
Kwara 370,475 357,666 378,641 286,231 386,723
Cost per pupil (Naira) Enugu 19,082.26 13,613.01 10,095.11 20,233.84 10,783.00
Kaduna 11,814.04 12,113.99 18,036.94 6,704.48 5,143.25
Kwara 10,604.79 12,534.40 10,560.85 16,810.49 11,228.51
57
Education in Nigeria: Evaluation of the Effectiveness & Impact of SDG 4
State Executive Council hopefully before mid-year (2021), period coincided with a recession in the country. However,
the state will be implementing a 9-3-4 education system as a result of previous investment in driving enrolment,
(9 years of basic, 3 years of senior secondary and 4 years enrolment continued to increase, thus making cost per
of tertiary) as opposed to the national system of 6-3-3-4 pupil fall significantly.
(6 years of primary, 3 years of junior secondary, 3 years of
senior secondary and 4 years of tertiary). Moreover, findings indicate that the higher the enrolment
of pupils in the basic education programme, the lower the
Cost per pupil cost per pupil despite the fact that budget allocation varies
from year to year. This explains the huge variation in per
In terms of cost per pupil, the cost is consistently higher
pupil cost year to year. Findings confirm the expectation
in Enugu State when compared with Kwara State and
that greater access means a reduction in per pupil cost.
Kaduna State. As Figure 3.5(b) shows, in Kaduna State,
the average cost per pupil is in the same range as in Kwara
Data on local government expenditure were available
for the 2015–2016 period. In 2017, the cost per pupil
only for Kwara State for 2016–2019. This information
was higher in Kaduna State than in the other two states.
considers the financial support that local governments
Notably, in 2018, when the budget for basic education
(Local Government Areas – LGAs) provide as salaries and
was two times higher than preceding years combined
other payments to primary school teachers. As Figure 3.6
and with a marginal increase in enrolment, the cost per
indicates, inclusion of this funding results in a consistent
pupil increased significantly. As enrolment continued to
increase in the cost per pupil in Kwara State for each of
increase in Kaduna, the per pupil cost continued to fall,
these years.
making Kaduna state more cost-effective than both Enugu
and Kwara for 2019 and 2020. The decline experienced
In sum, analysis of cost-effectiveness with data available
by all three states in per pupil cost for the period 2019–
provides some insights about cost-effectiveness, but
2020 was because of a drastic decline in budget allocation
they are largely predictable results: that cost per pupil
due to a significant fall in state revenue. This drop was
goes down when enrolment increases and that including
due to low allocation from the Federal government as the
LGA expenditures will also increase the cost per pupil.
58
Evaluation Findings and Analysis
Insufficient data within states and across the case study Nigeria Education Data Survey (NEDS), the National
states was a significant limitation to the evaluation. Demographic Health Survey (NDHS) and the National
Homegrown Feeding Programme (NHGSFP) Performance
4.4 Effectiveness
Review, the SDG4 Evaluation Team concluded that the
effectiveness of the MSP 2016–2019 is low vis-à-vis the
Overall Finding: Weak Effectiveness of expected
intended impacts, outcomes and outputs indicated in
results of Education MSP 2016–2019
the reconstructed MSP results framework. Government-
Quality of the Evidence: Medium anticipated results of achieving universal access (100per
cent) to basic education and to enrol 100 per cent of 10
The DAC criterion of effectiveness is defined as “the
million out-of-school children by 2020 are not likely to be
extent to which the intervention achieved, or is expected
achieved.
to achieve, its objectives, and its results, including any
differential results across groups.” Effectiveness focuses
• Access: Enrolment numbers continue to increase
more closely on outputs and attributable results than
though attendance rates indicate that less than two
impact. Two evaluation questions relate to this criterion.
thirds of pupils attend school nationally, while rates
The first examines the extent to which outcomes have been
vary significantly between states and between urban
achieved while the second builds on previous findings to
and rural areas.
further explore funding sources.
• Quality: The absence of national benchmarks
prevents meaningful comparisons of pupils’
Conclusion
proficiency over time and between states. Using
NEDS benchmarking, results are highly concerning
Based on the evidence of available statistical data from
as across the sample, nearly half of pupils complete
the Nigeria Digest of Educational Statistics (NDES),
Grade 4 without being able to read one word from a
FMOE National Education Indicators (2016), the 2018
flashcard or perform a single-digit addition problem.
UBEC National Personnel Audit (NPA), the National
SUMMARY CONCLUSIONS (Effectiveness)
Based on the evidence of available statistical data from the Nigeria Digest of Educational Statistics (NDES), FMOE National Education
Indicators (2016), the 2018 UBEC National Personnel Audit (NPA), the National Nigeria Education Data Survey (NEDS), the National
Demographic Health Survey (NDHS) and the National Home-Grown Feeding Programme (NHGSFP) Performance Review, the SDG4
evaluation team concluded that the effectiveness of the MSP 2016–2019 is low vis-à-vis the intended impacts, outcomes and outputs
indicated in the reconstructed MSP results framework. Government-anticipated results of achieving universal access (100per cent) to
basic education and to enrol 100 per cent of 10 million out-of-school children by 2020 are not likely to be achieved.
Monitoring and evaluation systems focusing on basic education, and SDG4.1 in particular, are weak and, in some cases, nonexistent.
Results frameworks for SDG4.1 and the FMOE do not exist.
Nigeria’s overall education financing is far below that of other African countries and transparency in financing data is extremely
weak. At the state level, actual expenditure regularly falls below planned expenditure due to the non-release of capital funds bud-
geted.
Funding for basic education is inherently shared between multiple actors, including the federal government, state governments,
development partners, private actors and parents, among others. Even with basic education declared as free, parents still bear a
considerable burden in getting their children to school.
Effect1: To what extent have the outcomes of the MSP been achieved?
Evaluation question (Effectiveness) Likely strength of evi- Data sources
dence
To what extent have the outcomes of the MSP been achieved? Medium Literature review, School
based survey, MICS, NEDS
2015 & 2020, NDHS, KIIs
59
Education in Nigeria: Evaluation of the Effectiveness & Impact of SDG 4
• Systems strengthening: School-Based Management Achievement of results framework
Committees (SBMCs) and the National Education
In order to obtain national-level data to assess whether
Group (NEG) represent potentially powerful
or not Nigeria has achieved what it set out to do in the
coordination mechanisms at various levels of
MSP, we have turned to existing data sets and reports
intervention. The UBE Act and the UBEC
including the Nigeria Digest of Educational Statistics
Intervention Fund hold promise as important
(NDES), FMOE National Education Indicators (2016),
structures, but also suffer from implementation flaws
the 2018 UBEC National Personnel Audit (NPA), the
and weak coordination.
National Nigeria Education Data Survey (NEDS), the
National Demographic Health Survey (NDHS) and the
Monitoring and evaluation systems focusing on basic
National Home-Grown Feeding Programme (NHGSFP)
education, and SDG4.1 in particular, are weak and, in
Performance Review. Table 18 indicates various results
some cases, nonexistent. Results frameworks for SDG4.1
for each of the relevant ESSP strategic objectives. Recall
and the FMOE do not exist.
that while the ESSP does not contain a proper results
framework, it does include projections. The information
To assess the extent to which MSP outcomes have been
below provides insights about whether not educational
achieved, the evaluation team first attempted to populate
developments may be considered as adequate progress.
the constructed results framework. We then address the
In some cases, data were unavailable, as indicated by grey
three outcome areas identified by the MSP: access, quality
highlighting. We have also highlighted increasing trends
and systems-strengthening. The quality analysis is the
in green, decreasing trends in red and yellow contradictory
most extensive as it includes findings on learning outcomes
and inconclusive data. In general, we see mixed progress
from the SDG4 school-based survey. For all sections, we
with reductions in 2017 and also in 2019.
draw largely upon primary and secondary quantitative data
and interviews.
Table 4.8: Updated status of achieved results against reconstructed results framework of ESSP 2016–2019
Pillar Strategic Expected Results in Base Line in 2015 Results Achieved Results Results achieved Results
Objective 2019 in 2016 achieved in in 2018 Achieved in
2017 2019
60
nerdlihC
loohcs-fo-tuO.1
Ensure Enrol 2,875,000 pu- PRY – 25,442,535 PRY&JSS PRY – 41,890,602 PRY
that all pils annually for the (NDES 2015) 31,559,323 24,543,722 (UBEC, NPA, -30,457,886
out-of- next four years (FMOE NEI 2016) (NDES 2017) 2019) (NDES 2019)
school PRY&JSS
children 31,622,826(FMOE PRY – PRY -27,889,387
are NEI 2016) 25,591,181 (NDES 2018)
enrolled (NDES 2016)
in basic
education
schools in
the next
four years
Raise the current PRY – 12,049,225 12,158,359 PRY – 20,371,711 PRY
enrolment of girls (NDES 2015) 11,657,395 (UBEC, NPA, -14,809,916
in basic education (FMOE NEI 2016) (NDES 2017) 2019) (NDES 2019)
schools by 1.5 mil- PRY&JSS –
lion girls annually 14,969,407(FMOE PRY – PRY -13,495,735
NEI 2016) 12,155,241 (NDES 2018)
(NDES 2016)
Raise the current en- Pry-424,053
rolment in Nomadic
schools from the JSS- 924
present 17per cent
Total- 424,977
to 30–40per cent
(UBEC, NPA,
2019)
Evaluation Findings and Analysis
Construct and Pry-690,456
furnish an additional
71,875 classrooms JSS- 152028
annually for the
Total-842,484
next four years to
(UBEC, NPA,
accommodate the
2019)
anticipated increase
in enrolment
Recruit an additional PRY – 466,465 PRY – 472,077 Pry-913,579 PRY -543,688
500,000 qualified (NDES 2017) (NDES 2019)
teachers (promised JSS-202,108 JSS-382,346
by the Federal gov-
Total- 668,573 Total- 1, 295, 925
ernment) in tranch-
es, to cater for the (FMOE NEI 2016) (UBEC, NPA,
anticipated increase 2019)
in pupils’ enrolment PRY – 542,533
(NDES 2016) PRY -594,653
(NDES 2018)
Recruit 37,500 quali- PRY – 245,447 Pry-491,356
fied female teachers
(or 7.5per cent of JSS – 98,078 JSS-167,350
the new teachers
Total – 343,525 Total-658,706
promised by federal
(UBEC, NPA,
government) annu- (FMOE NEI 2016) 2019)
ally
Implement school 9,041,393
feeding programme pupils from
2017-2019
(NHGSFP_
performance
report 2020)
Reactivate the
initiative on the
out-of-school boy-
child syndrome in
the South East and
South-South geo-po-
litical zones which
was inexplicably
abandoned in 2014
61
noitacudE
cisaB.2
Net All (100per cent) Net enrolment 25,591,181 27,889, 387 Net enrol-
Enrolment children of primary ratio 65per cent (UBEC, NPA, ment ratio
ratio is school age (girls as (NDES 2015) (FMOE NEI 2016) 2019) 69.9per cent
increased well as boys) will be (NDES 2019)
to 100per enrolled in primary Net enrolment
cent school or its equiv- Net enrolment ratio 60per cent
(engage- alent ratio 64.9per (NDES 2018)
ment to cent (NEDS
Universal 2016)
Education
2015)
Completion rate is PRY – 67.87 PRY – 85.1per 75.5per cent PRY – 75.4per
improved by 30per cent (NDES cent (NDES
cent to an overall JSS – 41.13 2017) (DHS) 2019)
rate exceeding 90per
(FMOE NEI 2016) PRY – 121per
cent of those in
cent (NDES
schools 63.0 (MICS) 2018)
Education in Nigeria: Evaluation of the Effectiveness & Impact of SDG 4
50per cent increase
in the number of
children with disabil-
ities mainstreamed
into primary school
Transition rate from 68.59per cent
primary to junior
secondary school (FMOE NEI 2016)
reach 90per cent
80per cent of chil- JSS – 43.09per
dren up to the age cent (Age 11-14)
of 15 will be enrolled JSS-69.8per cent
in school or an (FMOE NEI 2016)
(UBEC, NPA,
equivalent education
2019)
programme
Table 4.9: M&E strengthening strategy developed for transition to SDGs
Task Timeframe
Re-aligning National Statistical System with the SDGs – culminating in an action plan to improve data quali- 28 February 2016
ty on existing indicators
Prioritizing administrative data – diagnose challenges, sensitize, develop action plan, support the FMOE and 30 April 2016
UBEC to improve routine data collection
SDG-wide monitoring and evaluation platform – review existing platforms, share and advocate for open 28 February 2016
M&E experience, develop expanded M&E platform to cover new sectors
Encouraging data utilization – require all SDGs-relevant data to be online and open access, training for state 30 December 2016
and local government officials, demand evidence-based justifications in conditional grants platforms
Leveraging research resources – identify existing SDG-relevant data sources held in the international 30 December 2016
domain, establish research and data partnerships with Nigerian universities and international research
institutions
The data indicated in Table 3.9 are an imperfect match the exception of net enrolment, none of the results made
with the task at hand. For instance, the ESSP indicates consistent progress. Some historical background may shed
that in order to ensure that all of out-of-school children light on factors that may contribute to mixed results.
are enrolled in basic education schools during the plan
period, an average of 2,875,000 pupils will be enrolled Weak monitoring and inadequate statistical data
annually for the next four years. No data were available
Weak monitoring and inadequate statistical data may also
to show how many pupils were enrolled annually, but
account for varied results. Indeed, the grey cells in Table
official sources provided cumulative enrolment in 2016
3.9 and an incomplete results framework clearly illustrate
and 2018 as 31,559,323 by 2016 and 41,890,602 by 2018,
weaknesses. The evaluation team repeatedly asked senior
representing a 75 per cent increase from 2016. Similarly,
FMOE officials about reporting mechanisms, not only
the plan envisaged an increase in the current enrolment of
financial information which could not be shared with
girls in basic education schools by 1.5 million girls annually.
the evaluation team or even with UNESCO Institute for
During the plan implementation, total girls’ enrolment
Statistics, but also for monitoring reports on progress towards
was 12,158,359 as of 2016. By 2018, enrolment of girls had
achieving basic education goals. With the exception of the
increased to 20,371,711 representing a 59.6 per cent increase
flagship programmes (HGSF, in particular), the team did
in girls’ enrolment. More teachers were also recruited, and
not receive any such reports. One official pointed the team
the completion rate had improved from 63 per cent in
towards the FMOE Minister’s 2020 annual press briefing
2016 to 75.5 per cent in 2018, though it was expected to be
as an important resource for demonstrating achievements.
over 90 per cent by 2019. While the trend for all indicators
shows improvement from the 2016 figure by 2018, with
62
Evaluation Findings and Analysis
Review of that document demonstrates that it provides no and identifies that OSSAP-SDGs and NBS have begun
relevant updates for ESSP targets. The evaluation team the realignment process of the National Statistical System
obtained EMIS data from 2010 through 2019. Data for (NSS) with the requirements and indicators of the SDGs.
2020 was not available at the time of writing (June 2021), December 2020 was identified as the deadline for that
indicating a lag of at least six months. In addition, despite process. The report also calls upon states to “establish
efforts from UNICEF to improve the system, the data and adequately fund State Bureau of Statistics for timely
shared demonstrated major gaps, including inconsistent collection and processing of data at both the state and local
reporting of numbers when reporting previous year data government” level (OSSAP-SDGs, 2021, p. 48). In spite of
and errors in the computation of enrolment rates. the developed plans and espoused strategies indicated in
these various reports, the SDG4 evaluation team saw no
Although this evaluation question addresses ESSP in indications of progress towards a more adequate system.
particular, the evaluation team observed a similar pattern
for SDG monitoring and reporting. The 2015 OSSAP- Improvements in outcome areas
produced road map for the country’s transition to an SDG
More broadly, in addition to the results above, the ESSP
strategy from the MDG period identifies key strategies and
identified three outcome areas: access, quality and systems
activities for data, monitoring and reporting (Government
strengthening. We present findings on these areas drawing
of Nigeria, 2015), reproduced in Table 3.9.
from secondary data analysis, document review and
learning outcomes. The latter includes findings from the
Despite these espoused strategies and deadlines, the
school-based survey undertaken for the evaluation. Impact
2017 baseline report continued to identify significant gaps
EQs below will present a comparison of learning outcome
(OSSAP-SDGs & NBS, 2017). Data for six of the SDG4
data using the SDG4 evaluation school-based survey
indicators were missing, including for indicator 4.1.1,
results and previous studies.
which is the focus of this independent evaluation. The
baseline research team had looked for data within MICS,
Access:
UBEC reports and the National Bureau of Statistics
(NBS)39 as well as field visits without success. The report Analysis of MICS and NDHS data conclude that
also reiterates the importance of tracking SDG progress attendance rates show modest gains at the national level
and that successfully monitoring “will require capacity- since 2013 as well as more substantial gains for some of the
building efforts and mobilization of required resources” case-study states, although attendance rates still fall short
such as: of two-thirds of pupils attending school nationally (62.1per
cent, DHS, 2018). Similarly, 2019 NEMIS statistics show
(i) sustained data at the state and local levels; (ii)
a net enrolment rate of 69.9 per cent. Nonetheless, these
continuous training of the statistical staff across all levels;
gains hide the considerable decline that took place after
(iii) well-focused templates that are easily understood;
2011, and which continue to affect the educational system.
and (iv) and working with metadata developed for global
and national indicators. Furthermore, there is a need to Findings concerning gender parity offer some relatively
adopt data that are internationally comparable; hence good news as national results show that girls’ attendance
the need to adopt internationally agreed standards. rate is at 97 per cent. Disaggregation at the state level,
(OSSAP-SDGs & NBS, 2017, p. 57) however, reveals the fragility of near gender parity as well
as the need for attention to boys’ enrolments in order to
The Nigeria Sustainable Development Goals Implemen-
maintain boys’ presence within classrooms.
tation Plan released in 2021 identifies that monitoring,
evaluation, documentation and reporting are to be the fourth
At the national level, 80.6 per cent of the children living
mandate for the OSSAP-SDGs. Tasks include compiling
in urban areas attended primary school according to MICS
and updating annual SDG reports, presenting quarterly
2016 data. This proportion is only 52.9 per cent in rural
reports to the Presidential Committee on the Assessment
areas, which represents a difference of nearly 30 percentage
and Monitoring of the SDGs, developing a national
points. Disaggregation by state shows that the difference
monitoring and evaluation framework and collaborating
in the attendance rate between children in urban and
with the Ministry of Budget and National Planning and
rural areas was significantly different for all states with the
the NBSs. The report also recognizes reporting challenges
exception of Enugu. In each of these states, we observe
63
Education in Nigeria: Evaluation of the Effectiveness & Impact of SDG 4
a larger rate of children living in urban areas attending time and relative to pupil characteristics. The proficiency
primary school than the percentage of children attending standards attached to NEDS assessments used to
schools in rural areas. The largest differences, of about 35 determine literacy and numeracy competencies are simple
points between rural and urban results, are in Zamfara and and minimal.40 According to NEDS, a child is considered
Katsina States. Meanwhile, the smallest difference is in literate if, when presented with a flashcard with three
Enugu with a difference of just 2.6 percentage points. words, the child can read one of three words written in
English or in one of three national languages. NEDS
Quality: administers the assessment to children between the ages
of 5 and 16. A pupil is considered to have comprehension
Learning outcomes provide insights into educational
if the child can read and answer at least one of three
quality, and strong learning outcomes are the long-term
sentences in the form of a question. Similarly, a child is
goal of any education intervention. Investigation of
considered to demonstrate simple numeracy skills when
learning outcomes for this evaluation calls upon two data
he or she can complete a single-digit addition problem.
sources: the Nigeria Education Data Survey (NEDS)
Advanced numeracy refers to when a child is able to add or
and the school-level survey carried out for this SDG4
subtract at least one double-digit number.
evaluation.
The most recent NEDS results, from 2020,41 displayed
Nigeria Education Data Survey (NEDS):
in Figure 3.7, show that in Grade 2, 41 per cent of pupils
SDG target 4.1 seeks to measure the proportion of pupils possessed minimal literacy, while the same holds for 55 per
meeting a minimum proficiency level in Grade 2 or 3. cent of pupils in Grade 3. Numeracy results were higher
There is a dearth of official learning assessment data against the NEDS proficiency standards, with 44 and 60
in Nigeria. Within this vacuum, NEDS provides some per cent of Grade 2 and Grade 3 pupils demonstrating
indication of pupils’ literacy and numeracy abilities over minimal numeracy skills. Results by gender are not
available within the NEDS report.
Figure 4.7: NEDS 2020 results for literacy, comprehension and numeracy
100%
93%92%
90%
88%89%
90% 87%
79%
80%
73% 74% 73%
69% 68%
70% 66%
63%
60%
61%
60% 55%
50% 44% 46%
41%
40%
38%
30% 29%
30%
24%25% 24% 25%
20% 17%
10% 5% 6%
0%
pri m
ar y
J S
S1
J S
S1
J S
S1
e-
Pr
Literacy Comprehension Numeracy
64
Evaluation Findings and Analysis
SDG4 evaluation school-level survey: compare proficiency criteria. While ESSPIN benchmarks
are more complex – and for this reason, more attractive as a
In presenting the results of the survey, the SDG4 evaluation
benchmarking option – their use is still limited. Moreover,
team presents data in three ways. First, we have scaled all
the SDG4 evaluation team is unable to know exactly
subtasks to arrive at a single score for numeracy and literacy
what process was used to develop the ESSPIN criteria;
(different for end-of-grade P2 (P3) and end-of-grade P4
for example, how did ESSPIN determine the cut-score
(P5)) using item response theory (IRT). Like PISA and
to be 26 words or more? In absence of such information,
TIMSS, this process transforms the scores to a value scale
it is challenging to evaluate the quality of the proposed
with a mean of 500 points and a standard deviation of 100.
benchmarks. Furthermore, it is difficult to apply the
Therefore, a state where the average score is higher than
benchmarks as they are since the purposes and context of
500 signals that pupils in that state are performing better
the assessments were not the same. As indicated within
than the “national level”, while states with an average
the methodology section above, some subtasks were not
below 500 means that pupils are performing lower than
selected for the present evaluation. Table 3.10 and Table
the “national level”. In addition, we recognize the desire
3.11 present the criteria for NEDS, ESSPIN and GEP3
and utility to compare these results with performance
benchmarking.
scores using benchmarks. Doing so allows us to pronounce
whether or not pupils have achieved a desired level of
In addition, the FCDO-funded Girls Education Project
proficiency in literacy and numeracy. While the FMOE
(GEP3) studies have proposed alternative benchmarks
has not established formal benchmarks, the NEDS and
and criteria that were developed during a workshop,
ESSPIN studies developed benchmarks that we were also
indicated in Table 21. While this guarantees a better-
able to borrow and apply to the SDG4 school survey data.
quality benchmark, information was still missing and the
The benchmark criteria for NEDS are much simpler than
SDG4 evaluation team was not able to compute it. We also
the ESSPIN benchmarks and represent a lower level of
faced the same challenge for the ESSPIN benchmarks,
competency. Criteria for proficiency apply to children 4
as it was not possible for the SDG4 assessment tools to
to 16 years of age, at large, no matter the grade level of
include all the subtasks used in the GEP3 assessment.
the pupils. Tables 3.10 and 3.11 provide information to
Table 4.10: Criteria for NEDS and ESSPIN benchmarks
Skill NEDS (children 4 to 16, regardless of ESSPIN
grade level)
Grade 2 Grade 4
Literacy (includes Children are said to be literate if they Children who correctly answer Children who correctly read
reading fluency for word can read at least one or more words the two questions on listening a sufficient number (15 or
reading and/or connect- in English or one of the three national comprehension and correctly more) of familiar words at P4
ed text reading, listening languages42 read a sufficient number of level and correctly read a suf-
comprehension, and words (26 or more) from a ficient number of words (34
reading comprehen- P2-level passage in English only or more) from a P4-level pas-
sion depending on the sage and correctly answer at
assessment) least four out of five reading
comprehension questions
Reading Comprehension Literate children are said to compre- N/A Correctly answer at least four
hend if they can read and answer at out of five reading compre-
least one of three sentences in the hension questions.
form of a question
Numeracy Children are considered to be numer- Children who correctly answer Children who correctly
ate if they can complete a single digit at least five out of six P2-level answer P4-level questions on
addition problem questions on addition and sub- addition and subtraction and
traction and both multiplication multiplication and division.
questions.
65
Education in Nigeria: Evaluation of the Effectiveness & Impact of SDG 4
Table 4.11: Criteria for GEP3 literacy (P2 only)
Proficiency range Description of the knowledge and skills of pupils achieving within this range – English literacy
Pre-literacy Pupils who achieved within the pre-literacy range were able to demonstrate some of the following skills: knowl-
edge of print concepts, understanding and responding verbally with a grammatically correct sentence to a simple
question about their age, understanding and responding verbally with a grammatically correct sentence to a
simple question about their name, and saying the initial letters of a familiar object and animal.
Emerging In addition to the skills above, pupils achieving within this range were able to demonstrate at least some of the
literacy knowledge and skills within the range expected by the P1 curriculum. Pupils achieving within this range were
able to: verbally compose a short grammatically correct sentence in the continuous present tense in response
to a question about a picture, listen to a short passage and remember specific details to respond verbally to a
question, and copy words that were clearly shaped and correctly orientated, with an understanding of space and
full stops.
Basic literacy In addition to the skills above, pupils achieving within this range were able to demonstrate at least some of the
knowledge and skills within the range expected by the P2 curriculum. Pupils achieving within this range were
able to: use phonic knowledge to say the initial sounds of familiar animal names; listen to a short passage and
remember specific details so as to respond verbally to a question (one-word answers were acceptable); use
knowledge of common inflections in spellings; display knowledge of plurals; write the answer to a question; use
phonic knowledge (and awareness) to read upper and lower case letters; spell simple high frequency words ac-
curately; read high frequency words and phonically decodable two-syllable and three-syllable words that include
common diagraphs and adjacent consonants (e.g. ‘black’) in simple sentences; understand and respond in writing
with a grammatically correct sentence to a simple question about the position of an everyday item; listen to two
sentences and respond verbally to a question with a grammatically accurate sentence; independently read for
meaning a short text with a range of sentence structures, high frequency words, and two-syllable and three-syl-
lable words that include common diagraphs and adjacent consonants; verbally compose a short grammatically
correct sentence in the continuous present tense in response to a question about a picture; copy words that are
clearly shaped and correctly oriented, with an understanding of space and full stops; use appropriate intonation
when reading texts with a range of sentence structures, high frequency words, and two-syllable and three-syl-
lable words that include common diagraphs and adjacent consonants; use knowledge of common inflections
in spellings, including plurals, to write the answer to a question; read a range of simple sentences with high
frequency words, phonically decodable two-syllable and three-syllable words that include common diagraphs
and adjacent consonants (e.g. ‘black’) independently; remember specific details from a short, simple reading text
to respond verbally to a question; and read a simple sentence for meaning and complete a missing word using
the correct spelling.
Continuous score results sixth place and had been designated as ‘low-performing’
states. (See Tables E1-E4 in Annex G for more details.)
For the SDG4 evaluation school-level survey, we sampled
P3 and P5 pupils as proxies for end-of-grade P2 and
The results in Kaduna State may be particularly noteworthy
P4 pupils. Continuous score results allow us to make
as pupils had just resumed school after an extended
comparisons between states, as depicted in Table 3.12 and
COVID-19-related closure approximately one week prior
graphically in Figure 3.8.
to data collection. It is possible that scores underestimate
pupils’ real performance compared with other states, some
Results show that Enugu, which was classified as a
of which resumed at the end of September 2020 (see
‘transitioning’ state demonstrates the highest average
Impact 6 EQ for more information).
scores on all four different tests. This confirms findings
from the secondary data analysis that classifications based
In terms of gender differences, the gap between girls
on completion rate alone are not a reliable predictor of
and boys is most pronounced among current P5 pupils
other indicators. All other states, however, follow the
in Enugu State. For current P3 pupils, Kaduna shows
expected pattern according to the designations. Kwara
the greatest gaps in literacy scores while Kwara presents
and Kaduna demonstrate the second- and third-highest
the smallest gap in numeracy results. None of these
results and, for the purposes of this study, were designated
differences are statistically significant, however, so we
as ‘high-performing’ states. Due to school closures, we do
cannot conclude that there is a difference between girls’
not have P2 data for Kaduna State. Next follows Katsina, a
and boys’ performance.
‘transitioning’ state. Kano and Zamfara follow in fifth and
66
Evaluation Findings and Analysis
Table 4.12: Literacy and numeracy proficiency using evaluation survey data, by completion rate grouping (score; 98per cent confi-
dence interval score)
State End-of-P2 Reading End-of-P2 Numeracy End-of-P4 Reading End-of-P4 Numeracy
Low-performing states
Kano 456.5 455.6 455.9 459.9
(444.5;468.5) (444.2;466.9) (445.7;466.2) (448.9;471.0)
Zamfara 437.0 443.4 449.1 433.8
(428.1;445.9) (436.1;450.7) (437.5;460.7) (423.3;444.4)
Transitioning states
Katsina 472.9 457.9 476.9 472.3
(462.8;483.1) (449.6;466.4) (463.5;466.2) (463.3;481.3)
Enugu 599.5 600.1 610.8 608.9
(589.9;608.9) (589.7;610.4) (600.8;620.8) (598.2;619.3)
High-performing states
Kwara 565.3 563.0 559.2 564.9
(554.0;576.5) (555.4;570.6) (547.4;570.9) (555.7;573.9)
Kaduna N/A N/A 513.4 499.1
(498.9;527.8) (487.5;510.7)
Total 469.1 465.2 483.3 478.8
(461.9;476.4) (458.6;471.9) (476.1;490.5) (472.5;485.1)
NEDS benchmark results pupils being proficient in reading. Kwara State follows with
remarkably lower but still significant outcomes. All other
Using the NEDS benchmarking criteria displayed in Table
states have very poor results. The highest proficiency score
3.11, proficiency levels for SDG4 school-survey align
relates to P2 numeracy. Less than 3 per cent of pupils are
with continuous scores above. Table 3.13 and Figure 3.9
proficient across all categories for the remaining four states.
provide two visualizations of the data. We see high rates of
There are multiple cases where no pupils demonstrate
proficiency in Enugu State followed by Kwara. Lower rates
proficiency.
are registered for Kano and Zamfara states. In these last two
states, well over half of pupils are not proficient in either
Systems strengthening:
reading or numeracy. Given the simplicity of the NEDS
criteria, these results are highly concerning as well over In regard to the last specified ESSP outcome area of
the majority of pupils in these states complete P4 without systems strengthening, key informant interviews shed
being able to read one word from a flashcard or perform a some light on the strengths and weaknesses of structures
single-digit addition problem. and coordination mechanisms. In general, all FMOE
officials and development partners spoke very highly of
ESSPIN Benchmark results the National Education Group (NEG) as an opportunity
to work collectively. The NEG convenes government
Here, we present the same analysis using ESSPIN criteria,
officials with development partners, CSOs and private
as displayed in Table 3.14 and Figure 3.10. Variability is
sector partners. The group meets every two months; a
greater when applying this interpretation and it is more
development partners representative and the FMOE
difficult to identify key findings. It is clear, however, that
Permanent Secretary serve as co-chairs. The NEG offers
proficiency scores are much lower when applying the
the opportunity to discuss sector developments as well as
ESSPIN criteria compared to NEDS. Enugu still leads
to ensure coordination of efforts.
in all four of the categories with 43 per cent of end-of-P2
67
Education in Nigeria: Evaluation of the Effectiveness & Impact of SDG 4
I’ve been privileged to be part of it. It has become At the same time, findings indicate that the NEG may
an advisory group actually. CSOs, private sectors, focus more on World Bank and Global Partnership for
development partners and government. It has been
Education (GPE), for instance, in supporting the World
very key in major education in Nigeria, programmes and
Bank’s NIPEP project and more recently, developing the
projects in Nigeria. (Senior FMOE Official)
application for a GPE grant and related planning exercises.
Of course, we also relying on when our development
partners … UNICEF, UNESCO, USAID, DFID, JICA … so Other notable structures also exist including the UBEC
many, we have about 13 of them. We have grouped
Law, the UBEC Intervention Fund and the SDG4 office
to what we called Nigeria Education Group (NEG).
within the Ministry. The evaluation team found that the
So, we meet every month and they give us the report
level of implementation and coordination among various
of all the monitoring activities and the observations,
developments, new policies or initiatives to address key players in the sector has been less than desired,
problems. We discuss them as a group. It is our own which poses a barrier to achieving SDG4. It was noted
highest technical body that looks at all the issues around
that while the FMOE provides overall guidance to
education and what we focus on …We bring in all the
education in terms of policy direction, the law promoting
stakeholders in that particular sector we are focusing on
basic education created a federal agency (UBEC) to
at the time. So, it is an effective monitoring mechanism.
invest special intervention funds through a state agency
(Senior FMOE Official)
(SUBEB), without recourse to accountability. In addition,
68
Evaluation Findings and Analysis
Table 4.13: Literacy & numeracy proficiency using NEDS benchmark, by completion rate grouping (score; 98per cent confidence inter-
val score)
State End-of-P2 Reading End-of-P2 Numeracy End-of-P4 Reading End-of-P4 Numeracy
Low-performing states
Kano 30.00per cent 39.70per cent 40.60per cent 43.30per cent
(22.6per cent;38.6per (32.4per cent;47.5per (35.1per (33.6per cent;53.4per
cent) cent) cent;46.4per cent) cent)
Zamfara 18.30per cent 33.50per cent 41.10per cent 33.30per cent
(12.0per cent;26.9per (28.2per cent;39.2per (32.4per (26.5per cent;40.9per
cent) cent) cent;50.4per cent) cent)
Transitioning states
Katsina 46.80per cent 43.10per cent 64.30per cent 50.90per cent
(37.6per cent;56.2per (34.7per cent;52.0per (52.5per (43.7per cent;58.1per
cent) cent) cent;74.5per cent) cent)
Enugu 91.50per cent 95.80per cent 92.30per cent 97.50per cent
(87.05;94.6per cent) (92.7per cent;97.5per (88.9per (93.6per cent;99.1per
cent) cent;94.8per cent) cent)
High-performing states
Kwara 83.60per cent 92.70per cent 83.80per cent 96.00per cent
(77.4per cent;88.3per (88.9per cent;95.2per (78.1per (93.2per cent;97.7per
cent) cent) cent;88.2per cent) cent)
Kaduna N/A N/A 70.10per cent 74.00per cent
(59.9per (63.7per cent;82.2per
cent;78.6per cent) cent)
Total 36.00per cent 43.10per cent 53.90per cent 53.70per cent
(30.7per cent;416per (38.0per cent;48.2per
cent) cent)
69
Education in Nigeria: Evaluation of the Effectiveness & Impact of SDG 4
Table 4.14: Literacy & numeracy proficiency using ESSPIN benchmark
State End-of-P2 Reading End-of-P2 Numeracy End-of-P4 Reading End-of-P4 Numer-
acy
Low-performing states
Kano 0per cent 0.90per cent 0.2per cent 0.20per cent
(0.4per cent;2.1per cent) (0.07per cent;0.6per (0.07per
cent) cent;0.6per cent)
Zamfara 0per cent 2.10per cent 0per cent 0per cent
(0.8per cent;5.3per cent)
Transitioning states
Katsina 0per cent 0.70per cent 1.1per cent 0per cent
(0.1per cent;3.4per cent) (0.2per cent;6.0per cent)
Enugu 43.00per cent 40.90per cent 28.6per cent 32.40per cent
(35.8per cent;50.2per (35.0per cent;47.0per (22.7per cent;35.4per (26.5per
cent) cent) cent) cent;38.9per
cent)
High-performing states
Kwara 12.20per cent 22.60per cent 8.2per cent 15.70per cent
(7.8per cent;18.7per (17.9per cent;28.1per (5.2per cent;12.7per (11.3per
cent) cent) cent) cent;21.4per
cent)
Kaduna N/A N/A 2.9per cent 1.60per cent
(1.2per cent;6.8per cent) (0.6per
cent;3.9per cent)
Total 1.20per cent 2.50per cent 1.7per cent 1.50per cent
(0.8per cent;1.7per cent) (1.8per cent;3.5per cent) (1.1per cent;2.7per cent) (1.1per
cent;2.2per cent)
70
Evaluation Findings and Analysis
findings indicate a tension between UBEC and the An official in Enugu State described the committees as
FMOE, particularly at the state level. As one development “an enhanced PTA”. Stakeholders described various
partner indicated, roles for the SBMCs including accountability for school
administrators, coordination of small construction projects,
It’s politics and money. The states are not drawn to the help with enrolment, support for families so they may
federal ministry of education because it’s all about policy. send their child to school and general mobilization of
There is no financial incentive. So, everyone is drawn to
resources. A state-level CSO representative described how
the UBEC because that is where the money lies. Before
SBMCs have voluntarily contributed money to identify
the current problem with the economy, at the height of
water sources, pay teachers a stipend and buy land for the
its power, UBEC was drawing close to 400 million dollars
school. When speaking about mechanisms that enhance
from the consolidated funds for the government. So it’s
effectiveness, a Kwara official contributed the following:
a lot. So whatever Nigeria makes from the oil proceeds,
2per cent goes to UBEC. So that’s a lot of money. So,
It’s part of their responsibility to inform every parent
everybody listens to UBEC. Everybody dances to the tune
that your child must go to school. And if the child is not
of UBEC. So, I think that is the kind of current situation
in school, they will go and ask the person what is wrong
that we are in, there must be a synergy. So there must be
that your child is not in school. If there is any financial
role for UBEC to help drive the MSP. But, unfortunately crisis preventing the boy [child], the committee will
you see the Ministry playing the Big Brother, but always decide to bring out some amount to help the child to get
not willing to work in tandem with UBEC. (Development back to school. They provide school uniforms, writing
partner representative) materials, school shoes and so on just to motivate the
pupil to come to school. And during enrolment, when
they want to carry out the enrolment in the communities,
Moreover, education is a shared responsibility between
they do go to the schools see how they are enrolling the
the Federal, State and Local Governments in Nigeria. The
pupils. (Kwara Education Official)
extent to which SDG-supportive strategies in the MSP are
implemented at the State level depends largely on the
government of each state. Thus, the level of ownership This excerpt provides an illustration of the breadth of
of, commitment to, and implementation of the strategies SBMC interventions as well as enthusiasm for their
varies from state to state. The accountability framework contributions.
between the Federal and State governments in the
Conclusion
implementation of key education programmes is found to
be weak or nonexistent.
nigeria’s overall education financing is far below that of
other African countries and transparency in financing data
Special mention of School-Based Management
is extremely weak. At the state level, actual expenditure
Committees (SBMCs)
regularly falls below planned expenditure due to the
At the state level, one coordinating mechanisms arose non-release of capital funds budgeted. The inability of
frequently during interviews in all six case-study states: some states to access UBEC counterpart funding is a lost
the SBMCs. School-survey data found that only 4 schools opportunity to enhance basic education at the state level.
out of the 480-school sample did not report having a
functioning SBMC. In Katsina, 75 per cent of head teachers Funding for basic education is inherently shared between
reported that the SBMC had met during the semester of multiple actors, including the federal government, state
data collection or just prior during the vacation period. governments, development partners, private actors and
This proportion was around 50 per cent for all other states, parents, among others. Funding for basic education is
indicating that SBMCs are more active in Katsina State. complex and data is incomplete or nonexistent, thus
Effect2: What are the funding sources available to implement the plan?
Evaluation question (Effectiveness) Likely strength of evidence Data sources
What are the funding sources available to implement the plan? Medium Literature review, education
financing analysis, KIIs
71
Education in Nigeria: Evaluation of the Effectiveness & Impact of SDG 4
precluding a robust analysis of government funding education is often seen to be complex and produce
sources. Funding levels vary between states. Even with “overlapping responsibilities, leading to confusion,
basic education declared as free, parents still bear a weakened accountability, and duplication of efforts” (Ibid.).
considerable burden in getting their children to school.
While originally intended to cover gaps in spending, school Field interviews for the SDG4 evaluation further validated
and PTA levies contradict free education promises and this complexity when education officials at the ministries
pose a serious challenge. They are heavily contested and of education at the federal and state levels were unable
politically charged. to speak authoritatively about the level and sources of
funding to basic education from either UBEC or SUBEB.
The response to this EQ builds upon the earlier response Similarly, neither UBEC nor SUBEB have complete
to the first efficiency question above investigating the information on the funding available to basic education
efficient implementation of the MSP. The response from the ministries of education. Thus, it becomes difficult
begins with background on the governance structure and to accurately estimate how much funding comes from
institutional framework under which basic education different government sources. This is one of the factors
operates in order to contextualize funding sources available that complicates the cost-effectiveness analysis presented
for implementation of plans relevant to basic education. in EQ Efficiency2 above.
Governance structure and institutional frame- Funding sources
work
UBEC:
The UBEC Act of 2004 is the legal instrument that clearly
In order to ensure the success of the UBE programme,
defined the roles of the various levels of government in
the federal government dedicates 2 per cent of its annual
funding basic education and provided for semi-autonomous
Consolidated Revenue Fund43 to its implementation.
agencies with executive function. As noted in the ESSPIN
While basic education is the constitutional responsibility of
study of 2016, the Federal Ministry of Education now had
the state and local governments, the federal government’s
a basic education counterpart in the UBEC. The SMOE’s
intervention at this level is assistance for the “purpose
counterpart was the SUBEB. Even at the local level, the
of uniform and qualitative basic education throughout
local government had its own Education Supervisor, and,
Nigeria”. To this end, the UBE intervention fund is
with the passing of the UBEC Act of 2004, also saw the
channelled to providing and upgrading infrastructure in
establishment of a separate Local Government Education
schools, enhancing teacher capacity, procuring instructional
Authority (LGEA).
materials, promoting the education of children with special
needs, and correcting education imbalances through
At the implementation level, these roles are somewhat
programmes like the Tsangaya Education Programme,
complex and, because basic education falls largely to the
Nomadic and Migrant Education Programme, Boy-Child
states, the effectiveness of the funding sources between
and Girl-Child Initiatives, etc.
federal, state and local government is entirely dependent
on individual state commitments to implementing basic
Table 3.15 details UBEC allocations to the six case-study
education services. Two studies cited in the ESSPIN 2016
states beginning in 2015. The table includes information
report further explain the complexity of basic education
from UBEC as well as directly from case-study states. Data
financing. Firstly, the 2015 World Bank study noted that
are limited to Enugu and Kwara States owing to the same
“while the Federal and State Ministries of Education are
challenges in obtaining data indicated above in response to
formally responsible for providing oversight to UBEC
the efficiency questions
and SUBEB, in practice this is problematic because their
funding is earmarked and routed outside of the budget
External donors:
of these Ministries of Education” (Steenbergen et al.,
2016, p. 4). The second was Freikman (2007), which also Another source of funding to basic education identified
noted that because basic education involves all three tiers during field interviews is contributions from donors
of government (local, state and federal), and involves (international and local). This comes in the form of grants,
dual institutions at each level, Nigeria’s system of basic loans, technical assistance, and donations, and varies widely.
72
Evaluation Findings and Analysis
All state-level stakeholders spoke at length about the That’s why the government ensure that each and every
various projects underway through development partner school has School-Based Management Committee. The
support in their states. This SDG4 evaluation’s school- SBMC, part of their responsibility is to mobilize resources
level survey data also provided insights about funding in ensuring that that school is kept. (Kano Official)
within concerned states. When asked if the surveyed
At least we have seen some people donate, the PTA
school currently receives support in cash or kind from
especially the Parents Teachers Association in different
any other organization or programme, the proportion of
schools; you will see some of them donating computer
head teachers responding affirmatively ranged from 33.8
systems to the school, some will build a block of 2 or
per cent in Enugu to 88.6 per cent in Katsina. There is
3 classrooms, some will provide stationery for the
no consistency between these findings and designations of
students, some have even gone to the extent of sewing
the states as low, transitioning, and high-performing states.
school uniforms for the less privileged students. Some
(See Annex G for more detailed information.)
have even donated school buses for the schools. (Kwara
Education Official)
In addition, the FMOE Minister’s annual press briefly
highlighted current partnerships, notably BESDA and
The existence of these sources of funding varies from
AGILE, two World Bank initiatives funded at US$611
state to state. KII data indicate that what is common to all
million and US$500 million, respectively. Contributions
six case-study states is that parents still bear a lot of cost
from other donors are more challenging to calculate and
in terms of purchase of school supplies, transport money,
other development partners were not as forthcoming
and other incidentals. This situation belies the promise
during interviews.
that education would be free and compulsory. One CSO
representative was particularly emphatic:
Parental contributions:
Those things are in the policy but there is no
Also, as indicated above, other sources of funding include
implementation. Because if there is implementation like
contributions from parents, either through PTA levies44 or
the free education, that means there is ‘free education’
direct charges in the form of school development levies. in [State] 45 but students still are being charged to pay
The two quotes below from Kwara and Kano state again school fees. It means implementation is not there to
speak to the financial contributions that SBMCs make. support anything, you know there is no tuition fee but
they end up paying more than the tuition fee, all those
illegal fees they charge in school. Not every parent can
Then there is another one; community contribution,
pay whereas in the policy it said every child can go
those that philanthropists, businesspeople. Sometimes
to school no matter the challenge. But still, they are
they also get involved in conducting some activities
collecting something. (CSO state representative)
maybe in support and in providing teaching materials,
renovating classrooms or schools. Maybe some are
Not only do parents suffer the opportunity cost of sending
engaged in providing teaching and learning materials.
their child to school but there are additional out-of-pocket
Table 4.15: Disbursement of matching grant to states from 2015–2019 (in Naira)
STATE 2015-2016 2016-2017 2017-2018 2018-2019 2019-2020 Total (2015-2020)
ENUGU 1,828,183,235.49 2,084,054,054.04 2,572,686,367 2,947,665,690.40 1,335,810,845.90 10,768,400,192.95
KADUNA 1,918,783,783.78 0.00 1,286,343,183.55 1,473,832,845.20 0 4,678,959,812.53
KANO 1,918,783,783.78 0.00 1,286,343,183.55 1,473,832,845.20 0 4,678,959,812.53
KATSINA 1,918,783,783.78 0.00 1,286,343,183.55 1,473,832,845.20 0 4,678,959,812.53
KWARA 1,753,513,513.52 2,084,054,054.04 2,572,686,367.10 2,947,665,690.40 3,039,768,157.72 12,397,687,782.78
ZAMFARA 1,918,783,783.78 0.00 1,286,343,183.55 982,555,231.51 0 4,187,682,198.84
73
Education in Nigeria: Evaluation of the Effectiveness & Impact of SDG 4
Table 4.16: Indicative fees and levies for newly enrolling students into JSS1 at Unity Schools 46,47
No. Fees and Levies for 2016/2017 Session48 Amount (N)
1 Prospectus 500
2 Boarding fees per term for boarders only 15,000
3 Bed bunk and classroom furniture (once) 16,000
4 Caution fees 1,000
5 Textbook deposit 12,000
6 Exercise books per session 3,000
7 Uniforms per set 1,000
8 Blazer 5,500
9 Identity Card 500
10 Medical 1,000
11 Stationery 500
12 Vocational 1,000
13 Sports 500
14 Clubs and Societies 500
15 Utility 1,000
16 Security 1,000
17 ICT/Website/e-results 3,000
18 Extra Lessons 2,000
19 Insurance (once per session) 5,000
20 PTA49 5,000
Total 75,000
expenses. For some families, these requirements are 4.5 Impact
significant enough to constitute a barrier to enrolment
Overall Finding: Insufficient impact of Educa-
and retention. The evaluation team has constructed an
tion MSP 2016–2019 – Nigeria is unlikely to
illustrative table of primary school fees and levies based
achieve SDG4
on practices at the JSS level. This information was not
available for primary school levies, but Table 3.16 provides
Quality of the Evidence: Medium
an indication of the system and the growing culture of
exacting levies from parents even within the context of Conclusions
UBE. These JSS levies may also apply at the primary level.
close study of learning outcomes scores over time
demonstrates a gain between baseline measures (GEP3
The next section moves from a study of the efficiency of
2015 evaluation and ESSPIN 2015 Composite Survey, used
Nigeria’s progress towards obtaining SDG4 to examining
as ‘baseline’ studies) and SDG4 evaluation assessments
the possible impact of its interventions.
for end-of-P2 and end-of-P4 literacy and numeracy overall
74
Evaluation Findings and Analysis
and for almost all of the six case-study states. Pupils in Nigeria’s states as barriers. Interview findings underline
Enugu State consistently outperform others while Kwara repeatedly that insecurity in Katsina, Kaduna and Zamfara
State also showed significant improvement. Kaduna State significantly hinders access. Insecurity poses a serious
P4 pupils also demonstrated noticeable improvement threat to Nigeria meeting its SDG4 goals. It is likely that
(analysis was not possible for P2 pupils due to school pupils in areas with continued insecurity will continue to
closures for early primary levels). Conclusions are limited, fall behind and not have an opportunity to learn like their
however, because comparison with baseline studies was peers in more stable environments.
not possible for all states.50
Despite MSP-espoused actions to improve school
Inadequate economic power remains a barrier to access, infrastructure, findings show that poor infrastructure,
and more so for girls than boys, according to SDG4 notably insufficient numbers of classrooms and inadequate
school survey findings and NEDS results. Government and poorly maintained structures, continues to serve
policies recognize sociocultural beliefs and practices as as a barrier to progress. Data were generally lacking for
well as the significant challenge of insecurity in some of this analysis and NDES data, though available, suffer
SUMMARY CONCLUSIONS (IMPACT)
Quantitative evidence from NEMIS data presented in Figures 18 and 19 on access indicators and findings from NEDS (2015) on
learning outcomes reveal that Nigeria is not likely to achieve the global agenda of universal inclusive and equitable quality basic ed-
ucation for all (100per cent) school-age children by 2030. The net enrolment rate shows that just over two thirds of children (69.9per
cent) were attending school in 2019. Regarding quality, NEDS 2020 data show that only 41 per cent of P2-age children were able to
read one word from a flashcard and 44 per cent were able to perform a single-digit addition problem. Results for literacy remained
stable whereas numeracy results decreased by 10 percentage points since 2015 (see Table 29).
Evidence from Primary Data Collection (School-Based Students Learning Outcomes Assessment) completed in 6 cases study States
by the independent evaluation in 2021 revealed that the Pupils Proficiency in Literacy is Higher in only Enugu State (603.38 against a
benchmark of 500) and Lower in the remaining 5 States of Kano (488.77), Zamfara (443.38), Katsina (452.71) and Kwara (493.56). The
Benchmark of the composite indicator used for the measurement of Proficiency in Literacy is 500.
Regarding the Learning Outcomes in Numeracy, findings from the independent SDG4.1 Evaluation school-based primary data
collection done in 2021 in 6 selected states revealed that only two states have higher score of Pupils Proficiency in Numeracy: Enugu
(599.46) and Kwara (565.28 against the benchmark of 500); other remaining four states have lower Pupils Proficiency in Numeracy:
Kano (463.14), Zamfara (437.04) and Katsina (476.70). Primary data collection on pupils learning outcomes wasn’t undertaken in
Kaduna due to insecurity issue.
The Federal Ministry of Education and the Universal Basic Education Commission have not yet developed and adopted the global
standard method of calculating Pupils Minimum Proficiency Level in Literacy and Numeracy for Nigeria. There is also absence of na-
tional benchmarks that prevents meaningful comparisons of pupils’ proficiency over time and between states; However, to address
this challenge, UNICEF’s Nigeria will support the Federal Ministry of Education to establish a Nationally accepted standard for calcu-
lating Minimum Proficiency Level in Literacy and Numeracy for Nigeria including adequate Data Collection Tools.
Inadequate economic power remains a barrier to access, and more so for girls than boys. Government policies recognize that so-
ciocultural beliefs and practices as well as the significant challenge of insecurity in some of Nigeria’s states act as barriers. Insecurity
poses a serious threat to Nigeria meeting its SDG4 goals.
Despite MSP-espoused actions to improve school infrastructure, findings show that lacking infrastructure, notably insufficient num-
bers of classrooms and inadequate and poorly maintained structures, continues to serve as barriers to progress.
Investigation of human resources as a potential driver for improving quality shows that few gains have been made in increasing
teacher coverage within the period of the SDG4 evaluation.
The National Home-Grown School Feeding Programme (NHGSFP) is the most prominent flagship programme related to education.
While NHGSFP reports also demonstrate enrolment increases, analysis of learning outcomes shows little improvement for participat-
ing schools within the SDG4 school sample compared to non-participating schools.
While the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic will continue to emerge, schools experienced at least four months of learning loss. More
than half of pupils surveyed report not having participated in an alternative form of learning during school closures. While findings
are inconsistent, they indicate that one fifth of schools had experienced a loss of a quarter or more of their pupils at the time of data
collection.
75
Education in Nigeria: Evaluation of the Effectiveness & Impact of SDG 4
Imp1: To what extent has the MSP contributed to observed changes in education access, completion, equity and quality in Nigeria?
Evaluation question (Impact) Likely strength of evi- Data sources
dence
To what extent has the MSP contributed to observed changes in education Strong Literature review, School-
access, completion, equity and quality in Nigeria? based survey, NEMIS 2019,
MICS, NEDS 2015 & 2020,
NDHS, KIIs
from inconsistencies. Key informant interview findings investigation of three main areas: (1) observed changes in
somewhat contradict statistics as education officials in access, completion, equity and quality in basic education
some states emphasized efforts to improve infrastructure. in Nigeria and possible driving factors, (2) the impact of
This contradiction may suggest that the dismal state the Government of Nigeria’s flagship policies, and (3) the
of schools’ infrastructure is still an improvement over impact of COVID-19 on the education sector. As necessary,
the previous situation or that infrastructure efforts were we have grouped together evaluation questions to allow
limited in their reach. for greater readability.
Investigation of human resources as a potential driver for Imp1: To what extent has the MSP contributed
improving quality shows that few gains have been made in to observed changes in education access, com-
increasing teacher coverage within the period of the SDG4 pletion, equity and quality in Nigeria?
evaluation. Pupil-teacher ratios have also unfortunately
The response to this question builds upon the findings for
increased in this period as teacher recruitment has not been
the first effectiveness evaluation question that explored
able to keep up with population growth and enrolment
literacy and numeracy results from the SDG4 evaluation
increases. At the same time, the qualifications of existing
school-based survey. Acknowledging that a later EQ
teachers seem to have improved during this time period.
focuses on human rights, ‘leave no one behind’ and equity,
we focus here instead specifically on access, completion
Analysis of differences in drivers supporting and hindering
and quality. Quality is represented by observable changes
success in reaching SDG4 goals during different periods
in learning outcomes within the evaluation period. The
within the time frame of the evaluation are inconclusive
section closes with a summary analysis of critical SDG4
as there was variation in experiences and outcomes for the
indicators.
different case-study states during these periods. At the
same time, development partner interventions surface as
Access
the most common attribute for post-2016 changes, and to
a lesser extent the NHGSFP. The creation and success of Analysis of three indicators provides insights into access to
SBMCs, a development partner initiative, is also notable. basic education in Nigeria: i) net enrolment ratio using the
Negative drivers include the recession, insecurity and FMoE’s NEMIS data, ii) net attendance ratio using MICS
changes in national and state administration as well as and NEDS data, and iii) the completion rate using MICS
non-sustainability of activities when development partner data. These data complement findings reported earlier in
projects recede. the cost-effectiveness section.
According to the OECD, impact refers to the “extent Net enrolment ratio 1995–2019
to which the intervention has generated or is expected
According to the NEMIS Annual Statistics Report on
to generate significant positive or negative, intended
Education Performance Indicators published regularly by
or unintended, higher-level effects”. For the SDG4
the Federal Ministry of Education, the net enrolment ratio
evaluation, we assess various aspects of impact by an
for primary education has evolved sporadically, as depicted
76
Evaluation Findings and Analysis
in Figure 3.11. Trend analysis shows NER changing Net attendance ratio
direction from an increasing trend during the period 1995
We turn to analysis of secondary data to provide insights
to 2005 to decreasing during the last 15 years until 2018,
about changes over time in access to education in Nigeria.
before again starting to increase from 2018 (60 per cent)
Net attendance rate measures the number of children
to 2019 (69.9 per cent). The negative effect of COVID-19
of primary grade school age that are actually attending
will likely result in a decrease in access to primary school in
school. Overall, MICS data show that 60.9 per cent of
2020 and 2021, which has further reduced the already low
children nationally between 6 and 11 years old were in
chance that Nigeria will achieve the SDG4 commitment of
school in 2016 and this proportion increased to 62.1 per
universal access to basic education by 2030.
Table 4.17: Primary school net attendance rate by year
State 2007 2008 2011 2013 2016 2018
MICS DHS MICS DHS MICS DHS
Low-performing states
Kano 25.9per cent 49.3per cent 57.7per cent 54.0per cent 54.8per cent 64.6per cent
Zamfara 14.7per cent 18.3per cent 34.8per cent 38.8per cent 40.1per cent 37.6per cent
Transitioning states
Katsina 36.1per cent 38.3per cent 49.0per cent 42.7per cent 56.8per cent 68.7per cent
Enugu 85.0per cent 70.8per cent 89.8per cent 78.1per cent 87.9per cent 87.1per cent
High-performing states
Kwara 71.6per cent 64.7per cent 83.3per cent 82.9per cent 86.1per cent 80.3per cent
Kaduna 50.6per cent 68.6per cent 74.2per cent 59.9per cent 66.5per cent 66.2per cent
National 44.4per cent 59.9per cent 70.1per cent 59.9per cent 60.9per cent 62.1per cent
77
Education in Nigeria: Evaluation of the Effectiveness & Impact of SDG 4
cent according to the 2018 NDHS study. This proportion completion rate stayed about the same until 2018. The
is lower than what was observed in 2011, but still higher greatest improvement for this indicator was in Kwara and
than 2007 and 2008 values. It should also be noted that in Zamfara States. The 2018 completion rates vary from 58.5
2018, this net attendance rate demonstrated great variation per cent in Kano State to 95.8 per cent in Kwara State.
among selected states as it ranged from 37.6 per cent in Table 3.18 and Figure 3.13 show completion rates by year
Zamfara to 87.1 per cent in Enugu. For half of the case- across states.
study states, the net attendance rate was lower in 2016 and
2018 than what was observed in 2011. According to MICS Quality
and DHS data sets, Kano and Katsina are the two states
Information about pupils’ actually learning most
that present the biggest improvement in this indicator
appropriately addresses the issue of educational quality.
since 2007, with an increase of 38.7 and 32.6 percentage
We approach this question through both document review
points respectively. In addition, Zamfara State has also
and through analysis of learning outcome data over time.
made notable progress as its rate more than doubled
There have been some positive achievements in the
between 2007 and 2018. Table 3.17 and Figure 3.12 depict
Nigerian education sector since 2010, but, overall, the
these data by year across states.
picture of pupil learning outcomes is fairly bleak. As an
illustration, Adeniran, Ishaku and Akannai (2020) analysed
Completion
NEDS data and determined that “55 per cent and 49
The completion rate is computed as the number of per cent of the school children surveyed demonstrate
children who enter the last grade of primary school divided competencies in numeracy and literacy respectively. This
by the number of children who are of age to enter the last will suggest Nigeria has made modest progress in ensuring
grade of primary school. Consequently, this indicator may quality and inclusive education” (p. 4). They also identified
result in a calculation that exceeds 100 per cent, which that pupils in urban areas perform better than pupils in
is what is observed for Enugu in 2011. In 2018, for the rural areas and that the gender gap is fairly small. Analysis
population, the completion rate was at 75.5 per cent, an of MICS and DHS data confirm these trends. Similarly,
improvement of 39.5 percentage points since 2007. While the recent GPE country-level evaluation provides an
there was an increase from 2007 to 2008, the national evaluation of GPE inputs relative to the education sector in
78
Evaluation Findings and Analysis
Table 4.18: Completion rates by year
State 2007 2008 2011 2013 2016 2018
MICS DHS MICS DHS MICS DHS
Low-performing states
Kano 15.3per cent 58.8per cent 60.6per cent 61.2per 56.9per cent 58.1per cent
cent
Zamfara 15.9per cent 27.4per cent 70.8per cent 43.4per 47.9per cent 61.5per cent
cent
Transitioning states
Katsina 14.3per cent 57.3per cent 58.0per cent 68.8per 65.5per cent 63.6per cent
cent
Enugu 44.7per cent 75.8per cent 123.2per cent 117.1per 65.4per cent 76.5per cent
cent
High-performing states
Kwara 43.5per cent 65.4per cent 71.3per cent 98.7per 95.2per cent 95.8per cent
cent
Kaduna 21.9per cent 45.9per cent 55.0per cent 86.9per 79.0per cent 74.6per cent
cent
National 36.0per cent 77.3per cent 73.4per cent 75.6per 63.0per cent 75.5per cent
cent
five intervention states: Jigawa, Kaduna, Kano, Katsina and Comparison of NEDS data
Sokoto. These states overlap with three of the case-study
NEDS produced reports in 2015 and 2020 that included
states for the present SDG4 evaluation, Kaduna, Kano
data on learning outcomes. (See above first effectiveness
and Katsina. GPE’s analysis indicates that where learning
evaluation question: To what extent have the outcomes
outcomes have been measured, the majority of pupils in
of the MSP been achieved? for explanation of NEDS
the five participating states of their study generally fail to
proficiency criteria.) Examination of results reveals a
meet basic minimum standards in literacy and numeracy.
general downward trend between 2015 and 2020 for all
The report also indicates that participating states have
three learning outcomes: literacy, comprehension and
made improvements in their outcomes, albeit that these
numeracy. Reading comprehension showed the greatest
are not reflected nationally (Outhred and Turner, 2020).
declines. Nonetheless, as shown in Table 3.19 and Figure
79
Education in Nigeria: Evaluation of the Effectiveness & Impact of SDG 4
Table 4.19: Comparison of NEDS 2015 and 2020 results by competency
Literacy Comprehension Numeracy Change from
2015
Class 2015 2020 2015 2020 2015 2020 Literacy Compre-hen- Num-eracy
sion
Pre-pri- 23per 24per cent 6per cent 5per cent 34per 25per 1per cent -1per cent -9per cent
mary cent cent cent
P1 28per 24per cent 10per 6per cent 38per 30per -4per cent -4per cent -8per cent
cent cent cent cent
P2 41per 41per cent 17per 17per cent 54per 44per 0per cent 0per cent -10per cent
cent cent cent cent
P3 54per 55per cent 29per 25per cent 69per 60per 1per cent -4per cent -9per cent
cent cent cent cent
P4 66per 61per cent 40per 29per cent 78per 69per -5per cent -11per cent -9per cent
cent cent cent cent
P5 75per 68per cent 49per 38per cent 83per 73per -7per cent -11per cent -10per cent
cent cent cent cent
P6 80per 74per cent 56per 46per cent 86per 79per -6per cent -10per cent -7per cent
cent cent cent cent
JSS 1 91per 88per cent 74per 63per cent 93per 89per -3per cent -11per cent -4per cent
cent cent cent cent
JSS 2 92per 90per cent 79per 66per cent 94per 87per -2per cent -13per cent -7per cent
cent cent cent cent
JSS 3 94per 93per cent 84per 73per cent 95per 92per -1per cent -11per cent -3per cent
cent cent cent cent
3.14, differences are slight and may not surpass the margin 2020, COVID closures cannot provide an explanation for
of error, suggesting the need for caution in interpretation. 2020 results as they began later in March 2020 (see final
It is clear, nonetheless, that there is no marked increase in EQ on impact for further explanation of the impact of
learning outcomes within this five-year timespan. Because COVID-19 on the education system.).
2020 data were collected between 3 January and 3 March
80
Evaluation Findings and Analysis
We next turn to SDG4 evaluation school-based survey not participate in this assessment. Enugu State pupils
results. recorded the greatest change. Findings display according
to completion rate groups.
Comparison of SDG4 school-based survey with
baseline data set Applying the NEDS benchmark calculation, a minimal
proficiency benchmark, to the SDG4 school-based survey
The evaluation design required comparison of SDG4
data naturally yields outcomes that appear better. As Table
survey results with three data sets from projects
3.21 illustrates, differences between time points were
implemented around the beginning of the SDG period:
positive and significant for all states except for Zamfara,
ESSPIN, GEP3 and TDP (Teacher Development
which presents about the same proportion at both time
Programme). Unfortunately, the TDP data set was not
points, so shows little change. Kwara demonstrates the
available to the SDG4 evaluation team. In addition, the
greatest change, with 18.7 per cent of children at baseline
GEP3 project included data only for P2 pupils, not for P4.
and 83.6 per cent at the time of the SDG4 evaluation
Similarly, all the studies used as a proxy for baseline are
testing as having reading competency according to NEDS
missing data on numeracy competencies for both grades as
criteria. Enugu followed with over a 40 percentage point
well as literacy scores for P4, which explains the data not
increase.
presented in the tables below. As previously, we present
the findings using both a continuous score and according
As with the results presented above for effectiveness, the
to both NEDS and ESSPIN benchmarks. We present each
application of the ESSPIN benchmark, a more demanding
competency separately.
proficiency standard, results in very weak scores, as Table
3.22 depicts. Pupils in three states recorded no reading
End-of-P2 literacy results
competency at all (Kano, Katsina and Zamfara). As may be
Analysis of literacy results for end of P2 (current P3 expected given the effectiveness scores above, however,
pupils) demonstrates improvements overall, and for all Enugu pupils demonstrated statistically significantly
states, with the exception of Katsina, where results stayed higher competency in reading than all of the other five
the same. Positive results are statistically significant for states, with a change of nearly 40 points from baseline. It is
four of the five states, with the exception of Kano, as not possible to test significance for the other states.52
indicated by p-values of less than 0.005 in Table 3.20.
There is also greater variability between states in 2021 End-of-P2 numeracy results
than was observed previously. At baseline, averages varied
Analysis of end-of-P2 numeracy results using the
between 424.42 and 476.86 while the averages for this
continuous score method demonstrates a statistically
2021 SDG4 evaluation vary between 437.04 and 599.46.
significant improvement in all regions, as illustrated in
Kaduna P2 pupils were not yet back in school so they did
Table 3.23. Improvements are greatest in Enugu. Data
Table 4.20: Comparison of end-of-P2 literacy results, baseline and SDG4 evaluation (continuous score method)
Time period
State Baseline SDG4 evaluation p-value
Low-performing states
Kano 441.66 463.14 0.025
Zamfara 458.69 437.04 0.001
Transitioning states
Katsina 476.86 476.70 0.984
Enugu 468.88 599.46 0.000
High-performing states
Kwara 446.51 565.28 0.000
Kaduna 424.42 N/A
Total 436.57 470.31 0.000
81
Education in Nigeria: Evaluation of the Effectiveness & Impact of SDG 4
Table 4.21: Comparison of end-of-P2 literacy competency over time using NEDS benchmark
Time period
State Baseline SDG4 evaluation p-value
Low-performing states
Kano 14.4per cent 30.0per cent 0.005
Zamfara 19.9per cent 18.3per cent 0.713
Transitioning states
Katsina 27.0per cent 46.8per cent 0.000
Enugu 50.1per cent 91.5per cent 0.000
High-performing states
Kwara 18.7per cent 83.6per cent 0.000
Kaduna 9.4per cent N/A
Total 13.4per cent 36.0per cent 0.000
Table 4.22: Comparison of end-of-P2 literacy competency over time using ESSPIN benchmark
Time period
State Baseline SDG4 evaluation p-value
Low-performing states
Kano 1.0per cent 0per cent
Zamfara 2.3per cent 0per cent
Transitioning states
Katsina 3.0per cent 0per cent
Enugu 4.0per cent 43.0per cent 0.000
High-performing states
Kwara 0.0per cent 12.2per cent
Kaduna 0.1per cent N/A
Total 0.7per cent 1.2per cent 0.360
Table 4.23: Comparison of end-of-P2 numeracy results, baseline and SDG4 evaluation (continuous score method)
Time period
State Baseline SDG4 evaluation p-value
Low-performing states
Kano 437.12 488.77 0.000
Zamfara N/A 443.38
Transitioning states
Katsina N/A 452.71
Enugu 489.87 603.38 0.000
High-performing states
Kwara 434.89 493.56 0.000
Kaduna 425.42 N/A
Total 434.89 493.56 0.000
82
Evaluation Findings and Analysis
Table 4.24: Comparison of end-of-P2 numeracy competency over time using NEDS benchmark
Time period
State Baseline SDG4 evaluation p-value
Low-performing states
Kano 26.7per cent 39.7per cent 0.010
Zamfara N/A 33.5per cent
Transitioning states
Katsina N/A 40.0per cent
Enugu 47.8per cent 95.8per cent 0.000
High-performing states
Kwara 40.0per cent 92.7per cent 0.000
Kaduna 23.6per cent N/A
Total 26.3per cent 43.1per cent 0.000
Table 4.25: Comparison of end-of-P2 numeracy competency over time using ESSPIN benchmark
Time period
State Baseline SDG4 evaluation p-value
Low-performing states
Kano 3.2per cent 0.9per cent 0.029
Zamfara N/A 2.1per cent
Transitioning states
Katsina N/A 0.7per cent
Enugu 14.8per cent 40.9per cent 0.000
High-performing states
Kwara 7.8per cent 22.6per cent 0.000
Kaduna 1.3per cent N/A
Total 2.8per cent 2.5per cent 0.696
Table 4.26: Comparison of end-of-P4 literacy results, baseline and SDG4 evaluation (continuous score method)
Time period
State Baseline SDG4 evaluation p-value
Low-performing states
Kano 452.11 457.91 0.464
Zamfara N/A 456.88
Transitioning states
Katsina N/A 486.82
Enugu 500.79 612.31 0.000
High-performing states
Kwara 468.29 562.54 0.000
Kaduna 431.16 513.43 0.000
Total 446.62 481.78 0.000
83
Education in Nigeria: Evaluation of the Effectiveness & Impact of SDG 4
Table 4.27: Comparison of end-of-P4 literacy competency over time using NEDS benchmark
Time period
State Baseline SDG4 evaluation p-value
Low-performing states
Kano 22.8per cent 40.6per cent 0.036
Zamfara N/A 41.1per cent
Transitioning states
Katsina N/A 64.3per cent
Enugu 68.7per cent 92.3per cent 0.000
High-performing states
Kwara 45.9per cent 83.8per cent 0.000
Kaduna 7.5per cent 70.1per cent 0.000
Total 19.3per cent 53.9per cent 0.000
Table 4.28: Comparison of end-of-P4 literacy competency over time using ESSPIN benchmark
Time period
State Baseline SDG4 evaluation p-value
Low-performing states
Kano 1.5per cent 99.7per cent 0.060
Zamfara N/A 100.0per cent
Transitioning states
Katsina N/A 98.9per cent
Enugu 9.0per cent 71.4per cent 0.000
High-performing states
Kwara 2.7per cent 91.8per cent 0.018
Kaduna 0.1per cent 97.1per cent 0.000
Total 1.2per cent 98.3per cent 0.000
Table 4.29: Comparison of end-of-P4 numeracy results, baseline and SDG4 evaluation (continuous score method)
Time period
State Baseline SDG4 evaluation p-value
Low-performing states
Kano 436.53 460.93 0.033
Zamfara N/A 436.55
Transitioning states
Katsina N/A 477.16
Enugu 479.69 607.66 0.000
High-performing states
Kwara 467.93 563.49 0.000
Kaduna 413.43 497.38 0.000
Total 430.67 476.37 0.000
84
Evaluation Findings and Analysis
Table 4.30: Comparison of end-of-P4 numeracy competency over time using NEDS benchmark
Time period
State Baseline SDG4 evaluation p-value
Low-performing states
Kano 32.7per cent 43.3per cent 0.117
Zamfara N/A 33.3per cent
Transitioning states
Katsina N/A 50.9per cent
Enugu 47.4per cent 97.5per cent 0.000
High-performing states
Kwara 44.5per cent 96.0per cent 0.000
Kaduna 25.2per cent 74.0per cent 0.000
Total 30.9per cent 53.7per cent 0.000
Table 4.31: Comparison of end-of-P4 numeracy competency over time using ESSPIN benchmark
Time period
State Baseline SDG4 evaluation p-value
Low-performing states
Kano 1.6per cent 0.2per cent 0.008
Zamfara N/A 0.0per cent
Transitioning states
Katsina N/A 0.0per cent
Enugu 9.1per cent 32.4per cent 0.000
High-performing states
Kwara 2.4per cent 15.7per cent 0.926
Kaduna 0.7per cent 1.6per cent 0.280
Total 1.5per cent 1.5per cent 0.280
were not available for numeracy sub-tasks for Katsina and End-of-P4 literacy results
Zamfara within baseline data sets.
We performed the same analysis for reading proficiency for
end-of-P4 pupils. The GEP3 data set that serves as the
Similarly, Table 3.24 shows how the four states in which
comparison time point only assessed P2 pupils. We still
analysis was possible display improvements in numeracy
indicated SDG4 evaluation findings within subsequent
proficiency using the NEDS benchmark. Kwara State saw
tables. Analysis of literacy competency using a continuous
the greatest increase (52.7 per cent), followed by Enugu
score shows significant positive changes in all states except
(48.0 per cent).
for Kano. Increases are largest for Enugu and Kwara States,
followed by Kaduna State. See Table 3.26 for more details.
As Table 3.25 depicts, application of the ESSPIN
benchmark for end-of-P2 numeracy proficiency indicates
Analysis using the NEDS benchmark approach again
significant changes in Enugu, Kano and Kwara states
shows higher levels of reading proficiency and positive
between assessments, but not for the overall sample.
changes in all states and overall, as illustrated in Table
Increases vary between 14.8 points for Kwara State and
3.27. In contrast to the above findings for other proficiency
26.1 points for Enugu State. Kano numeracy proficiency
areas, as Table 3.26 demonstrates, Kaduna State registers
scores experienced a slight decrease during this period.
the greatest improvement (62.6 points), followed by
85
Education in Nigeria: Evaluation of the Effectiveness & Impact of SDG 4
Kwara State (37.9 points). In this way, findings from the continuous score results are most consistently positive.
continuous score calculation differ from NEDS benchmark Similarly, Enugu State registers the highest results each
results. time for this analytical approach. Application of the
ESSPIN benchmark almost always shows Enugu with the
Results derived from analysis using the ESSPIN greatest change over time, though this is not the case for
benchmark approach also differ from end-of-P4 reading end-of-P4 literacy. Results using the NEDS benchmark
continuous scores. As Table 3.28 portrays, Kano and are generally more variable in terms of which state shows
Kaduna States, followed by Kwara, demonstrate the the greatest improvement over time. Even with this
greatest improvements (98, 97 and 89 per cent respectively.) benchmark, learning outcomes are very low as nearly half
Results are statistically significant for Enugu, Kaduna and of pupils complete P4 without being able to read one
Kwara States. word from a flashcard or perform a single-digit addition
problem. Pupils in urban areas outperform pupils in rural
End-of-P4 numeracy results areas. Overall, the gender gap is small with girls generally
trailing behind, and more so in rural areas.
Finally, we compare results from baseline data sets with
the SDG4 evaluation school-level survey numeracy
At the same time, the improvement in learning
assessment results. As for other continuous score results
competencies over time that the SDG4 evaluation school-
above, in Table 3.29 we see statistically significant
based survey demonstrates contradicts the findings that
improvements for the four states with data, as well as
result from comparisons of NEDS 2015 and 2020 data.
for the overall sample. Enugu demonstrates the greatest
NEDS comparisons generally show a downward trend for all
improvement in numeracy proficiency over time, followed
learning outcomes: literacy, comprehension and numeracy.
by Kwara and Kaduna States. The improvement in Kano
The discrepancy may result, in part, because the NEDS
is less substantial.
2020 data used here is for 17 states and includes four of the
case-study states, but this is merely conjecture. Additional
Analysis of change in end-of-P4 numeracy competencies
investigation into learning outcomes is clearly warranted
using the NEDS benchmark demonstrates significant
and the need for a single comprehensive benchmark for
changes in all regions except for Kano. Improvements
literacy and numeracy competencies is clear.
are greatest for Kwara State followed by Enugu and then
Kaduna State, as displayed in Table 3.30.
Summary of analysis by completion rate group-
ings
Lastly, analysis of end-of-P4 numeracy proficiencies using
ESSPIN criteria shows much less change than for other The evaluation team also synthesized learning outcome
competency areas. The overall sample experiences no findings by completion rate groupings. Unfortunately, this
significant changes, as indicated in Table 3.31. Enugu, lens does not provide a clear conclusion as states did not
though leading among states, increased by only 23 perform according to these groups. Most notably, even if
percentage points – a smaller margin than for the other Enugu was identified as a transitioning state, it presents
competency areas. the best results for almost all indicators. Enugu presents
the highest results for every test and benchmark. Pupils
Summary of changes in learning outcomes from Enugu present the highest attendance rates as well
over time as one of the highest completion rates. Compared with
the baseline measure, Enugu also shows the greatest
Given the complexity of the findings above, we provide
improvement in P2 literacy. Along with Kwara State,
a brief synthesis here. Analysis of the four proficiency
Enugu has the lowest number of pupils per classroom
areas (P2-literacy, P2-numeracy, P4-literacy, P4-numeracy)
and per teacher. In Enugu and Kwara, the socioeconomic
using a continuous score as well as two distinct benchmark
quintile seems to have less relationship to attendance
calculations generally demonstrates that pupils increased
in school. Enugu also presents the highest proportion of
their reading and maths proficiencies between 2015 and
female teachers followed by the high-performing states
2021. Such a finding signals improvement in educational
(Kwara and Kaduna). Finally, Enugu has the highest rates
quality. The exception is P4 numeracy results, where the
of qualified teachers.
ESSPIN analysis demonstrated no significant change. The
86
Evaluation Findings and Analysis
Table 4.32: Possible drivers of differences in key education variables
Primary school attendance rate Rate of right-age children Age-appropriate early childhood development
at the end of primary
Bivariate and Multivariate Regression Analysis
Student’s gender Socioeconomic quintile Children receive learning support at home
Socioeconomic quintile Child labour Presence of children’s books at home
Mother frequented at least primary school
For the two low-performing states (Kano and Zamfara), data from multiple sources, including SDG4 evaluation
both have the lowest literacy and numeracy results, and data, computations of MICS (2017) data, EMIS (2019)
results are similar according to NEDS and ESSPIN and NEDS (2020) findings. Grey highlight identifies the
benchmarks. These two states present the lowest global indicators. Analysis shows that Nigeria has met one
proportion of female teachers; they also have the lowest of the eight indicators included here.
gender parity index but they improved in this last year.
Only Zamfara still presents a gender parity index that The response to this question complements many of the
is less than desired (0.81 in 2018). Zamfara’s GPI is also above findings by explicitly examining the drivers and
lower in Kaduna (0.88). Finally, Zamfara shows the largest determinant factors that affect access to and quality of
gap between boys’ and girls’ completion rates. basic education in Nigeria. The evaluation team recognizes
the overlap between these three impact questions and
Lastly, for the high-performing states (Kwara and addresses them simultaneously. First, we present the
Kaduna), Kwara State presents similar results as Enugu in drivers generally using a combination of sources that
demonstrating the lowest number of pupils per classroom include document review, secondary data analysis and
and per teacher and for the smallest link between primary data analysis from the SDG4 evaluation school-
socioeconomic quintile and attendance. Kaduna, on the level survey. Then, we present findings, largely from
other hand, shows attendance and completion rates more qualitative data, that explore how these factors may have
similar to Katsina, a transitioning state. applied differently during different periods between 2011
and 2018, and for the six case-study states. We apply a
Although the analysis of learning outcomes by completion determinants analysis in order to elicit insights into barriers
rates was inconclusive, the evaluation team studied and other factors that contribute to the current state of
the differences between the drivers applicable to key plateaued or, more likely, declining education outcomes.
education variables for the case-study states with low In alignment with the MORES framework, sub-sections
completion rates (Kano and Zamfara) and high completion specifically explore demand for education as related to
rates (Kwara and Kaduna) based on 2016 MICS data. access. We also explore quality through the domain of
Accordingly, regression analysis reveals the characteristics supply.
in Table 3.32 as possible drivers for attendance rate, a
child having the right age at the end of primary and age- Drivers and barriers to access
appropriate development.
The enabling environment is a major domain within the
MORES framework.60 Four determinant factors compose
Summary status of SDG4.1 indicators in Nigeria
the enabling environment: social norms, legislation/policy,
SDG4.1 Commitment: By 2030, ensure that all girls and budget/expenditure and management/coordination.
boys complete free, equitable and quality primary and Earlier sections including the second relevance question,
secondary education leading to relevant and effective the coherence question and efficiency questions above
learning outcomes address issues related to legislation/policy, budget/
expenditure and management/coordination. In theory, the
Table 3.33 presents education results from Nigeria education sector policy environment is highly supportive of
against SDG4.1 global and thematic indicators. UNICEF basic education, as is evidenced by the 2004 Universal Basic
provided the framework and the evaluation team compiled Education Act, the establishment of the Universal Basic
87
Education in Nigeria: Evaluation of the Effectiveness & Impact of SDG 4
Table 4.33: Summary status of SDG4.1 indicators in Nigeria
SDG4 N° SDG4.1 Indicators SDG4 Target in 2030 Current Status of Nige- Appreciation
ria in 2020
Proportion of children and young 100per cent Literacy: G2: 41per Nigeria unlikely to achieve SDG
people (a) in Grade 2 or 3; (b) at the cent; G3: 55per cent target in 2030
4.1.153 end of primary education; and (c) at (NEDS, 202055); G2:
the end of lower secondary educa- 1.2per cent (ES-
tion achieving at least a minimum SPIN proficiency
proficiency level in (i) reading and standard56); Maths:
(ii) mathematics54, by sex G2: 44per cent, G3:
60per cent (NEDS,
2020); G2: 2.5per cent
(ESSPIN proficiency
standard)
4.1.2 Administration of a nationally Present Absent57 Nigeria unlikely to achieve SDG4
representative learning assessment target in 2030
(a) in Grade 2 or 3; (b) at the end of
primary education; and (c) at the
end of lower secondary education
4.1.358 Gross intake ratio to the last grade 100per cent 66.4per cent (MICS Nigeria unlikely to achieve SDG
(primary education, lower second- 2017) target in 2030
ary education)
4.1.4a Net enrolment ratio in primary 100per cent 69.9per cent (NEMIS, Nigeria unlikely to achieve SDG
education 2019) target in 2030
4.1.4b Completion rate (primary educa- 100per cent 63per cent (MICS Nigeria unlikely to achieve SDG
tion, lower secondary education, 2017) target in 2030
upper secondary education)
4.1.5 Out-of-school rate (primary educa- 0per cent 31.3per cent (MICS Nigeria unlikely to achieve SDG
tion, lower secondary education, 2017) target in 2030
upper secondary education)
4.1.6 Percentage of children over-age for 0per cent 31per cent (MICS Nigeria unlikely to achieve SDG
grade (primary education, lower 2017) target in 2030
secondary education)
4.1.7 Number of years of (a) free and (b) Present in legal 6 years primary, 3 Target met: All years of basic
compulsory primary and second- framework years junior second- education are, by law, free and
ary education guaranteed in legal ary59 compulsory
framework
Evaluation question (Impact) Likely strength of evi- Data sources
dence
How and why? What are the drivers of success or shortfalls of access & Medium Literature review, KIIs
quality?
What are the main driving factors of increased completion rate at the Medium Literature review, KIIs
primary school level during the 2011–2013 period?
What are the driving factors of decreased primary school completion rates Medium Literature review, KIIs
in the 2013–2018 period?
Education Commission and the state SUBEBs. According other forms of funding support from the federal level to
to interviews, some measures taken in addressing the build the capacity for education sector management both
barriers and promoting education quality and completion at the state and federal level. Such funding comes from
are policy emphasis on full implementation of the UBE multilateral loans and grants. All of these factors can be
Act; and establishment of UBEC to provide direct funding characterized as supply-side factors.
intervention for school improvement infrastructures; and
88
Evaluation Findings and Analysis
Indicates differences between states that are statistically significant (p≤0.05)61
This leaves social norms, which also overlap with the and Basic Education policies. Similarly, the section below
domain of demand for education. The SDG4 evaluation on the principles of human rights, universality and leaving
report specifically focuses on social norms as also related no one behind (section 3.6) specifically addresses how
to the demand for education; that is, how children and Nigeria’s approach to basic education targets the most
parents indicate and act upon the desire and need for basic financially vulnerable constituents. In addition, document
education – in this case, primary schooling. review demonstrates that dramatic increases have occurred
in school enrolment that supply-side efforts have failed
Demand to fully meet. School enrolment increased dramatically
between 2009 and 2013, especially in northwest states,
Three determinants contribute to this domain of the
including Kaduna and Kano (Ogbanna, 2016). As
MORES framework. These factors are (1) financial access,
highlighted in previous sections of this report, poverty
(2) social and cultural practices and beliefs, and (3) timing
remains an important factor affecting the demand for
and continuity of use.
education. As further explanation, Cambridge Education
underlines findings and offers that many children “are not
Financial access
able to afford the direct costs of participation or wait for
The report explores funding for education as part of the long-term returns that accrue with higher educational
the second effectiveness question above, touching, for achievements” (Cambridge Education, 2020, p. 13). Lee
instance, upon challenges that families face in sending and Crawfurd (2014) report on previous studies conducted
children to school even within the context of Universal on household expenditures related to access by which
89
Education in Nigeria: Evaluation of the Effectiveness & Impact of SDG 4
hidden costs (such as uniforms, transport and lunch) as girls). At the same time, girls cite needing to help out with
well as PTA levies constitute major barriers to education household chores more than boys (45.4 per cent for girls
for poorer families. compared to 38.7 per cent). Girls are also more likely to
report needing to attend social or religious obligations
Data collected from pupils support the prominence of (18.2 per cent to 10.3 per cent). Boys and girls reported
economic issues as barriers to attending school. Given near equal proportions in regard to health issues (45.3
that discussions with parents were outside the scope of per cent for boys compared to 48.5 per cent for girls).
the evaluation, these responses provide critical insights Similarly, analysis related to urban or rural locations also
into demand for basic education. The SDG4 school reveals differences, as rural pupils are also more likely to
survey asked pupils to comment on challenges they may be involved in income-generating activities (35.9 per cent
experience in coming to school. Across the sample, just compared to 13.5 per cent) and household chores (47.6 per
under one quarter of pupils (24.2 per cent) indicated that cent compared to 31.4 per cent). On the other hand, urban
they do encounter issues, though this proportion varied pupils were more likely to identify illness as a challenge to
between 12 per cent in Enugu State and 31.2 per cent in coming to school (53.1 per cent compared to 43.7 per cent
Katsina State, as indicated in Figure 3.15. The top three for rural pupils).
challenges reported were disease/illness/health issues (46.9
per cent of pupils reported “yes”), followed by household Nigeria has the distinction of having the largest number
chores (42.1 per cent) and then income-generating of OOSC worldwide, making up 11 to 20 per cent of
activities (28.3 per cent). These findings emphasize the the world population of OOSC with variation to source,
interconnectedness between health and schooling that we definition of OOSC and methodology. Cambridge
have also explored as part of the first relevance evaluation Education’s 2020 report on the OOSC phenomenon
question above. Although the proportion of children identifies that despite increases in school enrolment, the
who identified payments for school being unaffordable rate of OOSC is estimated to be 27 per cent of all school-
was nearly negligible, the higher proportion of children age Nigerian children. The profile of OOSC varies greatly
identifying income-generating activities recognizes the by geographic region, “from 11 per cent in southern states
opportunity cost of education. to 40 per cent in northern states” with much higher rates
of OOSC within rural areas at 39 per cent of rural boys
Gender-specific analysis of the SDG4 survey shows and 41 per cent of girls compared to 11 and 12 per cent of
that across the sample, boys’ involvement with income- urban boys and girls (p. 13). While the SDG4 evaluation
generating activities may complicate school attendance school survey only reports data about in-school children,
(34.3 per cent for boys compared to 22.2 per cent for the NEDS 2020 report presents interesting findings about
90
Evaluation Findings and Analysis
factors affecting dropout rates for four of the six case- Respondent 1: “For completion, particularly for girls,
study states of the SDG4 evaluation. Like the SDG4 the moment the girl develops fully her secondary sexual
evaluation finding, Figure 3.16 shows that NEDS results characteristics, and there’s a suitor, that’s all. Some
also identified sickness as a major impediment. This parents don’t care because they have that impression
was followed by schooling being too expensive, and for that the education should end in her husband’s house.”
as many as one quarter of pupils in Kaduna State.62 The
Respondent 2: “Now, you have husbands. Why do you
expense of schooling may not be as problematic for pupils
worry?’ Some will claim that, ‘I didn’t prevent her, let
from Katsina (6 per cent), however. Nearly one fifth of
her go and school in her husband’s house!’” (Kano State
respondents (19 per cent) identified insufficiencies in
participants)
teacher supply as a factor for dropout.
Finally, regression analysis of MICS 2016 data reveals that
Social and cultural practices and beliefs
ethnicity other than Hausa correlates strongly with primary
A review of the literature demonstrates that among the school attendance rate and age-appropriate early childhood
factors influencing demand, social and cultural norms have development when comparing low- and high-performing
an important role in shaping the willingness of families to states (by completion rate groupings). A family’s religion
access education. Home and/or community circumstances, also correlates strongly with the rate of right-age children
lifestyles and cultures are recognized among the ‘pull’ at the end of primary and age-appropriate early childhood
factors for which children do not enrol or fail to persist or to development. These results further heighten our attention
achieve in school. In terms of social and cultural norms, key to the relevance of contextual factors and the need
factors that affect families’ demand for public education to take them into account when considering possible
also include religion and culture, particularly in northern interventions. Parental engagement and advocacy efforts
states where “non-secular Islamic and Qur’anic education to prioritize education are critical.
is preferred by some families, and in rural communities
across the nation that still hold strongly to culture and Timing and continuity of use
tradition” (Cambridge Education, 2020, p. 13).
Disruption in demand for education services is a major
impediment to successful completion of the basic
In addition, the MSP identifies social and cultural practices
education cycle. A clear example of education disruption is
and beliefs to be a major barrier to schooling for out-of-
the COVID-19 pandemic, the focus of the last evaluation
school children. The policy identifies how sociocultural
question in this impact section. The COVID-19 pandemic
factors include “negative perception of the importance
affects both the demand for education as well as service
and value of western education as well as the low status
provision, i.e., supply. Findings show that insecurity, the
accorded girl-child education and early marriage” (FMOE,
focus of the sub-section below, has been an even more
2017, p. 28). Similarly, the MSP identifies sociocultural
constant and insidious disruptor for many pupils, educators
beliefs that prevent girls from participating in basic
and communities in Nigeria, particularly in certain of the
education as an inhibiting factor.
SDG4 evaluation case-study states.
While focus group discussions with parents were beyond
Insecurity
the scope of the SDG4 evaluation, interviews with federal
and state-level education officials and non-state actor Insecurity has greatly disrupted many families, particularly
representatives frequently addressed social and cultural in the northeastern part of Nigeria, leading to many
practices and beliefs, including gender norms. Most families becoming internally displaced. Referring to FAO
often, participants referred to beliefs about girls being and ECOWAS documents, the 2020 VNR concludes that
destined for early marriage. For boys in certain states like this situation led to negative effects for food security and
Enugu, it was mentioned that they feel pressure to join gender inequality. Moreover, in areas under continued
the workforce as quickly as possible (see gender equality militant control, girls’ access to education is further limited
evaluation question below for more details). A discussion (FRN, 2020).
between a small group of KII participants in Kano State
provides a glimpse into conversations that may happen
within certain families:
91
Education in Nigeria: Evaluation of the Effectiveness & Impact of SDG 4
Several data sources emphasize insecurity as a barrier armed criminals. The security challenge was identified as
to educational quality and learners’ duration within the an important factor that affects the declining completion
education system. As one federal education official pointed rate in these states at different periods. There are parts of
out, Kaduna, like Briningwari, where pupils have not attended
school since 2011. This has slowed down enrolment,
“In some parts of the country, it is, you know, on retention and completion particularly in rural areas that
a downward trajectory for some of the reasons I are seriously affected by kidnapping of schoolchildren and
mentioned. For instance, the Boko Haram, issue of the
banditry. Kwara State has not recorded any case of banditry
kidnapping, you know, for some of the states, especially
or pupil kidnapping. However, interviews indicate that
in the northeast. States like maybe Yobe, Adamawa,
Kwara State is increasingly witnessing cases of sexual
states like Katsina, states like Sokoto, and Zamfara. …
violence, rape, bullying and drugs in schools.
In this particular area, you are talking about issues – you
know, even the issue of the enrolment, because when
Drivers and barriers to quality
you have an unstable environment, obviously education
would be the first to be affected. (Federal official)”
The MORES framework determinant domains pertaining
to quality of education are supply and quality. The domain
In addition, head teachers surveyed by the SDG4 school of supply shines light on the infrastructures and human
survey also reported on school closures lasting more than resources that make up the education system. An analysis
two weeks since September 2018 that were not related to of quality of education has been conducted in relation to
COVID-19. Among the 480 head teachers who responded learning outcomes in the first impact evaluation question
to the school survey, 104 reported school closures, above. Here, we briefly report on findings from the
representing 17.5 per cent of the weighted sample. Nearly SDG4 evaluation school survey that relate to supportive
all head teachers in Katsina (92.4 per cent) reported school and hindering factors for pupils’ performance from the
closures since 2018, followed by 15 per cent of head perspective of head teachers, before turning to data on
teachers in Enugu and 12.5 per cent of head teachers in infrastructure and human resources.
Zamfara. By far, insecurity was the most common reason
for extended school closures for four of the states. All General supporting and hindering factors
head teachers in Kaduna (100 per cent) who reported non-
Before closely examining infrastructure and human
COVID closures chose insecurity as the reason, followed
resource factors, this report briefly examines teachers’
by nearly all of Katsina State head teachers (98.6 per cent),
understanding of elements that both support and hinder
83.3 per cent of Kano head teachers and just under two
education quality and pupil performance. We also briefly
thirds of Zamfara head teachers (60.0 per cent). Insecurity
examine the relationship between household wealth and
was not reported as a reason for extensive school closures
school performance.
in either Enugu or Kwara State.
Head teachers’ perspective on determinant factors
Interviews with state officials within the six case-study
states provide additional context for understanding the
As part of the SDG4 evaluation school survey, head
scope and ramifications of insecurity on the education
teachers identified factors that they thought may possibly
system. Officials in Katsina, Zamfara and Kaduna indicated
contribute to improved pupil learning since 2016. As Figure
that insecurity poses an existential threat, particularly in
24 depicts, across all six states, the highest proportion of
the rural areas, where many schools have closed down due
head teachers chose improved teacher practice (57.8 per
to insurgency attacks and banditry. Some schools have
cent), followed by the national school feeding programme
been converted to IDP (internally displaced persons)
(42.9 per cent) and contributions from external donors or
camps or military bases. The security challenges are
programmes, all supply-side factors. Overall, just over a
eroding the successes recorded by various interventions
quarter (26.4 per cent) of head teachers identified improved
from donors and programmes of the government. Out of
parental engagement as having a positive influence. This
34 local governments in Katsina State, nine have been
is a demand-side factor.
completely taken over by insurgents and bandits, and
schools have been closed in the affected LGAs. In Zamfara,
There is great variation between state results
most schools in rural areas are hard to reach due to fear of
notwithstanding that Kwara State did not participate in the
92
Evaluation Findings and Analysis
National Home-Grown School Feeding programme. The factors for pupil learning. Still, for the sample at large, more
largest gap between states concerns the contribution of the than a quarter of head teachers interviewed identified
school feeding programme (a difference of 55 per cent in three factors: (1) lack of adequate materials (45.4 per cent),
the proportion of head teachers who identify this factor in (2) school closures related to COVID-19 (34.9 per cent),
Kano and the proportion in Enugu). The second largest and (3) the suspension of the national school feeding
gap concerns external donor support. The proportion of programme (26.4 per cent). These are supply-side factors.
head teachers in Kaduna, Kano and Zamfara is around one As Figure 3.18 illustrates, there is great variation among
third and over one half for Katsina, compared to 6.2 per state responses. For example, a considerably higher
cent of head teachers in Enugu and 17.5 per cent in Kwara proportion of head teachers in Enugu and Kwara States
States who cite external donor support as contributing to pointed to inadequate materials as a contributing factor
improved pupil learning since 2016. These differences when compared to the mean (63.7 per cent and 61.3
may reflect the coverage of the school feeding programme per cent, respectively, compared to 45.4 per cent). State
in Enugu State as well as the concentration of development variation is also noticeable concerning how COVID-19
and crisis assistance in the Northwest Region. may have contributed to reducing pupil learning as well
as for the suspension of the home-grown school feeding
Head teachers participating in the SDG4 school survey also programme. Finally, head teachers in Katsina were more
provided insights about factors they feel may contribute likely to identify insecurity as a problem, followed by head
to weakened pupil learning since 2016. In general, there teachers in Zamfara State (40.5 per cent and 23.8 per cent,
was less consensus about these factors than for supportive respectively).
Figure 3.17: Factors contributing to improved learning outcomes, according to head teachers (%), by state
Improved teacher practice*
National Home-Grown school
feeding programme*
External donors/programs*
Improved parental engagemen t
Increase in # of teachers*
Improved tracking of student progress*
Use of national languages for instruction*
Reduction or elimination of school fees*
0.0% 10.0% 20.0% 30.0% 40.0% 50.0% 60.0% 70.0% 80.0%
Total ZAMFARA KWARA KATSINA KANO KADUNA ENUGU
Indicates differences between states that are statistically significant (p≤0.05)
93
Education in Nigeria: Evaluation of the Effectiveness & Impact of SDG 4
Brief examination of the relationship between Table 3.34 presents financial poverty indicators alongside
household SES and pupil performance basic education indicators. Proficiency levels draw from
both NEDS 2020 data and the SDG4 evaluation school
While the later human rights evaluation question
survey results using the NEDS benchmark approach. (See
investigates in greater detail the relationship between
the first impact question for an explanation.)
household socioeconomic status and pupil performance,
94
Evaluation Findings and Analysis
Analysis of these data shows, however, that enrolment resources to encourage and sustain school enrolment,
doesn’t seem to be linked to the poverty rate as we do completion and learning outcomes. School supply has an
not see the NER fluctuating alongside poverty indicators. impact on both pupil access, because distance to school is
Rather, poverty seems more linked to learning outcomes. a major factor in children’s non-enrolment, and on school
This confirms the relationship we find below between quality, since insufficient schools to satisfy demand for
SES and proficiency scores in literacy and numeracy. (See schooling can lead to overcrowded classrooms (Lee and
human rights evaluation questions below for that analysis.) Crawfurd, 2014, p. 32).
Infrastructure (supply-side) The evaluation team again turned to NDES data in order
to view change in classroom availability over time. Table
In terms of infrastructure, multiple sources demonstrate
3.35 lists the number of classrooms existent within each
that there remain major impediments to education
of the six case-study states and nationally between 2017
provision. These include insufficient schools, particularly
and 2019.
in rural areas, inadequate infrastructure, facilities and
Table 4.34: Comparative analysis of household financial poverty with education performance indicators of basic education in Nigeria
and in six case-study states
Incidence Basic Edu-
of HH cation Per-
Financial formance
Poverty in indicator
State
2019
Poverty Poverty Net En- Profi- Profi- Profi- Profi- Profi- Profi- Proficiency
Head- Gap Index rolment ciency ciency ciency ciency ciency ciency level SDG eval-
count Ratio level level level level level level uation 2020
Rate NEDS NEDS NEDS SDG SDG SDG – using NEDS
2020 - 2020 - 2020 evalua- evalua- evalua- benchmark –
Literacy Compre- - Numer- tion 2020 tion 2020 tion 2020 P4 Numeracy
hension acy – using – using – using
NEDS NEDS NEDS
bench- bench- bench-
mark mark mark
– P2 – P2 – P4
Literacy Numer- Literacy
acy
Low-per-
forming
states
Kano 55.08 15.24 98.1 35 22 32 30 39 41 43
Zamfara 73.98 24.95 57.8 28 20 22 18 34 41 33
Transi-
tioning
states
Katsina 56.42 16.18 98.29 25 14 22 47 40 64 51
Enugu 58.13 16 66.54 N/A N/A N/A 92 96 92 98
High Per-
forming
states
Kwara 20.35 4.45 45.47 N/A N/A N/A 84 93 84 45
Kaduna 43.48 15.51 93.22 44 30 51 N/A N/A 70 74
Nigeria 40.09 12.85 69.86 N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A
95
Education in Nigeria: Evaluation of the Effectiveness & Impact of SDG 4
Analysis shows that there are fluctuations in the data year- however, the trends seen in Table 3.36 support the trends
to-year. In addition, there is cause for concern that some of depicted in Table 3.35 related to classroom availability.
the data may be incorrect given the large changes. It is rare
that so many classrooms would come out of service at one SDG4 evaluation school survey findings further
time. Kano, for instance, lost nearly 21,000 classrooms over demonstrate that the situation in the six case-study states
a three-year period. Similarly, these data show that Kaduna needs attention. Findings go beyond the availability of
gained over 73,000 classrooms. It is unlikely that these classrooms to investigate other important elements. Table
data correctly reflect the situation on the ground. Kaduna 3.37 summarizes these findings. Notably, most of the
State is experiencing major problems with insecurity surveyed schools do not have access to electricity (with the
and insurgents and it is not possible for the state to have exception of Kano, where electricity was available in 38.8
developed this number of classrooms in that time. While per cent of schools visited). In all states, except Katsina
interesting, these data are not very realistic and require and Kwara, about one fifth of schools have makeshift
additional triangulation. classrooms. Libraries (or collections of books for the pupils
to read) are also not widely available; the figure ranges
Similarly, the evaluation team investigated changes in the from 28.7 per cent of schools in Kaduna with a library to
pupil-classroom ratio during the same period of time. Table 42.5 per cent in Kano. In Kano, the state with seemingly
3.36 presents these data better access of children to printed materials, one child out
of two still does not have access to supplementary reading
Again, analysis of pupil-classroom ratios showed large materials at school.
fluctuations, particularly between 2018 and 2019, when
both Kano and Zamfara States seem to have experienced In addition, findings on the status of available infrastructure
either an increase in the school-going population and/ indicate additional cause for concern. In all the states the
or a decrease in the number of classrooms available. On majority of the available facilities are in need of repair, as
the other hand, Kaduna and Katsina States in particular shown in Table 3.38, thus providing an additional burden to
reported important decreases in the pupil-classroom ratio. education quality. Most alarming, the state of the school’s
In the case of Kaduna, the number of pupils per classroom roof or ceiling necessitates repair at the majority of schools
decreased from 83 pupils in 2017 to 15 pupils in 2019. This surveyed. This proportion ranges from two thirds of schools
change, if accompanied by other supportive determinant in Zamfara and Kano to more than 90 per cent (91.2 per
factors, might suggest improved educational quality. cent) of schools in Kwara State. Classroom walls are also in
Nonetheless, as with the above results, the magnitude of need of repair in the majority of schools. Kano’s school walls
the changes raises concerns about the validity. Overall, are in the best shape, as just over half require attention, yet
Table 4.35: Number of primary education classrooms in Nigeria by state (2017–2019)
State # Classrooms (2017) # Classrooms (2018) # Classrooms (2019) Change (2017-
2019)
Low-performing states
Kano 30,679 35,282 9,927 -20,752
Zamfara 6,324 7,654 6,487 163
Transitioning states
Katsina 13,831 17,714 15,772 1,941
Enugu 7,558 7,902 7,485 -73
High-performing states
Kwara 10,784 8,455 8,703 -2,081
Kaduna 18,513 21,984 92,018 73,505
National 461,632 406,778 458,287 -3,345
Source: NDES, 2017, 2018, 2019
96
Evaluation Findings and Analysis
Table 4.36: Pupil-classroom ratios from 2017 to 2019 for primary education, by case-study state
State # Pupils/ classroom # Pupils/ classroom # Pupils/ classroom (2019) Change (2017-
(2017) (2018) 2019)
Low-performing states
Kano 94 79 328 234
Zamfara 95 63 100 5
Transitioning states
Katsina 116 90 95 -21
Enugu 24 20 23 -1
High-performing states
Kwara 19 18 16 -3
Kaduna 83 59 15 -68
National 46 40 45 -1
Source: NDES, 2017, 2018, 2019
Table 4.37: Availability of infrastructure elements within case-study states
State Electricity Makeshift classrooms Library (or collec- Fence or bound- Playground
tion of books) ary wall
Low-performing states
Kano 38.80per cent 21.20per cent 38.80per cent 48.80per cent 67.50per cent
Zamfara 12.50per cent 21.20per cent 28.70per cent 23.80per cent 61.30per cent
Transitioning states
Katsina 10.10per cent 6.30per cent 30.40per cent 19.00per cent 81.00per cent
Enugu 8.80per cent 18.80per cent 42.50per cent 12.50per cent 90per cent
High-performing states
Kwara 25.00per cent 11.20per cent 30.00per cent 26.20per cent 83.80per cent
Kaduna 8.80per cent 20.00per cent 28.70per cent 27.50per cent 82.50per cent
Overall 22.2per cent 17.1per cent 33.4per cent 32.1per cent 76.3per cent
Table 4.38: School infrastructure in need of repair, by proportion of schools within sample
State Fence or boundary Windows Roof or ceiling Classroom walls Playground
wall
Low-performing states
Kano 30.80per cent 62.50per cent 67.50per cent 55.00per cent 11.20per cent
Zamfara 42.10per cent 78.80per cent 67.50per cent 71.20per cent 72.50per cent
Transitioning states
Katsina 46.70per cent 82.30per cent 84.80per cent 75.90per cent 87.30per cent
Enugu 70.00per cent 83.80per cent 80.00per cent 80.00per cent 43.80per cent
High-performing states
Kwara 71.40per cent 92.50per cent 91.20per cent 86.20per cent 67.50per cent
Kaduna 50.00per cent 73.80per cent 77.50per cent 78.80per cent 56.20per cent
Overall 43per cent 75.4per cent 76.9per cent 71.2per cent 40.2per cent
97
Education in Nigeria: Evaluation of the Effectiveness & Impact of SDG 4
this proportion is close to, or higher than, three quarters for and 2016 Annual Education Sector Performance Review
all other states. (AESPR) documents and they highlight a failure to provide
adequate facilities for pupils as well as a failure to make
These findings, however, contradict some findings from progress towards improving the situation. Toilets and
key informant interviews with state- and federal-level sanitary facilities can be considered particularly important
actors. For example, education officials in Kaduna, Katsina as this issue disproportionately affects female pupils, who,
and Kwara States spoke about how efforts to improve in the absence of sanitary and private toilet facilities, are
infrastructure have contributed to improved educational more likely to be absent from school or drop out due to
quality. An education official in Kwara, for instance, spoke menstruation. Data from the SDG4 school survey show a
at length about the integrated school development model similar picture, as indicated in Table 3.39.
that they had initiated:
The gender equality evaluation question below investigates
The state then identified three things. To have a high this issue in further detail.
learning outcome you need: (1) the infrastructure, (2)
adequacy of staffing, (3) adequacy of physical facilities; Human resources
and we are talking about institutional management
development. These are the three things. There was a The SDG4 evaluation team sought to better understand
very heavy investment in infrastructure, there was a very the supply of teachers to support basic education provision.
high-level commitment from the state government. The While the evaluation team has some concerns about the
people at the helm of the affairs understood very well the reliability of NDES data, as stated elsewhere in this report,
scheme and there was adequate and proper monitoring NDES data allow for analysis over time. Table 3.40 presents
and supervision. (Education Official, Kwara State)
the number of teachers in Nigeria, as well as in each of the
six case-study states between 2015 and 2019.
Among other possibilities, this contradiction may suggest
that the dismal state of schools’ infrastructure is still Analysis shows that the number of teachers increased in five
an improvement over the previous situation or that of the six states while decreasing for Enugu and nationwide
infrastructure efforts were limited in their reach. by around 5 per cent. At the same time, three of the states
demonstrate nominal changes that are less than Nigeria’s
WASH facilities (supply-side)
population growth rate, estimated at 2.6 per cent for 2019
(World Bank, 2019). In addition, the data are reflective of
WASH facilities require special mention as they constitute
events in the education sector in Kaduna between 2017 and
an important enabling factor for access to education,
2019, where teachers who failed a competency test were
especially for girls. The GPE First Annual Report for
laid off and a new set of teachers who passed through a
Nigeria (Turner et al., 2019) presents data from 2015
Table 4.39: Availability of toilets at SDG4 evaluation sampled schools (mean)
State Toilets available Toilets for girls
Mean Mean
Low-performing states
Kano 4.8 3.2
Zamfara 4.3 2.5
Transitioning states
Katsina 6 3.1
Enugu 3.6 2.5
High-performing states
Kwara 2.5 1.9
Kaduna 4 3.3
Overall 3.7 2.8
98
Evaluation Findings and Analysis
Table 4.40: Teacher coverage in Nigeria from 2015 to 2019 for primary education, by case-study state
State # Teachers # Teachers # Teachers (2017) # Teachers (2018) # Teachers (2019) Change (2015-
(2015) (2016) 2019)
Low-performing
states
Kano 45,772 45,802 40,053 19,009 46,520 1.6per cent
Zamfara 9,632 9,315 8,951 13,105 9,742 1.1per cent
Transitioning states
Katsina 19,274 19,435 21,468 25,044 27,423 42.3per cent
Enugu 11,133 10,415 9,779 10,179 10,491 -5.8per cent
High-performing
states
Kwara 13,959 12,849 12,927 13,807 14,369 2.9per cent
Kaduna 32,938 34,004 32,060 25,896 37,937 15.2per cent
National 567,380 542,533 472,077 594,653 543,688 -4.2per cent
Source: NDES, 2015, 2016, 2017, 2018, 2019
Table 4.41: Pupil-teacher ratios from 2015 to 2019 for primary education, by case-study state
State # Pupils/ teacher # Pupils/ teach- # Pupils/ teacher # Pupils/ teach- # Pupils/ teacher Change
(2015) er (2016) (2017) er (2018) (2019) (2015-2019)
Low-performing states
Kano 56.1 59.4 72 161 71.2 26.9per
cent
Zamfara 49.5 51.4 67.1 39.7 68.3 38.0per
cent
Transitioning states
Katsina 80.2 76 74.7 71.6 71.6 -10.7per
cent
Enugu 15.9 16.7 18.5 17.3 17.1 7.5per cent
High-performing states
Kwara 14.3 15.7 15.9 12.9 12.6 -11.9per
cent
Kaduna 35.8 41.8 47.9 59.6 48.1 34.4per
cent
National 36.6 41.2 45 37.6 44.7 22.1per
cent
Source: NDES, 2019
competitive process were recruited instead. Also, Katsina Results show high variability between states. In 2019,
demonstrates a large jump as the number of teachers pupil-teacher ratios ranged from 12.6 pupils per teacher in
available in the state nearly doubled between 2015 and Kwara to 71.6 pupils per teacher in Katsina State. Figures in
2019. red within the change column indicate increases that would
likely be detrimental to the quality of education while
In addition, study of pupil-teacher ratios provide insights green text indicates a positive change. Between 2015 and
about how the system is able to respond to increases in 2019, three of the case-study states as well as the national
enrolment. Again, NDES provides these data for 2015– aggregate increased the pupil-teacher ratio in a way that
2019 as depicted in Table 3.41. may detract from quality teaching and learning. Two states,
99
Education in Nigeria: Evaluation of the Effectiveness & Impact of SDG 4
Enugu and Kwara State, demonstrated changes that stay teacher training. Education officials make the connection
within an acceptable range for pupil-teacher ratios. In between qualified and trained teachers and educational
Katsina State, the ratio decreased between 2015 and 2019, quality. As a non-state actor from Kaduna State pointed
a positive change, yet the ratio still remains the highest out:
of the six case-study states. In general, the increases far
exceed Nigeria’s population growth, and again, further Kaduna State is now employing more qualified teachers
as we speak. Because the moment we have teachers
investigation is warranted in order to confirm data validity,
that know what they are doing, they are able to engage
particularly for Kwara State values which seem to be very
learners better. A conducive learning environment,
low.
which also helps to take away that violence in schools …
So, it helps to keep the children in school, gives parents
Teacher qualifications (supply-side) encouragement that their children are learning and for
them to encourage children to go to school. (Kaduna
The recent 2020 Voluntary National Review (VNR)
non-state actor)
identifies important successes addressing human
resources within the education sector. These include a The next section provides a more nuanced investigation of
teacher certification policy that has helped teachers to how changes to the education sector may have varied over
obtain minimum qualifications, well-stocked libraries the time period central to the SDG4 evaluation.
for many schools and strong relationships between the
government and other stakeholders, including civil society Availability of Learning Materials (supply-side)
organizations. Nonetheless, the literature continues to
The Education Policy (2004) didn’t make a mandatory
point out that many Nigerian teachers are not adequately
provision of education text books and numeracy books to
trained and do not have the necessary teaching and learning
all primary school. Access of pupils to learning materials
materials at their disposal to assure adequate instructional
depends on the financial capacity of parents. The ratio
quality. In addition, weaknesses in the teacher recruitment
of learning material per pupil still very low in Nigeria.
and deployment system lead to imbalances in teacher-
Text Book is the major learning resource used in school
pupil ratios across the educational system (Ogbanna, 2016;
by teachers. This gap or inequality of access to text books
FRN, 2020). The supply of trained teachers and their
by children due to the high HH poverty, represents a key
deployment across the country, along with appropriate
determinant constraining factor of quality of education in
management, remains a challenge in many areas and is a
Nigeria.
contributing factor to the high number of out-of-school
youth in Nigeria (Cambridge Education, 2020).
Language of Instructions
NDES data also demonstrate increasing levels of The National Policy on Education established in 1977 and
appropriate teacher qualification in recent years. In the enshrined in the 1979 Constitution and Political Bureau
SDG4 survey, state analysis shows that in all states the Report in 1987, establishes the delivery of learning and
majority of teachers have a Senior Secondary Certificate teaching in the Mother Tongue or Language of Immediate
Examination (SSCE) (from 79.7 per cent in Katsina to 53.8 Environment (L1) from Primary 1 to Primary 3; and from
per cent in Kano). Data for Kaduna, Kano and Katsina show Primary 4 to Primary 6 in English (L2).
that no sampled school within these states has unqualified
teachers, though Enugu shows a worrying 12.5 per cent of Findings of the study on language in education in
teachers without an academic qualification. At the same Nigeria undertaken by UNICEF in 2021 in 8 selected
time, these results for Enugu may be unreliable simply states revealed the weakness of transition from Mother
because many respondents selected “other” when asked Tongue to English in education as stated in the executive
this question. summary report of the study: “The main findings of this
study reveal that there is non-compliance to the provisions
While the section below provides additional details about of the National Policy on Education (NPE) relating to
how states are addressing teacher capacity reinforcement, transition from Mother Tongue (L1) to English (L2)
qualitative data from KIIs underline that development between Primary 3 and Primary 4 by all schools; rather the
partners, in particular, have provided necessary support for use of dual medium transition for teaching and learning
100
Evaluation Findings and Analysis
is adopted for classroom practice;…the practice of code- As noted in the background section above, the SDG4
switching by teachers during classroom teaching and evaluation period included some major shocks, such as a
learning to explain or emphasize difficult concepts by the major recession in 2016, a fall in crude oil prices between
major language of immediate environment, differs across 2016 and 2020 and increasing security problems beginning
the states: for example, Hausa in the North-East and West in 2016. In addition, 2015 marked the end of the MDGs
(Bauchi, Taraba, Kano and Sokoto); Tiv in specific areas and 2016 marked the beginning of the application of the
in Benue State in the North-Central; Igbo in the South- SDG agenda.
East (Imo); Yoruba in South-West (Osun); and Kalabari and
Obollo in specific areas of South-South (in Port-Harcourt Key informant interviews, specifically, provide the bulk
and Andoni respectively)”. of the data for responding to these questions. In the field,
the evaluation team encountered multiple challenges in
This inappropriate application of language transition and obtaining relevant secondary data from government sources.
code switching among states of Nigeria affects the quality First of all, completion rate trends varied significantly
of Education and mostly Pupils Leaning Outcomes as between states. As Figure 3.13 indicates, Enugu and
demonstrated by the language study in education. Zamfara States experienced major decreases in their
completion rates in 2013 while other states experienced
Information from fieldwork observations from the areas of them in 2016. In the case of some states, the decrease has
study indicate that there is no school at the basic primary been relatively minor and completion rates have plateaued
level that teaches Reading and L1 subjects in Mother rather than decreased. In addition, for respondents,
Tongue (MT) or LIE. Some government schools that recalling the situation back to 2013 was challenging, due in
adopt English as Medium of Education (EME) do not part to mobility and turnover within the education system
teach reading as a subject. Apart from the schools that are and for development partner staff, but also simply because
currently, running a donor-based intervention programme of the length of time that had passed. When conducting
in Kano, Bauchi, and Sokoto; and in Andoni in Rivers State interviews, the evaluation team presented Figure 3.13 to
(a community funded project), Reading is not part of the participants and discussed the statistics presented in order
basic education curriculum in the schools that participated to better ground the conversation. Nonetheless, during at
in the study. Similarly, schools that adopt the use of MT or least five interviews with various stakeholders, participants
LiE do not also teach Reading as a subject. were unable to comment because they did not feel they had
enough mastery of the data. In addition, one development
Teachers Supervision and Monitoring and Mentoring partner representative acknowledged that the trajectory
had not been clear across the states, but that it had varied.
From the classroom observation, it reveals that there is weak
Education officials in Kano State disagreed outright with
system of teachers monitoring & mentoring and classroom-
the MICS and DHS findings that informed Figure 3.13.
based support to teachers to deliver quality learning, which
Rather, they argued that completion rates had been steadily
contributes to poor quality learning outcomes. The SUBEB
increasing. These challenges aside, findings reveal some
and the LGEA should ensure grassroot monitoring of
useful information about how various drivers have changed
the implementation of the NPE provisions on education
during the time frame of the SDG4 evaluation.
across all schools within their various areas of coverage or
jurisdiction to enforce implementation of the policies by
Drivers leading to positive improvements
all schools – both private and public as there is the current
practice of non-compliance with the policies by so many In regard to positive improvements, some stakeholders
schools. pointed to supply-side improvements in infrastructure (as
noted above) and improved teacher quality. Actors from
Close investigation of drivers of increased and Enugu, Kaduna, Katsina and Kwara States specifically
decreased completion rates over time mentioned the latter. In addition, it is noteworthy that non-
state actors in Kaduna indicated that accountability of the
The original Impact 4 and Impact 5 evaluation questions
state government to non-state organizations has also grown
specifically addressed driving factors of increased
in this time period.
primary completion rates during the 2011–2013 period
and decreased completion rates between 2013 and 2018.
101
Education in Nigeria: Evaluation of the Effectiveness & Impact of SDG 4
Development partner interventions economy and on enrolment and completion. As indicated
above, findings from KIIs generally acknowledged the
Without doubt, however, the most common response among
interdependence of multiple drivers affecting education
stakeholders when asked to what they attribute post-2016
outcomes. As a high-level FMOE official pointed out:
changes was the supply-side intervention of development
partners. The HGSFP also surfaced within findings, but not Yes, when we have prolonged school closures or prolonged
to the extent that NGO-led projects did. KII participants strikes based on the state governments not meeting their
referenced projects that included ESSPIN, GEP, UNICEF, salary obligations to teachers, it also leads to those lower
NIPEP, the World Bank and the Qatar Foundation, among completion rates. And you see that there will even be
others. Most notably, many respondents applauded the variation from state to state. So, these are some of the
ESSPIN project, and in particular its implementation and other factors. Even when the economy goes down, you
support of SBMCs. Of the six case-study states, Enugu, know, people are now having difficulties fending for
Kaduna, Kano and Kwara participated in the then-DFID themselves. They begin to withdraw their children from
school because (A) they don’t have money to pay for the
funded ESSPIN project from 2008 to 2017. In addition,
fees anymore, but (B) because they need their labour to
Katsina and Zamfara KII participants also spoke about the
augment the family income. So, these local factors tend
importance of development partner support for SBMCs.
to affect them. …That is why we believe that holistic
As an illustration, when asked what changes in education,
approach... There’s no silver bullet. You cannot say I am
access, completion, equity and quality have occurred since
hitting one, therefore, everything will fall in place. You
2016, a Kano official described how SBMCs had been
have to be attacking all the various challenges that you
influential in the following way:
face and from time to time they improve as other things
improved. (FMOE Senior Official)
[Through] collaboration with development partners,
stakeholders of the state and collaboration with SBMC,
In addition to the findings above, KII respondents from
with the community is another way. When I say SBMC, I
Kaduna, Katsina, Kwara and Zamfara States, in particular,
mean the community that surrounds the school, I mean
spoke at length about how the challenging insecurity
the Parent Teacher Association, because Parent Teacher
situation has impacted the education sector. Federal actors
and SBMC are together. So, using them in the aspect of
educational activities also enhanced this progress. (Kano also acknowledged the disruption that insecurity has
Education Official) caused. A respondent from Katsina, for instance, shared the
following:
Like this official, the majority of interview participants also
One of the things that give rise to the figures that
spoke of sensitization of parents as a key factor in achieving
you quoted earlier, most of them were the rural areas
success during this time period.
and now the rural areas are the worst hit in terms of
insecurity, especially the banditry … And most of them
Drivers leading to decreases in positive indicators are displaced in fact … many of their parents have been
killed …, so many of them have lost their means of
While some respondents indicated that they were not
livelihood. (Katsina participant)
in a position to comment on the reasons for decreases in
key education indicators, like enrolment, completion Zamfara officials also pointed out that the decrease in
and transition rates, others pointed to contextual factors completion rates for their state took place earlier and they
that included the recession, insecurity and changes in blamed insecurity.
administration. For instance, two development partner
representatives, in Kano and Katsina, respectively, In addition, respondents also cited competition between
commented on how the recession has complicated private and public schools for pupils and teachers as having
education delivery and take-up, both supply- and demand- a negative effect on public schools. A development partner
side factors. They noted that children have needed to step and officials from Enugu State made this claim. One official
in to contribute as earners to help their families. While data from Enugu further explained how parents may wish to
are not yet available to support the claim, it is likely that the send their children to private school for junior secondary
economic effects of the COVID-19 pandemic and imposed school (a demand-side consideration) and in doing so,
prevention measures may also have similar effects on the their child skips a primary grade, thereby not finishing the
102
Evaluation Findings and Analysis
primary school cycle. Participants also pointed to PTA levies participating schools. Similarly, the programme suffers from
as having a negative effect on enrolment and completion. implementation inconsistencies that require attention. At
(See the second effectiveness evaluation questions above the time of writing, the NHGSFP was still suspended due
and the human rights evaluation question below for greater to the pandemic.
detail.)
The evaluation team turned to various sources to inform
Lastly, just as KII participants indicated above that the response to this question, including document review,
development partner interventions contributed to key informant interviews and learning assessment results
improved education outcomes, some also identified the specific to investigating the impact of the HGSFP. At the
end of development projects as the reason for outcomes same time, information was sparse, particularly for the
subsequently declining. Two federal-level participants Social Cash Assistance programme. None of the documents
made this assertion, which also has implications for available to the evaluation team directly identified
sustainability. One of them provided the following reason expected results or a results framework. For this reason,
for decreasing trends: the evaluation team interprets this question to explore
possible effects of the flagship programmes most relevant
Another thing could be, take for instance, in Kano, like to education. As this section will demonstrate, there is
now you mentioned Kano, I want to tell you as we are
more information about the school feeding programme,
speaking, now if you go to Kano, you find more than five
and though comments were positive about the programme,
or ten projects from IDPs. Now, at this time, because of this
there is little evidence that the programme positively
project deal with schools they will have a lot of enrolment,
but there won’t be sustainability from the start. As soon affects learning outcomes.
as these projects end, 1 year, 2 years, because there’s
no sustainability, all the dust will go back. So maybe As background, a 2019 impact evaluation and occasional
within this period, there a lot of interventions and all of
mention of cash transfers in KIIs also provided some useful
a sudden, the interventions are no more and there there’s
data. As background, the 2017 ERGP recognized achieving
no sustainability. (Federal Education Official)
macroeconomic stability to be a key execution priority for
The evaluation team will revisit the role of development the Nigerian government. This would require changes to
partners within the final sustainability evaluation question. social policies, including education, that would “invigorate
3.5.4 the economy and enhance human capital” (Federal
Government of Nigeria, 2019, p. 4). These flagship
Imp3: To what extent did the following flagship policies initiatives align not only with the SDG goals but also with
and programmes of the education sector achieve overall Nigeria’s goal of being a top economy by 2030.
expected results: Home-grown School Feeding Programme,
Social Cash Assistance to poorest families, etc.? Both the Nigerian National Cash Transfer Programme
(NCCT) and the NHGSFP began in 2016. The government
Conclusion
implements the CCT in 33 states and the school feeding
program in 34 states (National Home-Grown School Feeding
The National Home-Grown School Feeding Programme
Programme (NHGSFP), 2020, p. 2). The programmes were
(NHGSFP) is the most prominent flagship programme
originally implemented by the Office of the Vice President,
related to education. While NHGSFP reports also
but were transferred to the Ministry of Humanitarian,
demonstrate enrolment increases, analysis of learning
Disaster Management and Social Development in 2019 in
outcomes shows little improvement for participating
order to promote institutionalization. The CCT aims to (1)
schools within the SDG4 school sample compared to non-
improve household consumption; (2) increase utilization of
Evaluation question (Impact) Likely strength of evi- Data sources
dence
To what extent did the following flagship policies and programmes of the Medium Literature review, KIIs
education sector achieve overall expected results: Home-Grown School
Feeding Programme, Social Cash Assistance to poorest families, etc.?
103
Education in Nigeria: Evaluation of the Effectiveness & Impact of SDG 4
health and nutrition services; (3) improve school enrolment government has succeeded in improving enrolment rates,
and attendance; (4) Improve environmental sanitation and particularly for girls. Some also argue that retention has
management; (5) encourage household financial and asset increased. While, by design, the HGSFP only provides for
acquisition; and (6) engage beneficiaries in sustainable limited grades, P1–3 findings demonstrate that three state
livelihood (Federal Government of Nigeria, 2019, p. 15). governments provide school lunches for the remaining
Beneficiaries are poor and vulnerable members of the grades of the primary cycles (P4–6). They are Enugu, Kano
population and they receive N5,000 per month in the hope and Kwara States. Kwara officials indicated that they intend
of lifting them out of poverty. to cover the upper three grades when the programme
initiates. Kano officials also explained that the state began a
The NHGSFP addresses five federal government school feeding programme around 2000 supporting Grades
priority areas: (1) Expand access to education; (2) enlarge 1–3 and then shifted to the upper grades when the federal
agricultural output; (3) enhance social inclusion; (4) reduce programme began.
poverty; and (5) build a thriving economy. The NHGSFP
has as its target 12 million children while the National Key informant interview data most frequently indicate
Cash Transfer Programme (NCTP) targets one million of that flagship programmes, the HGSFP in particular,
the poorest households. The NHGSFP is funded by the increased enrolment. Fewer stakeholders commented on
Nigerian government. The programme provides free school cash transfer programmes, but they also associate these
lunches to pupils in P1–3 in participating states. The aims with development partners like UNICEF and GPE. One
of the programme are as follows: education official in Katsina spoke from his professional
experience, but also as a father. He indicated how the
It is expected that by improving their health through school feeding programme has provided his own children
regular and hygienic feeding, their level of enrolment in with incentives:
school, as well as their ability to learn and comprehend
properly, is significantly improved. The programme, by
I also frankly encouraged my little two twin daughters, to
extension, also aims to empower unemployed, often go to school as early as possible … they say, ‘Teacher says
unskilled low-income women by hiring them as cooks if you come early, you get food with meat; if you come
to prepare and provide the meals to the pupils and late, you get food without meat.’ (Katsina Education
support local farmers by ensuring the cooks utilize locally Official)
produced farm inputs in preparing and providing meals
Impact reports for both programmes substantiate claims of
to the pupils. (NHGSFP impact evaluation, slide 263)
increased enrolment. The 2019 impact evaluation of the
CCT found that 7 per cent more beneficiaries have at least
Of the six case-study states for the SDG4 evaluation, only
one child in school compared to non-beneficiaries (Nigeria
Kaduna and Zamfara participated in the NCCT programme
Policy Innovation Unit, 2019). The 2019 impact evaluation
and five participated in the school feeding programme at the
of the school feeding programme also identified that the
time of the evaluation. Kwara did not, although education
initiative led to an increase in enrolment of 1,922,593
officials indicated that the state had recently launched the
pupils between 2017 and 2019 (21 per cent increase).
programme. They explained that the hesitancy had been
The NHGSFP impact report also found improvements in
due to political disagreements between the previous state
pupil attendance and academic performance at the schools
administration and the federal government. At the time of
where the programme is offered. (We investigate learning
writing, the school feeding programme was suspended in
outcomes separately below.) The report notes that the
all states due to the COVID-19 pandemic.
programme is associated with an average per class increase
of three pupils (results are not statistically significant).
Perceived impact of flagship programmes
More teachers in participating schools reported complete
State-level actors from all five enrolled states were attendance compared to teachers in control schools.
overwhelmingly supportive of cash transfer programmes and
school feeding programmes, yet participants referred most Possible effects on learning outcomes
often to development partner cash transfer programmes
The SDG4 evaluation team sought to understand not
rather than the national programme. In addition, they noted
only stakeholder perspectives on the effects of flagship
that through the school feeding programme, the federal
104
Evaluation Findings and Analysis
programmes on learning outcomes, but clear statistical participating in the school feeding programme, we obtained
evidence from learning assessments. To begin, findings a list from the Vice President’s office of participating schools
show that teachers are generally positive about the and matched them with schools in the SDG4 school-based
programme and feel that it has contributed to improved survey sample. Equivalent information for the CCT was
learning outcomes. The 2019 impact evaluation of the not available.
HGSFP found that teachers in programme schools were
more likely to report an increase in academic performance Analysis shows that, overall, three quarters (76 per cent)
compared to teachers in non-HGSFP schools (94.9 per cent of schools in the sample took part in the school feeding
compared to 86.0 per cent). Similarly, as part of the school- programme. State participation ranged from 68.8 per
level survey, head teachers identified factors that they cent of schools in Enugu State to 86.1 per cent of schools
think may have contributed to improved pupil learning in Katsina. There are no data for Kwara State as the
since 2016. They were able to list multiple factors. Over programme in Kwara was not yet fully in place at the time
one third of head teachers in Zamfara (36.2 per cent) and of data collection. The SDG4 evaluation team compared
more than half of head teachers in Katsina (53.2 per cent), mean results for all four competency areas (end-of-P2
Kaduna (55 per cent) and Kano (58.8 per cent) identified literacy and numeracy, end-of-P4 literacy and numeracy)
the school feeding programme as contributing to improved using continuous scores. The results show little difference
pupil learning. Hardly any head teachers gave this response between both groups across the six case-study states, as
in Enugu (only 3.8 per cent). Kwara did not participate in indicated in Figure 3.19. In addition, Figure 3.20 shows
the school feeding programme. how disaggregation by state reveals very little meaningful
information after controlling for multiple variables. (See
At the same time, results from the literacy and numeracy Annex G for detailed tables.) Criticisms of school feeding
assessments when controlling for participation in the programmes (discussed in the section below) in general,
HGSFP show that the programme has not had an impact and in Nigeria in particular, coupled with implementation
on pupils’ results. We describe the findings here, beginning challenges may help explain the lack of definitive impact.
with an overview of the sample. In order to isolate schools
105
Education in Nigeria: Evaluation of the Effectiveness & Impact of SDG 4
Persistent widespread critique of school feeding also acknowledges the ongoing debate about school feeding
internationally and its contribution to educational gains.
In spite of general enthusiasm for the programme, findings
The 2020 WFP State of School Feeding Worldwide report
demonstrate that many stakeholders criticize the approach.
(World Food Program, 2020) cites how between 2013 and
Their criticism may explain the lack of impact that school
2020, the number of children receiving school meals grew
survey findings demonstrate above. The evaluation team
by 9 per cent globally and by 36 per cent in low-income
106
Evaluation Findings and Analysis
countries. The report also acknowledges that there is cooking and all that and so on and sharing the burden.
growing evidence that effective school feeding programmes If you make it a capital thing like the big companies are
improve both access to schools and learning while cash doing, you will never get it right. (Senior FMOE Official)
transfers primarily affect access. Nonetheless, it is also
clear that when enrolment increases suddenly, education Others reiterated that the feeding programme draws
systems around the world may find themselves challenged children to school, but that they may leave shortly after or
to respond to meet increased demand (increasing teaching simply aren’t invested in learning. The initiative also seems
staff, remediating overpopulation through construction, to lack proper monitoring and evaluation. Insufficient
etc.). Of the six interviews with development partners, information forthcoming to the SDG4 evaluation team
this critique arose in four interviews. These development confirms this gap. A CSO representative in Zamfara and
partner representatives noted that increased access Katsina also shared how their organization monitors school
does not equate to improved learning outcomes. One feeding activities and how after publication of a report
of the development partner representatives, a Nigerian, a school reinitiated the programme. This experience
acknowledged the controversy but took a more pragmatic demonstrates the power of monitoring, evaluation and
approach: reporting. Moreover, a couple of stakeholders, including
high-level federal officials and state actors, in Kano in
Whatever the government is doing, it will mean, as an particular, indicated clearly that the programme was highly
education person, it’s better than nothing. Whether they politicized. Finally, the programme has suffered from
do it well or not is another issue. Can they do it better? vendor quality issues, particularly in Enugu and Zamfara,
Can they have value for money? Can they do it in a more
according to stakeholders. This issue may be more
impactful way? I think all those can be done, but in a
widespread, however. Enugu stakeholders also commented
country that for so many years that you don’t see much
on the flaw in the design of the programme. While pupils in
and now we are seeing a lot that has been done, we are
P1–3 and – if states match the federal offer – P4–6, receive
caught in a corner. If you say that it’s not been doing
school meals, younger children enrolled in early education
well, and they should stop. But what we are saying is it’s
programmes do not. A CSO representative spoke of having
not about stopping but about making it more effective
pictures of young children crying when they could not eat
and efficient and if there is value added. (Development
the meals provided in front of them.
partner representative)
The impact report further notes some challenges to
Some government officials and CSO representatives at the
programme implementation. These include inadequate and
state and federal level also commented on the absence of a
inconsistent funding cycle where weeks can pass without
causal link between school feeding and educational quality.
school feeding, inconsistent structure and frequency of
cooks’ remuneration as well as infrastructure challenges
Implementation challenges
that do not allow appropriate accommodation of enrolled
While far fewer in proportion than those applauding pupils. The report also points to ineffective monitoring
flagship programmes, some government and CSO and updating of pupil enrolment records and the need for
stakeholders espoused similar criticisms of the school proper identification, location and living conditions of out-
feeding programme. One senior FMOE official described of-school children.
the initiative as a well-rounded approach that sought to
stimulate education, agriculture and nutritional outcomes, Imp6: How has COVID-19 impacted the education system,
but that it is vulnerable to mismanagement and challenging
particularly in terms of access to education, retention and
to implement. As the official described,
completion?
The home-grown school feeding had a tremendous Conclusion
impact where it was being well done, but it also comes
While the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic will continue
with a huge cost. And if you do not organize it very well,
to emerge, schools experienced at least four months
by involving the private sector, involving the community,
of learning loss. Of concern, more than half of pupils
involving the parents and teachers, letting schools even
have school farms, letting parents handle issues around surveyed report not having participated in an alternative
form of learning during school closures. While findings
107
Education in Nigeria: Evaluation of the Effectiveness & Impact of SDG 4
are inconsistent, they indicate that one fifth of schools had question with a specific focus on school closures, alternative
experienced a loss of a quarter or more of their pupils at the education delivery modalities and effects on enrolment and
time of data collection. Much needs to be done to support retention.
local economies and enhance enrolment campaigns as well
as to establish effective catch-up programming. School closure
Document review indicates that the COVID-19 pandemic
The COVID-19 pandemic presented education systems
and accompanying school closures have further handicapped
around the world with significant disruption. Nigeria was
an already fragile system. Public schools closed in March
no exception. This evaluation question explores how the
2020, with the exception of some exam classes, and did
pandemic has impacted education in Nigeria. UNESCO’s
not resume until October or November 2020. Table 52
case study of the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic on
shows the closure and reopening dates of the six case-study
the Nigerian education system (Adediran, 2021) concludes
states that were provided to the evaluation team through
that the pandemic has resulted in disruption of the
discussion with state education officials. Schools in Kaduna
academic calendar, learning loss, the widening of learning
State were closed the longest. At the time of data collection
inequality, a rise in the number of out-of-school children,
for the SDG4 evaluation, P1 and P2 pupils had not yet
and the likelihood for many children, especially vulnerable
resumed school in Kaduna.
children, of not returning to school. The study emphasizes
that the pandemic will have financial implications for school
Alternative education delivery modalities
continuity as education financing has been reduced due
to shocks in government revenues, economic downturns While the government, in coordination with development
for Nigeria as well as donor countries, and the pressing partners, has sought alternative modes for delivering
need for funds to be diverted to the health sector. The educational services, these services have largely been
SDG4 evaluation team turns to document review, SDG4 deemed inadequate. During the pandemic, UBEC
school-based survey data and findings from key informant supported the SUBEB’s in sustaining the learn-at home
interviews to provide further answers to this evaluation programme (LHP) of the FMOE and funds were provided
Evaluation question (Impact) Likely strength of evi- Data sources
dence
How has COVID-19 impacted the education system, particularly in terms of Medium Literature review, School
access to education, retention and completion? based survey, KIIs
Table 4.42: School closure dates in six case study states
State Date of closure Date of reopening Notes
Enugu 23 March 2020 28 September 2020 Closed again 7–17 January 2021 during COVID second wave
Kaduna 27 March 2020 8 February 2021 Reopening was partial; P4 to P6 resumed; P1 to P3 had not yet
resumed at the time of data collection for this evaluation
Kano 23 March 2020 12 October 2020 P1 and P2: Monday and Tuesday; P3-P5 Wednesday-Friday; P6 all 5
days; Closed again for 7–17 January during COVID second wave; all
pupils returned full time 18 January 2021
Katsina 20 March 2020 1 October 2020 Specific date of resumption in October not specified; All classes
resumed; Schools closed again 12 December 2020 to 9 January
2021 due to insecurity after 100 pupils at the Govt. Sec. School
Kankara were abducted
Kwara 23 March 2020 28 September 2020 Closed again 7–17 January 2021 during COVID second wave
Zamfara (missing) 1 November 2020 Can assume that closed around 27 March 2020
108
Evaluation Findings and Analysis
to states for use on electronic media platforms (Adediran, SDG4 school-survey data confirms that access to alternative
2021). The 2020 VNR points out, however, that the forms of learning was very limited. Overall, just under
transition to online coursework during the pandemic one third of head teachers (30 per cent) reported that the
was out of reach for many in the country. The FMOE’s pupils at their schools had the opportunity to attend virtual
October 2020 survey of education stakeholders reported learning. As Figure 3.21 depicts, the proportion varied
that 90 per cent of respondents saw learning from home as greatly between states, from 1.3 per cent of head teachers
ineffective and that “remote learning is adding little value in Kwara State to half of head teachers in Katsina State (51.9
to learning outcomes” (p. 3). At the same time, a majority of per cent) reporting their pupils could take advantage of
respondents saw alternative learning platforms, like radio virtual learning. When respondents who reported that their
and TV, as having the potential to help pupils recover lost pupils had access to alternative learning modalities were
learning time (FMOE, 2020). Moreover, the pandemic asked to identify the type of educational programming,
has further exacerbated existing inequalities, such as the head teachers nearly unanimously chose radio (93.6 per
urban/rural divide and limitations and lack of access related cent overall, ranging from 84.6 per cent in Kaduna to 100
to poverty (FRN, 2020). per cent in Enugu and Kwara States).
It has also brought the consciousness of the sector to Pupil data regarding learning during COVID-related
the fact that there’s a limit to how much it can reach closures confirms head teacher responses. The survey
all children within the sector, because we personally
asked pupils about possible learning activities during
question the effectiveness of the e-learning to ask the
school closures. By far, the most common activity reported
Ministry, how we’re catering for children in the rural
was reading or practising schoolwork on their own (56.7 per
communities where radio is a luxury; how do you cater
cent) across all six states. Still, this means that nearly half
for children who are hearing impaired; how do you cater
of pupils reported not having engaged in any cited learning
for children who are visually impaired to be part of this?
activity during closures. In terms of more directed activities,
So, I think those questions we began to ask have also
pupils reported radio most commonly but the proportion of
helped them to see that … left alone, they would say
pupils who participated in radio lessons was less than one
they’ve covered all children, but we’ve now made them
third across all states and not much higher for individual
realize that [they haven’t]. (Kaduna Education Official)
states. Kano pupils reported the highest proportion of
109
Education in Nigeria: Evaluation of the Effectiveness & Impact of SDG 4
radio listening, at 38 per cent. The percentage of pupils directed learning activity using any form of technology.
participating in TV or SMS lessons was lower and hardly At the same time, interviews with stakeholders also reveal
any pupils reported participating in online lessons (the enthusiasm for continuing some of the alternative forms of
highest proportion was 6.8 per cent of pupils in Kaduna educational delivery that emerged during the COVID-19
state). lockdowns. As indicated above, officials in Kaduna State,
in particular, expressed a commitment to continuing to
Interestingly, the proportion of pupils reporting provide blended learning by supplementing in-person
participating in technology-assisted activities is highest in learning with e-learning on radio and television. Yet, they
Kaduna State, with the exception of radio lessons, where are not alone in seeing how the use of alternative modalities
the proportions were higher only in Kano and Katsina could apply to other contexts, as indicated by the quote
States (38.0 per cent and 37.2 per cent compared to 28.1 per below from a school official in Enugu State:
cent, respectively). State differences for radio lessons were
not statistically significant. Interviewees in Kaduna State These advances have made it possible and opened our
explained that the state invested in e-learning technology eyes to alternative ways of providing education. What
is required now is how to make it cheap and available
during the school closure. It is planning a blended school
enough to all. It’s not that they are not effective, but it is
system, where in-class learning will be supplemented
about access. If we can find ways to make them accessible
by technology. Accordingly, the state has intensified
to all, then we won’t cry so much about situations like
procurement of tablets for pupils including primary schools
even if COVID-19 should stay longer and any other
on a pilot basis.
such situation can arise. We now find out that there are
alternative means of delivering quality education apart
Survey data also confirm findings from document review
from sitting in a classroom with your pupils. That’s one
that rural pupils had less access to learning opportunities
opportunity that is yet to be beaten by COVID-19. Without
than pupils living in urban areas. Gender disaggregation, on
COVID-19, we would not have explored this opportunity.
the other hand, resulted in very little distinction between (Enugu Education Official)
boys and girls. As Figure 3.22 demonstrates, urban pupils
are generally at least 10 percentage points higher in Effects on enrolment and retention
reporting participating in learning activities during COVID
Although the effects of the pandemic are not yet fully
closures, including for reading or practising schoolwork
known, at the time of data collection in February and
and for teacher-provided lessons. Less than a quarter of
March 2021, respondents reported that COVID-19 has
pupils living in rural areas report having participated in any
110
Evaluation Findings and Analysis
affected the retention of pupils in schools and regularity required for them to get used to learning and reading
in attendance. Kaduna closed its schools for a longer again. We try to mitigate that by teaching them during
time than other states, as its public schools were not fully the holidays but that was also limited; it was only those
equipped for COVID-19 protocols like hand-washing who have access to television and radio or those who
systems and sanitizers. Respondents agree that COVID-19 have data that could access those open resources. So,
in all cases, different segments of our school population
has presented young people with a false choice between
suffered. (Senior FMOE Official)
immediate economic opportunities or long-term investment
in their future through education. Participation in the
In addition, the majority of stakeholders indicated concern
economy as entrepreneurs during lockdown may make it
over learning loss:
difficult for some children to return to school. Children
may engage in activities that involve petty trade and menial
Well, COVID-19 is a general problem. We all know what
tasks as well as more lucrative and mainstream activities.
happened at schools and other sectors that shut down,
In addition, interviewees explained that some girls have
but it hit the school badly because even as other sectors
been married off during the period of school closures and
opened, schools were still shut for a longer period and
will not be returning to school. Others noted that girls were
even as they opened, they were still shut for some weeks
particularly vulnerable to gender-based violence during
and all these things … and we know that this thing has
this period.
a schedule. When you lose, you have lost. The problem
is how do you regain what you have lost … we actually
A senior FMOE official underlines how the pandemic lost because staying at home for 6 months means a lot.
affected different sub-groups of pupils differently: (Enugu Education Official)
Because of the experience and the fact that some children
In terms of returning to learning, across all states, around
have stayed out of school for a long time, some have
four fifths of head teachers participating in the SDG4
either been married off, some have become pregnant,
school-based survey report that at least three quarters
some have gotten into some kind of trade and they don’t
of their male and female pupils had returned after the
want to leave it. Parents are making gains now; parents
last COVID-19 related school closure (see Figure 3.23).
don’t want them to leave it anymore. So, we lost children
This finding suggests that one quarter or more of the
to the school system as a result of COVID-19 …. And even
pupil population at nearly one fifth of schools in the case
then, for those that are coming back adjustment time is
111
Education in Nigeria: Evaluation of the Effectiveness & Impact of SDG 4
study states had not yet returned. This may indicate that calculated at 15 per cent. This suggests that, at least in
a high level of permanent school leaving could follow the Zamfara State, girls may be more affected than boys by
COVID-19 school closures. It is not clear currently if these COVID-19 school closures. At the same time, a review of
pupils may be returning at a different point in the year or if enrolment data as reported by head teachers during the
they may have moved to a different school. SDG4 evaluation school-level survey for academic years
2019–2020 and 2020–2021 shows little difference, with
TThe difference in the proportion of female and male the exception of Kaduna State. Whereas the difference in
pupils returning is generally low (under 5 per cent) for five enrolment, measured as a percentage of 2019 enrolment,
of the case-study states. In Zamfara, however, the gap is ranges from -4.7 per cent in Zamfara State to 0.6 per cent in
112
Evaluation Findings and Analysis
Enugu, Kaduna figures show that enrolment has dropped by human rights, equity, universality and that no one should
21.7 per cent overall, with the decrease in male enrolment be left behind. The Education 2030 Framework for Action
being slightly higher than girls (23.1 per cent compared to underlines this commitment and serves as a framework for
20.3 per cent). The fact that, at the time of data collection, analysis:
P1–3 classes had not yet resumed in Kaduna State may
explain the difference. At the same time, the discrepancy Inclusion and equity in and through education is the
between head teachers’ perceived change in enrolment cornerstone of a transformative education agenda, and
we therefore commit to addressing all forms of exclusion
(Figure 3.23) and analysis of their reported enrolment data
and marginalization, disparities and inequalities
(Figure 31) suggests the need for reliable data as the impact
in access, participation and learning outcomes. No
of the continuing pandemic becomes clearer. While these
education target should be considered met unless met
field-level data are not yet conclusive, UNESCO’s case
by all. We therefore commit to making the necessary
study of Nigeria’s experience of COVID-19 (Adediran,
changes in education policies and focusing our efforts
2021) suggests cause for concern and argues that there
on the most disadvantaged, especially those with
will be lasting effects for the most marginalized learners,
disabilities, to ensure that no one is left behind. (UNESCO,
in particularly, girls. Lessons from the Ebola outbreak
2015, p. 7)
in Sierra Leone, Guinea and Liberia indicate that girls’
enrolment will drop and there will be increased rates of
This section of the report provides a response to the
poverty, child labour and teenage pregnancy, all of which
evaluation question below. While it specifically addresses
impact girls more than boys.
economic status, the findings expand to include geographic
inequalities as well as education for children with
3.6 SDG Principle of Human Rights,
disabilities. The evaluation question that follows this one
Equity, Universality and Leave No One
addresses gender equity.
Behind
HR1: To what extent did the programme tar-
Overall Finding: SDG principles of Equity and
get the poorest and help reduce inequalities
LNOB are not met for education in Nigeria
between the wealthier groups and the poorest
Quality of the Evidence: Strong groups?
The SDG4 evaluation goes beyond OECD criteria to Conclusion
investigate how Nigeria’s approach to addressing SDG4
Learning outcomes underline that children in the lowest
serves all people. The evaluation invokes the principles of
wealth quintiles consistently underperform their peers
the United Nations’ commitment to ensuring respect for
SUMMARY CONCLUSIONS (Human Rights)
Learning outcomes underline that children in the lowest wealth quintiles consistently underperform their peers and evidence shows
no meaningful indication of change in improving learning and lessening economic barriers between baseline studies and the SDG4
evaluation.
National and state-level strategies, particularly UBE, emphasize education for all and providing services to the most marginalized
groups. These strategies support principles of equity, universality and ‘leave no one behind’.
At the state level, where implementation is most critical, however, deliberate strategies are absent and education programmes are
failing to meet the needs of the most vulnerable children, including children with disabilities.
Most insidious of the structural barriers are PTA levies, which are deliberately constructed by schools and PTAs.
Evaluation question (Human Rights) Likely strength of evidence Data sources
To what extent did the programme target the poorest and help reduce Strong Literature review, MICS,
inequalities between the wealthier groups and the poorest groups? NDES, KIIs
113
Education in Nigeria: Evaluation of the Effectiveness & Impact of SDG 4
and evidence shows no meaningful indication of change education” (p. 10) as an important component of its
in improving learning and lessening economic barriers approach. It also noted that all levels of government would
between baseline studies (GEP3 2015 evaluation, ESSPIN “develop appropriate strategies and programmes to provide
2015 composite survey) and the SDG4 evaluation. Basic Education for children of peculiar circumstances
National and state-level strategies, particularly UBE, (such as children of pastoral nomads, hunters, migrant,
emphasize education for all and providing services to fisher folks, orphans, children in apprenticeship, etc.) who
the most marginalized groups. These strategies support are unable to benefit from Basic Education within the
principles of equity, universality and leave no one behind. conventional educational system” (p. 10). The cornerstone
At the state level, where implementation is most critical, of this approach was the provision of educational services
however, deliberate strategies are absent and education for every Nigerian child, particularly primary education.
programmes are failing to meet the needs of the most As noted in the policy and context section above, the 2004
vulnerable children, including children with disabilities. UBE Act made schooling a right for all children within the
Most insidious of the structural barriers are PTA levies, public school system. To date, it has been the most evident
which are deliberately constructed by schools and PTAs. and focused policy that targets universality and equity in
Additional sensitization is required for education officials education in Nigeria.
to recognize the challenges and structural barriers that
prevent the most marginalized from truly accessing and The ESSP built upon the UBE Act and the national
benefiting from educational services. policy’s commitment to universal and basic education
to identify specific actions to support the approach. The
To answer this question, the evaluation team again turned to ESSP included a four-page action plan for basic education.
policy and document review, key informant interviews and Seventeen actions were identified and focused on girls’
primary and secondary school-level data. To begin, with the education and access. There was no direct mention of
National Policy on Education, the ESSP and MSP clearly economic vulnerability or poverty. This seemed to be an
emphasized education for all in alignment with key equity- understood tenet of the approach. Key actions included
focused principles, which included providing services to community mobilization and sensitization to the LGA
the most marginalized groups. The 2013 National Policy on level in order to boost enrolment for girls, in particular, and
Education provided the broad outlines for understanding to make known the provision of the UBE Act. Within its
the philosophy behind Nigeria’s approach to education. action plan for out-of-school children, the ESSP referenced
The foreword of the 2013 National Policy on Education the Home-Grown School Feeding programme. The ESSP
stated that also contained specific strategies for addressing issues and
challenges of basic education with particular mention of
These strategy plans in education have engendered special needs education. Strategies included:
an expanded role for education as an investment
for economic, social and political development; an
• Establish new schools and provide the requisite
aggregate tool of empowerment for the poor, and the
teaching-learning facilities and instructional materials
socially marginalized groups; an effective means of
developing the full capacities and potentials of human aimed at broadening access to disadvantaged groups,
resource, as well as the development of a competent e.g. nomadic groups, the handicapped etc.;
work force through the acquisition of practical life skills • In order to broaden access to education for girls, roll
relevant to the world of work as a veritable means of
out the GEP programme nationwide so as to boost
developing sound intelligent learning societies, fit and
enrolment for girls;
relevant to the 21st century. (Government of Nigeria,
• Support States to establish Special Schools for Girls in
2013, p. ii)
States that have low participation rates for girls;
The policy further accentuated that “education is • Provide Special schools to broaden access to children
compulsory and a right of every Nigerian irrespective of with special needs and make all schools accessible to
gender, social status, religion, colour, ethnic background children with special needs;
and any peculiar individual challenges” (p. 1). The policy’s • Provide qualified teachers for children with special
goals and values also adhered to the principles outlined needs;
above through its statement of goals and values. Among • Finalize and implement the policy on special needs
other concepts, the policy identified “inclusiveness in education” (FMOE, 2016, pp. 12–13)
114
Evaluation Findings and Analysis
The MSP was a continuation of these same assertions. In increasingly an inhibitor to education. A conflict-sensitive
the MSP, in fact, the government essentially self-assessed approach to education is applicable to many communities
its failure to provide services in line with equity-based within Nigeria, and unfortunately, is becoming more
principles: common.
The continued existence of the phenomenon of out-of- Education for the poorest groups
school children is the strongest evidence yet, that Nigeria
has failed to achieve one of the EFA (Education For All) Interviews with state- and federal-level actors, as well as
goals and Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) of with development partners, reveal initiatives underway to
universalizing access to primary education for all school- promote access to education for all pupils. One development
age children, irrespective of social class, religion, region,
partner pointed out that the FMOE is performing very well
or ethnicity. (MSP, p. 11)
in terms of community mobilization, particularly through
CSOs like Mothers’ Associations. Findings also revealed
The Ministry made reference again to the central role of
notable strategies within some states. As mentioned above,
the UBEC as well as to actions of development partners to
Kano State provides uniforms to all pupils in order to address
address access, namely UNICEF and NGOs. There was
the hidden costs of education. Kaduna State’s programme
mention of creating temporary structures for schooling to
design and implementation are also geared toward equity
improve access as well as strategies related to insecurity.
and quality. To demonstrate this, the Kaduna State
For instance, the plan mentioned the need to build the
Governor enrolled his children in a public school. Kaduna
confidence of teachers to support children who have
officials also explained that there are special scholarships
suffered traumatic experiences of violence and war.
for some bright pupils, which may include pupils from
across the household economic spectrum. Officials also
In addition to these sector-wide policies, as discussed
pointed to development partner programming, such as
in the impact section on flagship programmes (section
the World Bank AGILE project in Katsina that is building
3.5.4), the aims of Nigeria’s National Social Investment
schools to be within two kilometres of all villages, according
Programmes were to increase access of poor and vulnerable
to an MOE official. A Zamfara official also pointed to the
households to income/livelihood, reduce inequalities and
SMOE’s work to construct schools so they are in closer
wide disparities, and stimulate productivity and growth
proximity. Interview participants in Kano and Katsina
especially in rural communities. As addressed in the
pointed to GPE efforts while Kwara and Zamfara officials
impact section, the NCTP, in particular, was designed to
referenced the Reading and Numeracy Activity (RANA)’s
provide targeted monthly cash transfers of N5,000 to poor
provision of materials for pupils. A Zamfara official also
and vulnerable households. Community facilitators were
mentioned the GEP project and the early TDP project,
to support beneficiaries and encourage the formation of
which addressed girls’ education, in particular. In Kaduna
savings groups. Additional grant money was available for
State, teachers in rural areas receive 28 per cent more pay
individuals who also participate in other related human
than their colleagues in urban areas. Officials see this policy
capital development and sustainable environment activities
as addressing the urban/rural divide but not necessarily
(Federal Government of Nigeria, 2019). The NHGSF
poverty.
programme also targeted vulnerable children namely out-
of-school children, and communities, though at the time of
State-level officials in Kaduna, Kano, Katsina and Kwara also
the evaluation, this programme was not operating due to
shared examples of private initiatives. A sponsor programme
COVID-19 prevention measures.
in Kaduna State, for instance, covers the expenses of exam
A closer look at programming to support the fees, according to a CSO representative. Participants
most marginalized also pointed to the generosity of wealthier families and
philanthropists in providing support for individual pupils
The sections below specifically explore findings relevant
and their families. An Enugu official described how
to education for children from the poorest families, as well
individual charity helps pupils without materials/means to
as support for pupils with disabilities. While exploration
go to school by supplying necessary backpacks, shoes, etc.
of the provision of education services to pupils in conflict-
This support, however, is not systematized and is unlikely
and crisis-affected areas was beyond the scope of the
to be sustainable.
evaluation question, findings also revealed that insecurity is
115
Education in Nigeria: Evaluation of the Effectiveness & Impact of SDG 4
Furthermore, investigations at the state level revealed cases, fees associated with the PTA or SBMC (see efficiency
that overall, most states did not have a deliberate strategy and effectiveness sections above for more information).
to target the poorest and reduce inequalities between One non-state actor was very clear that PTA levies violate
the richer groups and poorest groups. When asked about human rights to education. The interviewee explained
specific strategies, the majority of officials pointed the how the fees are part of a larger scheme that involves local
evaluation team to the UBE Act and some also mentioned authorities and government and how the SUBEB and the
the cash transfer and school feeding programmes. A high- LGA sometimes misappropriate the fees. It is a problem
level official in Kaduna State said “there is no discrimination that development partners have even been unable to solve.
in the provision of education services. Public Schools are The issue appears to be highly sensitive and politically
free for all children of school age.” Officials from Kano, charged (see Guardian Nigeria, 2016).
Zamfara, and even the federal level echoed this sentiment
that approaching education as free and compulsory should Education for children with disabilities
allow for all children to attend primary. Even at the
Although the evaluation question itself addresses poverty
federal level, however, at least one key actor underlined
and wealth specifically and the subsequent evaluation
how policies may exist, but that implementation may be
question addresses gender, it is necessary to address findings
inadequate. The official said:
here relevant to education for children with disabilities.
Indeed, the ESSP laid out at least six strategies specific
It is not easy. You know, it cannot … there are so many
to children with disabilities. The topic also emerged as an
factors that bring about poor and rich. The gap is too
wide, you know, so … the education sector and ministerial important theme during interviews when discussing equity.
strategic plan does not, cannot address to bridge the gap For instance, an Enugu SUBEB official described how they
between the rich and the poor. It’s the truth. I am just are currently building an inclusive school and how UNICEF
saying it. (Federal Education Official) has also provided materials for children with auditory and
speech impairments. A Kano CSO representative identified
Findings confirm that while education is termed universal
that a policy on inclusive education exists, but that it is still
and free, some pupils still have trouble accessing education.
weak and that children with disabilities are still not able to
It is clear that a proportion of families continue to struggle
access their right to education. A federal education official
financially to send their children to school even within the
also clarified that UBEC allocates 2 per cent of its funds to
context of the UBE Act of 2004. This seems to be due to
special education.
opportunity costs as well as the remaining hidden costs of
schooling, such as uniforms, school materials, and in some
116
Evaluation Findings and Analysis
The SDG4 evaluation collected data on educators’ be reporting having pupils with disabilities enrolled and
qualifications to teach inclusively, as well as information teachers should receive necessary training for teaching and
about pupils with disabilities at sampled schools. Across learning by pupils with disabilities to be successful.
the entire sample, just over one tenth of head teachers
indicated that either they or any teacher at their school Performance data demonstrate continued in-
had received training to support children with disabilities. equalities
This means that almost 90 per cent of teachers have had
Next, we turn to data on pupil learning in order to understand
no preparation to meet the needs of a vulnerable and
if the education system has been able to close the learning
diverse community of learners. As Figure 3.25 shows, the
gap between pupils of various backgrounds. Specifically,
percentage ranged from only 5.1 per cent in Katsina to 22.5
the evaluation team investigated the relationship between
per cent in Kaduna State. Investigation of enrolment data
learning and geographic location as well as socioeconomic
showed that over half of schools overall reported having
status. The subsequent evaluation question specifically
children with disabilities enrolled. Schools in Kwara were
addresses the issue of gender.
less likely (38 per cent) to report pupils with disabilities
while schools in Katsina were most likely (68.4 per cent) to
Geographic inequality and access and quality indicators
report enrolling pupils with disabilities. This discrepancy
indicates that many schools are not tracking enrolment of Table 3.43 presents findings relevant to pupil attendance
children with disabilities, a critical step to being able to and learning outcomes by state. Green colouring indicates
foster appropriate inclusive education. If learning is to truly the top three values while red colouring indicates the last
be universal and leave no one behind, all schools should three values for each of the categories.
Table 4.43: Basic education performance indicators by state and Federal Capital Territory (FCT)
Geographic entity (State, FCT, Country) Net Enrolment Ratio Literacy (NEDS Comprehension Numeracy
2020) (NEDS 2020)
(NDES 2019) (NEDS 2020)
Abia 47.09
Adamawa 85.1 38 24 38
Akwa Ibom 96.64
Anambra 44.51
Bauchi 72.95 24 17 21
Bayelsa 33.96
Benue 64.42
Borno 60.47 44 29 40
Cross River 97.83 77 55 83
Delta 55.43
Ebonyi 80.23 57 40 57
Edo 70.66
Ekiti 34.66
Enugu 66.54
Federal Capital Territory (FCT) 71.84
Gombe 74.81 26 18 27
Imo 96.25
Jigawa 67.33 20 13 20
Kaduna 93.22 44 30 51
Kano 98.1 35 22 32
Katsina 98.29 25 14 22
Kebbi 79.86 21 14 21
117
Education in Nigeria: Evaluation of the Effectiveness & Impact of SDG 4
Kogi 90.9
Kwara 45.47
Lagos 41.97
Nasarawa 89.8
Niger 63.39 40 30 40
Ogun 60.05
Ondo 120.17
Osun 64.41
Oyo 97.11 64 44 68
Plateau 71.79
Rivers 32.37
Sokoto 41.65 23 13 20
Taraba 96.82 36 21 38
Yobe 96.65 24 14 22
Zamfara 57.8 28 20 22
Nigeria 69.86
Results are mixed, due in part to concerns about data State and Ebonyi. Except for Kaduna State, which scored
quality. The net enrolment ratio (NER) for some of the 51 per cent in numeracy, no other northern state scored
states contrasts with what is generally known about the state above 44 per cent in all the three proficiency levels.
of education in those states. For instance, UNICEF in 2018
reported that 69 per cent of Nigeria’s out-of-school children When reviewed together, these results point to the need for
– estimated in the MSP to number 10.5 million, and the more reliable enrolment data as well as general consistency
UNICEF 2015 MICS to number about 13.2 million – are that southern states outperform northern states in terms of
located in the northern part of the country.65 Therefore, the learning proficiency and gender parity.
NER calculations of 93.2 per cent, 98.1 per cent and 98.29
per cent for Kaduna, Kano and Katsina cannot be statically SES inequality and access and quality indicators
correct. In addition, these figures, as reported, exceed
In addition to geographic inequalities, the SDG4 evaluation
Kwara State rates, which is one of the higher-performing
closely examined the relationship between SES and access
states in terms of enrolment and completion. Kwara State is
and quality indicators.
identified as high-performing among the SDG4 evaluation
case-study states as well. NDES data show that Kwara
Inequality in access to basic education
has a NER of only 45.7 per cent, about half of the rate for
Kaduna, Kano and Katsina, clearly indicating inaccuracies. Secondary data analysis using MICS 2016 data for the
Furthermore, the NER for Lagos and Ekiti States cannot six case-study states showed that, with the exception
be correct. The NDES data report those two states as of Enugu, attendance rates were lowest for pupils of the
having an enrolment rate of 34.7 per cent and 42 per cent poorest socioeconomic quintile. For these five states,
respectively. as Table 3.44 indicates, the attendance race is higher for
children in wealthier families than for children in poorer
Proficiency level results are also consistent with the families. For example, only 26.4 per cent of children in the
observed gap between education performance between the poorest quintile attend primary school at the national level
southern states and the northern states. For instance, the while the attendance rate is at 91 per cent for families in
three southern states of Cross River, Ebonyi, and Oyo hold the richest quintile. Nationally and across the five states,
the highest scores for proficiency in literacy, comprehension the attendance rate for children within the poorest families
and numeracy and outperformed all the northern states is about half the rate of children from the wealthiest
included on the table. Cross River is the highest performer families. In Enugu, while the overall attendance rate is
with 77 per cent in literacy, 55 per cent in comprehension, high, analysis did not reveal significant variation between
and 83 per cent proficiency in numeracy, followed by Oyo
118
Evaluation Findings and Analysis
Table 4.44: Primary attendance ratio by socioeconomic quintile for case study states
State Poorest Second Middle Fourth Richest Total
Low-performing states
Kano* 26.8per cent 50.6per cent 66.3per cent 77.5per cent 82.1per cent 54.8per cent
Zamfara* 20.8per cent 36.9per cent 57.3per cent 70.4per cent 88.7per cent 40.1per cent
Transitioning states
Katsina* 32.4per cent 65.4per cent 75.7per cent 84.0per cent 85.0per cent 56.8per cent
Enugu 100per cent 81.5per cent 90.5per cent 86.6per cent 95.0per cent 87.9per cent
High-performing states
Kwara* 42.6per cent 77.1per cent 83.9per cent 93.3per cent 97.3per cent 86.1per cent
Kaduna* 35.6per cent 57.6per cent 69.3per cent 77.5per cent 83.8per cent 66.5per cent
National* 26.4per cent 52.7per cent 69.4per cent 79.9per cent 91.0per cent 60.9per cent
Table 4.45: Country-wide primary net attendance ratio by socioeconomic wealth quintile
Wealth Quintile NDHS 2013 MICS 2016
Lowest 32.2per cent 26.4per cent
Second 57.0per cent 52.7per cent
Middle 72.8per cent 69.4per cent
Fourth 79.1per cent 79.9per cent
Highest 78.9per cent 91.0per cent
socioeconomic status levels. Enugu data showed a perfect sample into four distinct school groups: pupils who were
rate of attendance for children within the poorest quintile, assessed for Grade 2 literacy, Grade 2 numeracy, Grade 4
which is explained by an extremely small number of literacy and Grade 4 numeracy competencies. Analysis
families (n=2) in this quintile. of SES status between “baseline studies” and the SDG4
evaluation yielded few conclusive results and revealed very
Comparison of net attendance ratios over time required little about how the household financial situation of pupils
comparison across NDHS 2013 and MICS 2016 data sets, was different over time. While we see that SES was lower
shown here in Table 3.45. While direct comparison was not on the SDG4 evaluation school survey overall for end-of-
possible, for both time periods attendance improved with grade-4 pupils who took the literacy assessment across the
increased socioeconomic wealth. sample, the opposite was true for pupils in the same grade
taking the numeracy assessment. We noted no significant
The evaluation team compared SDG4 evaluation school- difference in SES between the previous study and the
survey data to MICS data. The SDG4 evaluation targeted SDG4 evaluation samples overall for end-of-grade-2
children already enrolled in school, in contrast with pupils taking the literacy assessment. The evaluation team
the MICS household survey, which was able to capture could not compare this information for pupils taking the
information about out-of-school children. Information numeracy assessment as this information was not collected
from the SDG 4 evaluation school-level survey could shed by the baseline studies. (See tables in Annex G for more
light on changes in socioeconomic status of children over details.) With such contradictory data, it is unfortunately
time, and, in this way, provide an indication of whether or not possible to draw a clear conclusion from the SDG4
not children’s socioeconomic status was improving. The evaluation data about how pupils’ overall household
design of the school survey required separation of the financial situation has changed over time.
119
Education in Nigeria: Evaluation of the Effectiveness & Impact of SDG 4
Inequality in quality of basic education report accessible to the evaluation team so we cannot
complete the table to include 2020 data.
In order to examine the quality of basic education provision,
the evaluation team examined learning performance in
The SDG4 evaluation analysis also investigated the
relation to SES. NEDS found, as was similar for MICS
relationship between SES and learning outcomes results.
data above on attendance rates, that pupils in the highest
A decrease in the strength of the relationship between
quintile performed the best on both literacy and numeracy
these two factors might indicate that basic education
assessments while pupils in the lowest quintile performed
interventions in Nigeria were effectively targeting more
the worst. Table 3.46 also indicates change over time with
economically disadvantaged pupils. At the same time,
large improvements in both literacy and numeracy ranging
the economic challenges occurred within this period
from 6 to 30 per cent, with one exception,66 between 2004
of 2016–2019 may also have countered any progress.
and 2010. Changes between 2010 and 2015 did not show a
Findings from the SDG4 evaluation that compare the
pattern of continued improvement. Rather, both the lowest
relationship between SES and learning assessment results
and highest quintiles decreased in the proportion of literate
demonstrated little change. The evaluation team was able
children during the five years in question, though by a
to compare results for three of the four learning assessment
narrow enough range to not exceed the margin of error. All
groups as data from previous studies were not collected for
quintiles decreased in their numeracy performance, with a
end-of-grade-2 pupils taking the numeracy assessment. In
range between 1 and 12 percentage points. Unfortunately,
addition, baseline data sets did not collect data for all six
wealth quintile data were not reported in the NEDS 2020
Table 4.46: Literacy and numeracy rates by socioeconomic status
Wealth Quintile Literacy Numeracy
2004 2010 2015 2004 2010 2015
Lowest 10per cent 16per cent 14per cent 26per cent 26per cent 14per cent
Second 14per cent 30per cent 32per cent 33per cent 45per cent 38per cent
Middle 22per cent 48per cent 52per cent 41per cent 64per cent 61per cent
Fourth 35per cent 65per cent 66per cent 54per cent 77per cent 75per cent
Highest 67per cent 83per cent 82per cent 81per cent 88per cent 87per cent
Source: Adapted from NEDS, 2015
Table 4.47: Regression coefficients by time period for end-of-grade-2 literacy results
Baseline Endline
Coefficient 95per cent CI p-value Coefficient 95per cent CI p-value
Low-per-
forming
states
Kano
Zamfara 7.52 0.88; 14.16 0.027 10.11 2.47; 17.76 0.010
Transition-
ing states
Katsina 14.91 5.98; 23.84 0.001 24.45 14.52; 34.38 0.000
Enugu
High-per-
forming
states
Kwara
Kaduna
Overall 9.52 4.12; 14.92 0.001 21.86 14.13; 29.59 0.000
120
Evaluation Findings and Analysis
Table 4.48: Regression coefficients by time period for end-of-grade-2 literacy results
Baseline Endline
Coefficient 95per cent CI p-value Coefficient 95per cent CI p-value
Low-per-
forming
states
Kano
Zamfara
Transitioning
states
Katsina
Enugu 18.33 10.68; 25.98 0.000 16.26 6.11; 26.41 0.002
High-per-
forming
states
Kwara 6.98 0.24; 13.72 0.043 27.00 17.40; 36.60 0.000
Kaduna 13.75 9.47; 18.03 0.000 23.24 9.70; 36.78 0.001
Overall 17.29 14.84; 19.75 0.000 22.24 15.15; 29.32 0.000
Table 4.49: Regression coefficients by time for end-of-grade-4 numeracy results
Baseline Endline
Coefficient 95per cent CI p-value Coefficient 95per cent CI p-value
Low-performing
states
Kano 19.81 5.18; 34.45 0.008 2.77 -6.02; 11.56 0.532
Zamfara
Transitioning
states
Katsina
Enugu -6.68 -21.00; 7.63 0.357 20.21 11.21; 29.21 0.000
High-performing
states
Kwara 0.43 -17.73; 18.60 0.962 13.49 4.38; 22.59 0.004
Kaduna 8.56 -3.73; 20.86 0.171 8.86 -2.65; 20.37 0.130
Overall 16.54 6.50; 26.58 0.001 11.19 3.91; 18.46 0.003
states so results, in general, are able to only portray a partial Kwara, the regression coefficient was significantly higher
picture. The tables below Tables 3.47, 3.48 and 3.49 present at endline than at baseline (27.00 compared to 6.98). Yet,
the strength of the relationship between SES and learning this difference was not observable for Kwara pupils taking
results using regression analysis. Missing values reflect data the other two assessments. For Enugu, a similar trend was
that were not collected as part of baseline data sets. observed where the regression coefficient was significantly
higher on the SDG4 evaluation survey than on the previous
For all three analyses, there was little observable change study used as baseline (20.21 compared to -6.68). In sum,
across any state, using available data and paying attention we observed no meaningful indication in assessment results
to adequate confidence intervals. The only significant that change has occurred to improve learning and lessen
differences were for Kwara State end-of-grade-4 pupils economic barriers. Moreover, contextual changes such as
taking the literacy assessment and Enugu State end- the economic downturns within the 2016–2019 period may
of-grade-4 pupils taking the numeracy assessment. For be obscuring progress.
121
Education in Nigeria: Evaluation of the Effectiveness & Impact of SDG 4
4.7 Gender Equality Conclusion
Overall Finding: Gender equality is still not met Government policies demonstrate attention to gender
as girls continue to lag behind equality and the empowerment of girls and women, yet
completion rates of girls continue to lag behind boys overall
Quality of the Evidence: Strong
and comparison of learning results between baseline studies
Attention to how gender affects access to education and the SDG4 evaluation shows little progress in closing the
services and the quality of those services is a major focus of gender gap. There has been improvement in recruitment of
the SDG4 goal. The Education 2030 Framework for Action female teachers since 2016 and generally female teachers
clearly underlines the significance of gender: are more qualified than their male counterparts according
to available data. Nonetheless, much remains to be done
We recognize the importance of gender equality in to make girls more comfortable, supported and successful
achieving the right to education for all. We are therefore at school over the longer term in order to stay in school
committed to supporting gender-sensitive policies, and complete primary school, including more deliberate
planning and learning environments; mainstreaming
policies, activities and gender-sensitive monitoring efforts.
gender issues in teacher training and curricula; and
eliminating gender-based discrimination and violence in
The response to this question investigates both interview
schools. (UNICEF, 2015, p. 8)
data and statistics on educational data most relevant to
In turn, the SDG4 evaluation incorporated one question access and quality within basic education. To set the
focused specifically on gender equality. This question context for understanding these results, we begin with
aligns closely with the approach and findings from the interview data that assesses gender-focused programming
human rights-focused evaluation question in section 3.6 as well as some of the inherent challenges.
above.
When asked about how the ESSP and flagship programmes
GE1: To what extent did the Education Sector Strategic support women and girls, the responses of many KII
Plan and flagship programmes incorporate considerations participants were similar to the human rights findings above.
of gender equality and the empowerment of women and Results were mixed. The majority of interviewees were
girls into the design, implementation and monitoring of well aware of programming. Less than the majority, but still
interventions? a noticeable number of interviewees, responded that there
SUMMARY CONCLUSIONS (Gender Equality)
Government policies demonstrate attention to gender equality and the empowerment of girls and women though much remains to
be done to make girls more comfortable, supported and successful at school over the longer term in order to stay in school and com-
plete primary school, including more deliberate policies, activities and gender-sensitive monitoring efforts. Development partners
have put in place a number of initiatives to support girls’ education, with emphasis on improving access to WASH facilities.
Despite emphasis on girls’ education, completion rates of girls continue to lag behind boys overall and comparison of learning
results between baseline studies and the SDG4 evaluation show little progress in closing the gender gap. The negative impact of
COVID-19 will likely be greater for girls than for boys.
Analysis of barriers to education continue to point to a perceived lower importance of girls’ education and gender norms as per-
sistent obstacles, especially in the North. Some boys may also feel societal pressures to leave school in order to enter the labour
market, though likely more in the South than in the North.
Evaluation question (Gender Equality) Likely strength of evi- Data sources
dence
To what extent did the Education Sector Strategic Plan and flagship pro- Strong Literature review, NDES,
grammes incorporate considerations of gender equality and the empower- MICS, DHS, KIIs
ment of women and girls into the design, implementation and monitoring
of interventions?
122
Evaluation Findings and Analysis
was nothing specific to girls’ education within state plans (CBOs), or by communities through SBMCs, have claimed
and also that it is a universal approach that pertains to both some success in increasing girls’ enrolments (and retention,
girls and boys. These respondents included senior officials to a lesser extent) (Abbas et al., 2018). These initiatives
at the state level as well as a small number of federal- have often focused on “inputs”, such as scholarships and
level actors. The same finding applies to the prominent free uniforms, some of which (e.g. renovated classrooms
flagship programmes, the NCTP and the NHGSFP. Both and provision of textbooks) have increased the enrolment
programmes should have the potential to ameliorate some of boys too (Oduwaiye & Bakwai, 2017).
of the factors that often hinder girls’ education in providing
money for hidden school costs and through provision of KII participants most commonly pointed to development
daily meals at school. At the same time, flagship programme partner projects. These included many of the projects
documentation, namely the overview document for National listed in Table 1.2 above, including:
Social Investment Programmes and the available impact
evaluation summary for the NHGSFP, do not specifically • Girl for Girl (G4G), He for She (H4S), Girls Education
reveal targeting of women and girls. Similarly, some actors Programme (GEP), Reading and Numeracy Activity
in the field emphasized that the programme addresses (RANA) by UNICEF and DFID
all children, not girls in particular. In this way, findings • Global Partnership for Education (GPE) (World Bank)
echoed the positions of KII participants who made similar • Better Education Service Delivery for All (BESDA)
statements regarding interventions for the poorest families. and AGILE (World Bank)
They argued that programming is meant to improve their • Quarter Foundation cash transfer programme in
situation as well, but not uniquely. One exception was that Zamfara
the impact evaluation summary slide deck identified that
the NHGSFP also has as its aim “to empower unemployed, Kano State officials also described how they developed a
often low-skilled women by hiring them as cooks to prepare policy brief on girl child education with support from ACE
and provide the meals to the pupils”. In general, however, Charity through the Malala Fund (malala.org). Others
data presented in the slide deck summary infrequently mentioned state-supported second chance programming
provided gender disaggregation, with the exception of for girls who have dropped out of school. All these
body mass index calculations. Similarly, there is one brief interventions are special programmes that incorporate
mention of improving women’s financial literacy within considerations of gender equality and the empowerment
the internal NHGSFP report. Monitoring data for these of women and girls into their design, implementation and
programmes was not available in order to verify if data were monitoring. All interviewees who spoke of these projects
appropriately disaggregated. perceived that these programmes have contributed to
increased enrolment, retention, equity and completion
At the same time, other respondents signalled that the rates, particularly of girls.
situation of girls’ education has improved since the
beginning of the SDG agenda. A federal-level official made Gender Dimension in Education in Nigeria
the following assessment:
Despite many progress achieved by Nigeria toward Gender
Parity Index in Basic Education, Gender Dimension in
When you go to many rural areas where before now, you
education still a challenge in the country. Evidence from the
know, you don’t have health, you know, women health
Final Evaluation of Girls Education Program in Northern
experts or maybe in their schools … you don’t have female
Nigeria 2012-2021 has revealed that: ‘’the most compelling
teachers, that trend has been on the increase and … the
element of change in gender equality would have been
resistance to female enrolment has been going consistently
undoubtedly the change in the defined script for a daughter
… down, there’s now much awareness unlike before. So, I
by the different groups from the community. The change
think we can say it is a success. (SDG evaluation working
in script is clearly generational. The option for a woman to
group)
contribute to the family income through paid work outside
the home is not really embraced in the country. From some
Document review showed that initiatives by the
qualitative focus group discussions, while both boys and
government in conjunction with internally displaced
girls mentioned girls becoming doctors, teachers or lawyers
persons (IDPs) and community-based organizations
123
Education in Nigeria: Evaluation of the Effectiveness & Impact of SDG 4
as one of the main outcomes of girls’ education, the main referenced the problem of boys’ school-leaving. The MSP
outcome mentioned by fathers and men in general was that contextual analysis pointed specifically to the areas of the
an educated woman can properly look after the house and South-East and South-South geopolitical zones as well as
children and even help them with their homework’’. the Lagos axis (MSP 2018–2019, p. 28). Enugu officials
interviewed explained that they were concerned with boys’
There are some innovative broader approaches that have completion rates, and to some extent enrolment. (Boys
been introduced within some programs funded by partners tend to drop out after P6.) Findings below triangulate this
that have contributed to improving the school environment observation as gender parity rates in Enugu State are above
to allow good management of periods at school; offering 1, indicating that more girls than boys attend school. An
life skills programme in the “Girl 4 Girl” component; and Enugu education official explained that boys leave school
taking into account different barriers and concerns that for petty trade and to learn artisan work. They feel pressure
could represent an obstacle to the pursuit of schooling for a to join the economy as soon as possible. To remedy this, the
girl who has reached puberty. official argues, requires emphasis on vocational, technical
education so that pupils feel that they are developing
There was evidence of social and economic empowerment practical and relevant skills while at school. Similarly, a
of women and improved livelihood for households as a result federal official spoke of UBEC’s programming that focuses
of the CTP. In spite of the latter, socially transmitted fear on girls’ education in the northern part of the country and
of (and shame associated to) a pregnancy out of wedlock, boys’ education in the southern part. He also affirmed
which is also a major reason for girls’ early marriage after that technical and vocational schools are the government-
their first menstruation, didn’t seem not been adequately preferred solution.
taken into account in Gender dimension of Education at
school. Remaining challenges to promoting girls’ edu-
cation
Progress in improving WASH provisions
In addition to barriers identified above (see section
Among the sorts of programmes mentioned, one theme 3.5.3.1), KII participants also clarified challenges they
stood out from others as an area where progress has been face in developing gender-sensitive programming. The
possible, particularly for non-state actors. In both Kano challenges of girls’ education were most obvious during
and Kaduna States, for instance, representatives described interviews, perhaps because five of the six case-study states
how infrastructure has been improved to support water, are in the North of Nigeria where girls are more numerous
sanitation and health (WASH) initiatives. A representative among the out-of-school population than in the South. The
at the federal level as well as one from Enugu also stressed two examples here come from Kano State, but are likely
the importance of WASH activities. The latter commented: challenges that apply to other states. One education official
in Kano, for instance, spoke of simply being overwhelmed
Then one other thing that should be considered, by the numbers of girls and their families needing support.
biological nature of girls sometimes they may not be
This official stated that,
able to buy sanitary towels when it started … it become
an embarrassment. Some of them use tissue and some
You know the challenge is that it’s not every girl despite the
have little knowledge of how to use it. That should be put
challenges they have in coming from the poorest families,
into consideration as a threat to education. If it makes
not all of them are benefiting from the programme …
it available, accessible… And such embarrassment can
Because they are in hundreds of thousands. So, since the
stop girls from coming to school. (Enugu non-state actor)
money from the donor partner cannot cover them all,
Challenges to boys’ education it is only some selected that will benefit from that. And
that also brings discouragement to the others. (Kano
While girls’ education is the focus of this evaluation
Education Official)
question, boys’ education is also prominent within
education policy as well as within interview data.
Analysis also identified a serious unintended consequence
Education officials explained that, in the case of Enugu,
of gender programming. Another colleague in Kano
gender equality means sensitivity to boys’ education. This
recounted strong imagery of working with fathers and
situation is true of other Nigerian states. The MSP also
boys who were not supportive of funding going directly to
124
Evaluation Findings and Analysis
their wives or to girls. In this case, the official specifically needs to be addressed. The presence of female teachers
mentioned the GPE cash transfers. The project stipulated and administrators not only provides role models for girls
that the mother of the girl was to receive the funding. The and boys in what they can achieve and how they can view
education official recounted that some men had threatened one another equally, but also can serve to challenge often
to divorce their wives due to the targeting of the cash deep-rooted gender socialization and practice inequalities
transfer to women only. As a solution, the official indicated in school communities (Jenkins, 2019; Mount-Cors et al.,
that they worked with village head leaders to intervene and 2020).
settle the issue. Certainly, other challenges also apply but
many have already figured above in the human rights and Recruitment of female teachers
impact sections. The next section investigates the possible
Data available from NDES demonstrated change over
evidence of positive change as a result of gender-focused
time in the proportion of female teachers within each of
initiatives.
the six case-study states and in Nigeria overall, as depicted
in Table 3.50. Analysis shows that, overall, about half of the
Recruitment and qualifications of female teach-
teachers in Nigeria are female. At the same time, there is
ers
great variability between case-study states. Zamfara has the
Increasing the number of female teachers in Nigeria is lowest proportion of female teachers (19.9 per cent) and
one of the target results of the ESSP and the later MSP. Enugu has the greatest proportion (86.6 per cent). Kano
The MSP further stated the objective of achieving “an and Katsina also have lower rates of female teachers, both
equitable balance of male and female teachers between around one quarter of the teacher population. Analysis also
urban and rural areas to serve as role models for boosting shows that all states and the country as a whole increased
girls’ enrolment” (MSP 2018–2019, p. 30) within its action the proportion of teachers who are female between 2014
plan for out-of-school children at the federal level. Having and 2019. The change over time has been small, however,
female teachers may help girls feel more comfortable ranging from only 0.70 per cent in Zamfara to 8 per cent, a
at school and see their own future more positively. In more notable increase, in Enugu State. The overall increase
addition, there is often an imbalance between rural and in recruitment of female teachers for Nigeria was 1.60 per
urban schools in the number of female teachers, which cent between 2014 and 2019.
Table 4.50: The proportion of female teachers at primary schools in Nigeria and by state
State 2014-2015 2015-2016 2016-2017 2017-2018 2018-2019 Change from
2014
Low-performing states
Kano 22.5per cent 23.7per cent 20.9per cent 24.2per 26.2per cent 3.70per cent
cent
Zamfara 17.2per cent 16.7per cent 16.6per cent 16.7per 19.9per cent 2.70per cent
cent
Transitioning states
Katsina 22.5per cent 23.0per cent 23.4per cent 23.7per 24.9per cent 2.40per cent
cent
Enugu 78.6per cent 80.1per cent 84.1per cent 83.2per 86.6per cent 8.00per cent
cent
High-performing states
Kwara 58.8per cent 59.5per cent 58.6per cent 55.7per 59.5per cent 0.70per cent
cent
Kaduna 49.5per cent 48.4per cent 50.0per cent 47.5per 52.1per cent 2.60per cent
cent
National 48.4per cent 47.8per cent 49.3per cent 47.4per 50.0per cent 1.60per cent
cent
Source: NDES, 2020
125
Education in Nigeria: Evaluation of the Effectiveness & Impact of SDG 4
The SDG4 evaluation team found similar results during Results from SDG4 evaluation primary data collection
primary school-level data collection where, overall, almost confirmed the observation from the NDES report where
half of the teachers (49.1 per cent) were female. Enugu is overall 81.1 per cent of the female teachers are qualified.
the state with the highest percentage of female teachers Enugu presented the highest proportion of qualified female
(86.8 per cent). Kwara (69.4 per cent) and Kaduna (54.5 teachers with 93.4 per cent; Kaduna followed with 86.9 per
per cent) are the other states where more than half of the cent. In Katsina (73.7 per cent), Kwara (81.2 per cent) and
teachers were reported as female. In Kano (29.4 per cent) Zamfara (79.4 per cent), about three quarters of the female
and Katsina (32.1 per cent), about 3 teachers out of 10 were teachers were qualified, according to head teachers. This
female. Zamfara showed the lowest proportion with less percentage is at its lowest in Kano where only 62.8 per cent
than one quarter (only 22.4 per cent) of female teachers. of the female teachers were qualified.
Gender analysis of pupil data
Qualifications of female teachers
The following sub-sections apply a gender lens to explore
While recruiting female teachers is important, having
how access and quality differ for girls and boys in Nigeria.
teachers who are appropriately qualified to teach pupils
The evaluation team turns to both primary and secondary
in order to foster effective and efficient learning is critical.
data analysis to investigate primary school attendance,
NDES data provided an opportunity to analyse teacher
completion rates and data on learning outcomes.
qualifications. Figure 3.26 presents the data for the three
most recently reported academic years, 2016–17, 2017–18
Gender parity in primary school attendance
and 2018–19. Generally, results showed an increasing trend
in the proportion of teachers who are qualified. Moreover, The gender parity index compares the primary and
the proportion of female teachers who are qualified exceeds secondary school attendance of girls and boys. A value
the proportion of male teachers in many cases. The latter greater than 1 signals that the attendance rate of girls is
is particularly true for Kaduna, Katsina and Zamfara States. higher than for boys while a value less than 1 signals that
the boys’ attendance rate is higher than for girls. The
126
Evaluation Findings and Analysis
evaluation team took advantage of multiple data sources large, however, and we may conclude that the attendance
to investigate gender parity: MICS and DHS household rate of girls was at 97 per cent of the attendance rate for
surveys as well as the NDES. The latter is a population- boys. At the national level, the gender parity index showed
based survey. Given the difference in methodologies for little variation. Comparing the states, we could conclude
each data set, we refrained from direct comparisons of data. that there is not much difference between states except for
According to the DHS 2018 data, the gender parity index Zamfara where the gender parity index is much lower than
overall at the national level had a value of 0.97 in 2018. This for the other states at 0.81 followed by Kaduna State at 0.88.
means that the attendance rate of boys was a little bit higher While some states, like Enugu, Kaduna or Kwara, have
than the attendance rate for girls. The difference is not shown little variation since 2007, other states demonstrated
Table 4.51: Gender parity index by year
State 2007 2008 2011 2013 2016 2018
MICS DHS MICS DHS MICS DHS
Low-performing states
Kano 0.75 0.76 0.85 1.04 0.93 0.99
Zamfara 0.58 0.73 0.83 0.64 0.71 0.81
Transitioning states
Katsina 0.74 0.70 0.79 0.92 1.04 1.00
Enugu 1.01 0.90 1.03 0.98 1.02 1.06
High-performing states
Kwara 0.95 1.01 1.12 0.98 0.99 0.98
Kaduna 0.95 0.90 1.07 0.96 1.04 0.88
National 0.94 0.91 0.94 0.95 0.95 0.97
127
Education in Nigeria: Evaluation of the Effectiveness & Impact of SDG 4
Table 4.52: Gender parity index by state and Federal Capital Territory (FCT)
State Gender Parity Index State Gender Parity Index State Gender Parity
Index
(NDES) 2020) (NDES) 2020)
(NDES) 2020)
Abia 0.95 Enugu 0.99 Niger 0.77
Adamawa 0.94 FCT 1.03 Ogun 0.88
Akwa Ibom 0.99 Gombe 0.92 Ondo 1
Anambra 0.98 Imo 0.99 Osun 1.01
Bauchi 0.88 Jigawa 0.92 Oyo 0.99
Bayelsa 0.98 Kaduna 0.9 Plateau 0.94
Benue 0.9 Kano 1.01 Rivers 1.04
Borno 0.93 Katsina 0.99 Sokoto 0.67
Cross River 1.01 Kebbi 0.61 Taraba 1
Delta 0.99 Kogi 0.96 Yobe 1.02
Ebonyi 1.01 Kwara 0.86 Zamfara 0.55
Edo 0.99 Lagos 1.07 Nigeria 0.95
Ekiti 1 Nasarawa 0.87
Table 4.53: NDES gender parity data for case-study states over three previous years
State 2015-2016 2017-2018 2018-2019
Low-performing states
Kano 0.98 1.18 1.01
Zamfara 0.7 0.98 0.55
Transitioning states
Katsina 0.95 0.96 0.99
Enugu 0.93 1.04 0.99
High-performing states
Kwara 0.93 0.98 0.86
Kaduna 0.92 1 0.9
National 0.96 1.05 0.95
better gender parity in 2018 than what was observed in Table 3.53 presents GPI data for the six case-study states
2007. In 2018, Enugu and Katsina had both achieved parity. over the past three years using NDES data. Due to other
Gender parity could reflect more efforts made by states to discrepancies noted with NDES data, the evaluation team
increase girls’ primary school attendance, but the change urges caution in interpreting these data
could also reflect that boys’ attendance was decreasing.
Table 3.51 and Figure 3.27 depict the gender parity index In sum, data on gender parity indices in Nigeria, and in
for each year of available data across the six states. particular, for the six case-study states demonstrate that
GPI is generally just under 1. This result indicates that
Table 3.52 presents gender parity using NDES 2019 girls are lagging a bit behind in primary school enrolment,
data. In general, the gender parity index (GPI) results are but the gap is not very wide. Regionally, results suggest
reflective of expected girls’ and boys’ enrolment in schools. that Zamfara shows the largest gap between girls and boys
For example, Zamfara (0.55), Kebbi (0.61) and Sokoto and Kano and Katsina seem to have closed the gap since
(0.67) report the lowest gender parity results for enrolment, about 2013 (as suggested by 2013 DHS data and following
indicating that boys outnumber girls by a large margin in studies).
those states.
128
Evaluation Findings and Analysis
Source: NDES, 2020
Gender analysis of completion rates points behind boys. Results for numeracy were slightly
better. According to NEDS 2015, 75 per cent of boys ages
Examination of completion rates further illuminated how
5–16 in urban areas were able to compute a one-digit maths
girls may experience education quite differently from boys
sum versus 40 per cent in rural areas. As with literacy, girls in
in Nigeria. The evaluation team accessed data through
urban areas surpassed their male counterparts very slightly,
NDES for the previous three academic years. Figure 3.28
as 76 per cent of girls assessed demonstrated numeracy
presents these data and shows that there is a lot of variability
while they underperformed compared to boys in rural areas
from one year to the next. This level of variation makes the
at 39 per cent of girls in rural areas. Unfortunately, this level
evaluation team question the validity of the data. Should
of detailed data was not available to the evaluation team for
the data be reliable, they show that boys complete the
the NEDS 2020 findings.
primary cycle more frequently than girls in all but one state,
Kano, where girls’ completion rate exceeds that of boys by
Data from the SDG4 evaluation provided an opportunity to
nearly 10 percentage points (90.5 per cent compared to 80.9
compare girls’ and boys’ learning outcomes over time using
per cent). Zamfara demonstrates the largest gap between
data from the previous studies serving here as baseline
boys’ and girls’ completion rates at 46.4 percentage points.
measures. In general, findings show little difference
The gap between girls’ and boys’ completion rates stayed
between girls’ and boys’ scores at both baseline and at
about the same through the three years analysed.
the time of the SDG4 evaluation. Analysis of baseline
results shows no difference between the two groups for P2
Learning outcomes for girls
numeracy and both P4 literacy and numeracy results. For
P2 literacy, although, at baseline, there was no meaningful
NEDS 2015 results indicate that 67 per cent of boys ages
difference in the overall sample at baseline. Boys showed
5–16 in urban areas were able to read versus 36 per cent in
significantly higher results in Katsina and Zamfara while
rural areas. Girls in urban areas slightly surpassed their male
the gap was no longer significant at the time of the
counterparts as 69 per cent demonstrated literacy while this
SDG4 evaluation. At this later point, results generally
was true for 34 per cent of girls in rural areas at 2 percentage
129
Education in Nigeria: Evaluation of the Effectiveness & Impact of SDG 4
showed that the gap between boys’ and girls’ learning For both numeracy assessments, one state demonstrated
outcomes was increasing contrary to desired outcomes. a significant difference in boys’ scores and skews overall
Boys demonstrated higher scores for the SDG4 evaluation sample results. For P2 numeracy, Kano boys demonstrated
overall for P2 literacy and both P2 and P4 numeracy though higher results than Kano girls (495.01 compared to 483.01;
the differences for numeracy were slight. P2 literacy results p=0.036). For P4, Kaduna state boys skewed the results
showed that boys increased the gap between boys’ and girls’ (506.81 compared to 487.75; p=0.030). Literacy scores from
performance from baseline to the time of SDG4 evaluation Enugu state presented the only exception where girls’
data collection. The difference increased from 2.51 to results surpassed boys’ results. P2 outcomes showed that
14.45 points. Because the sample is very big when dealing the average scores were very similar between boys and girls
with overall results, even small differences are significant. at baseline and that girls pulled further ahead at the time
130
Evaluation Findings and Analysis
of the SDG4 evaluation, now demonstrating significantly the SUBEBs at the state level. In addition, stakeholders
higher results (623.01 compared to 603.01; p=0.004). Figure interviewed from across all states spoke of the importance
3.53 shows how the GPI for assessment scores fluctuated of free compulsory basic education within their states
between time points for the case-study states where above. Some even indicated state laws and strategies to
comparison data are available. In general, we can conclude enforce children’s attendance at school. Both Zamfara and
that the gap did not change much between time points. Kano officials, for instance, indicated that there are punitive
measures in place for parents that do not comply. A Kaduna
4.8 Sustainability education official indicated that there is a fine of N30,000
or jail time of six months for parents that do not send their
children to school. No evidence was available at the time of
Overall Finding: There is potential for
data collection to the evaluation team of this policy being
sustainability, but it is weak as interventions are
enforced, however.
disparate
Quality of the Evidence: Medium
At the same time, findings above also indicate
Conclusion implementation problems in providing for accessible and
quality education for all girls and boys, in accordance with
in terms of sustainability, the government’s espoused
SDG4. These implementation problems threaten the
commitment to basic education persists since the
effectiveness of UBE’s promise. In addition, the evaluation
establishment of UBE in 2004 and continues to grow.
team observed challenges in communication between
SBMCs present a particular promise for both effectiveness
SUBEBs and MOEs during field visits. It seemed that
and sustainability and their potential should be harnessed
some of the offices do not have regular communications.
and multiplied in order to continue to improve enrolment,
UBEC officials at the federal level confirmed that tensions
retention and equity in schooling. Though less established,
often exist. Policy dictates that the MOE supervises while
the use of technology and public-private partnerships also
UBEC reports. Some stakeholders spoke of how UBEC
demonstrate sustainability.
is well appreciated among stakeholders because of its
In answering this question, the evaluation team focused
funding, making the Ministry of Education less effective.
on initiatives that have surfaced throughout the findings
All the same, findings show that some states have yet to
above as positive developments.
access counterpart funding. Inconsistent funding also
threatens the sustainability of Nigeria’s commitment to
Political commitment to basic education
UBE. Some stakeholders from states successfully accessing
Findings from above demonstrate a strong policy funding expressed their desire to maintain the same level
commitment to UBE, most notably evidenced by the 2004 of funding, including an education official from Katsina,
UBE Act and mechanisms to ensure basic education for all. who said:
These mechanisms include UBEC at the federal level and
SUMMARY CONCLUSIONS (Sustainability)
In terms of sustainability, the government’s espoused commitment to basic education persists since the establishment of UBE in
2004 and continues to grow. SBMCs present a particular promise for both effectiveness and sustainability and their potential should
be harnessed and multiplied in order to continue to improve enrolment, retention and equity in schooling. Though less established,
the use of technology and public-private partnerships also demonstrate sustainability.
Sus1: To what extent can any observed changes be maintained?
Evaluation question (Sustainability) Likely strength of evi- Data sources
dence
To what extent can any observed changes be maintained? Medium Literature review, KIIs
131
Education in Nigeria: Evaluation of the Effectiveness & Impact of SDG 4
I say I know for one thing, up to now we have ways in specifically for gender issues. It was impressed upon the
which we access UBEC funds and I know Katsina state evaluation team how SBMC has embraced ownership of the
will continue to follow suit in an attempt to pay its school and within the SBMC is the Mothers’ Association
counterpart funds, access funds and continue to run an that focused on house-to-house campaigns for mothers
upgrade, provide learning and teaching resource and to enrol their girls in school. In general, KII participants
materials to our primary schools. (Katsina Education
judge it to be a successful initiative that has contributed
Official)
greatly to enrolment and completion rates as well as to an
One additional potential threat to Nigeria’s implementation
improved gender parity index in the states. In addition, for
of basic education is changes in both federal- and state-level
the four states that participated in the ESSPIN project,
administrations that may shift priorities. Among others,
SBMCs began in 2007 and have continued since ESSPIN
Kaduna and Kwara education officials cited this concern
ended in 2017. It is also important to note that UNICEF
during interviews.
has supported the development of SBMCs, for example
in Zamfara State. This continuity is a clear indication of
Active and sustained SBMCs
sustainability. A Zamfara official made a particular plea for
continuity of support to Mothers’ Associations:
Interview data show that the sustainability of the
improved enrolment, retention, equity and completion
They are calling for the government to please make it
rate particularly for girls is seen to be dependent on the
mandatory that every school has to have this Mothers
continued functionality of the School-Based Management
Association, they are really supporting, because most of
Committee (SBMC) and the Mother’s Associations. All the
them, they are mothers. In the SBMCs, only few women
states agreed that SBMC is the most significant mechanism
are there, maybe one or two, the head girl and the
that can sustain the observed changes in enrolment, and
132
Evaluation Findings and Analysis
community leader, but the Mothers Association, all of embrace provision of technological devices through public-
them are mothers, so they are ready also to work, help private partnerships. In addition, a senior-level FMOE
and support the children in school. So, we are calling official underlined the importance of distance learning
the government that they make it mandatory that every strategies that became more real and accessible to many
school has to have this Mothers Association. (Zamfara (though not all) during the COVID-19 lockdown. Similarly,
Education Official)
an official from Zamfara expressed that they “want to
sustain them forever”. In Zamfara’s case, these distance
Additional indications of emerging sustainabil-
learning endeavours are developed through the RANA and
ity
BESDA projects. Nonetheless, the evaluation team urges
caution as findings from the impact question on COVID-19
Discussions with stakeholders revealed other components
above points to limited access to these electronic platforms,
of Nigeria’s approach to basic education that are of great
including radio.
interest to education actors and may continue into the long
term.
Monitoring and evaluation at the state-level – While
this report finds above that monitoring and evaluation is
Use of technology – Some stakeholders expressed great
generally weak, especially for the overall SDG4 effort, there
interest in continuing to use technology in education
are indications that systems-strengthening has occurred in
delivery. In Kaduna State, education officials explained
this realm. For instance, Kano education officials report
how ESSPIN had started the distribution and use of tablets
that their M&E teams are strong and that they have robust
to teachers and pupils and how the state has continued to
133
Education in Nigeria: Evaluation of the Effectiveness & Impact of SDG 4
mechanisms for monitoring and reporting. An official Partnerships with the private sector – Findings also point
commented: to successful partnerships that support basic education in
various ways. For instance, as a federal official pointed out,
We have a lot of senior support officers at LG level and private schools also support the larger goal of providing
at the state level with quality assurance, and they are basic education to all girls and boys. In addition, civil
going out week in, week out to schools to make sure that
society actors in Kaduna reported that they have increasing
learning is taking place. At the same time, they make
access to the education sector and are able to fulfil their
sure they are tracking the quality input by the teachers,
role in ensuring accountability (see the second impact
because we conduct a need assessment for each school
evaluation question above). As the responses to the second
each year. … Each quality officer is assigned to a certain
effectiveness evaluation question also pointed out, while
number of schools… and they are coming out with a
not necessarily fully sustainable, many state officials also
weekly report, and we put it together and come up with
reported that they benefit from the support of private
a monthly progress report. Then that progress is being
philanthropists. All of these initiatives are positive and
combined to an annual report. (Kano Education Official)
seem to have endured, demonstrating sustainability.
Advancements made by development partner projects are
Similarly, an education official in Zamfara mentioned
powerful but also precarious.
improved M&E systems that they developed through the
RANA activity. They have generally sustained them, and
Finally, as stakeholders noted within the response to the
Zamfara’s M&E system serves as a model for other states
second impact question above, while collaborations and
even though the project ended in 2018. At the same time,
support from development partners may be helpful and
a non-state actor in Zamfara questioned whether or not the
transformative, they do not often lasting beyond the end of
government is ready to increase its M&E efforts. It is worth
the project. Of course, there are some exceptions, such as
noting that the evaluation team was not able to verify the
SBMCs. Katsina non-state actors suggested in interviews
existence of such reports for either state.
that sustainability plans need to be part of all development
efforts.
134
Education Policies Analysis and
Implementation in Nigeria
Chapter 5
The focus of this evaluation is to assess the extent to which education policy and strategies have
impacted on the progress towards attaining the SDG4 by 2030. Thus, the evaluation team drew on the
6th edition of the National Policy on Education 2013, the Education Sector Strategic Plan 2016–2019
and its successor, the Ministerial Strategic Plan (2018–2022) for the policy-related evaluation questions
for which the major findings have been discussed in the preceding sections. This section highlights
key emerging issues that require policy attention if the SDG4.1 target is to be realized by year 2030.
137
Education in Nigeria: Evaluation of the Effectiveness & Impact of SDG 4
The 2013 National Policy on Education provides broad- The plan reflected and incorporated the aspirations of the
based guidelines on standards, procedures, strategies and SDGs with well-identified goals and target issues in basic
the coordination roles necessary to ensure and sustain the education and a list of clear strategies to address them.
delivery of quality education at all levels of government The MSP recognized that the Universal Basic Education
within Nigeria. This coordination is very important given (UBE) programme “was designed to be a veritable
that, by constitutional provision, education functions are tool for achieving some of the Education for All (EFA)
shared between the federal, state and local governments. goals” connected with MDG goals, the precursor to the
The policy recognized that basic education is, by law, SDGs. Moreover, the MSP referenced the SDG4 goal of
compulsory for all children of school age in Nigeria. “ensuring inclusive and equitable quality education and
The policy reiterates that, in public schools, schooling promoting lifelong learning opportunities for all”. It also
is provided free through the Universal Basic Education acknowledged that EFA targets had largely not been met
(UBE), which is backed by legislation (the Compulsory, and that it was necessary to review and set new milestones
Free, Universal Basic Education Act 2004). Furthermore, and targets.
the policy stipulates a Home-Grown School Feeding and
Health Programme (HGSFHP) that provides basic health It is important to note that the National Policy on Education
services and a free balanced meal per day for every child allows each state to design their Education Sector Strategy
that attends public primary or junior secondary school to Plan to take into account the particular education needs of
facilitate the success of the UBE programme. the state. For the six states included in this study, policy
review shows that their education sector strategies broadly
The Education Sector Strategic Plan 2016–2019 and the reflect National Education Policy directions in terms of
Ministerial Strategic Plans (MSP) have the same policy emphasizing the three main result areas of access, quality
orientation. In fact, the MSP is a continuation of ESSP. and system-strengthening. The degree of emphasis
138
Education Policies Analysis and Implementation in Nigeria
within a strategy to achieve access, quality and system implementation, evaluation and decision-making. To
strengthening differs from state to state. For instance, the date, data availability is a key challenge in basic education
four states of Kano, Katsina, Zamfara and Kaduna lay more planning and tracking of progress.
emphasis on how to increase access to all children who are
of school-going age because the northern part of Nigeria Future education planning in Nigeria at the federal and
accounts for the highest number of out-of-school children. state levels should start with the design of a collectively
This is not a challenge for Kwara and Enugu States. created and validated ToC so that it can fully understand
Thus, emphasis in those states is on quality and system- the assumptions and risks that need to be addressed
strengthening. State-level plans also address barriers to through its interventions if the desired change is to be
education. The response to the second evaluation question achieved. While a ToC should be included as part of a
on relevance below provides further details. results-based strategic plan, it should not be taken as a
static document, but one that may be reviewed, adapted
5.1 Emerging Policy Issues
and revised to reflect ongoing and emergent challenges,
considerations and priorities. Inadequate reliable data for
Based on the findings discussed in Chapter 3, a number of
planning and evaluating progress against targets is a major
key issues emerge that require attention from policymakers
challenge to plan formulation and implementation. There
and decision takers in the immediate to medium term.
is also a need to strengthen the Education Management
and Information System (EMIS) both at the federal and
5.1.1 Planning, implementation and coordi-
state levels for better evidence-based education planning
nation
and monitoring.
Information from interviews suggests that there is
considerable alignment between the National Education 5.1.2 Education financing
Policy, the Strategic plans, the State education plans and
How governments allocate funds to education is very critical
the SDG 4.1 target particularly at the formulation of the
to achieving the SDG4.1. However, document review
plans, but a big gap exists at the implementation level. This
demonstrates that Nigeria faces significant challenges in
gap is due, in part, to the lack of a coordination framework
providing transparent data regarding education financing.
for the various implementing agencies, including those
The absence, unavailability and/or unreliability of data
in the education sector. Policy action at the federal and
are major impediments to financing education. Evidence
state levels would require that a monitorable coordination
is sparse on how much money is spent by governments
framework is put in place to ensure that all actors in the
on education, and on how it is spent, particularly at the
implementation of various plans act in concertation with
state level. A deeper understanding is needed of public
one another.
expenditure on education, on the relationship between
planning and budgeting systems, and on their relationship
Furthermore, findings show that there was no formal
with pupils’ learning outcomes. Most accountability
situation analysis or needs assessment in the development
is upwards to higher levels of government rather than
process of the ESSP and its successor plan but, they
outwards toward communities, although decentralized
were largely informed by contributions from parastatals
school governance through SBMCs is attempting to
and departments within the FMOE, numerous reports,
address this. Crucial to its success are consistent funding
plans and documents that were produced in the past and
and LGEA support.
interventions from development partners. These were
then synthesized and articulated to produce the MSP, the
In summary, there is no single source of data on expenditure
plan that became the roadmap to guide the sector from
on basic education and, therefore, it is difficult to have
the end of 2016 to 2019. Neither the ESSP or the MSP
validated consolidated information on public expenditure
has a theory of change (ToC) or a results measurement
allocated to, and effectively and efficiently spent on, basic
framework, which makes it difficult to gain a clear
education in Nigeria. In a study by the World Bank in
understanding of how the plan intends to influence the
2015, it was noted that “consolidated budget information
expected results or how the results will be measured.
would require the harmonization of charts of accounts used
Having a results framework also implies the need to have a
across levels of government, the functional reclassification
robust data generation and collection system for planning,
139
Education in Nigeria: Evaluation of the Effectiveness & Impact of SDG 4
of budget expenditure and systematic audited reporting This governance arrangement often creates overlapping
on budget execution.” The study concluded that “for lack roles and responsibilities and sometimes unhealthy
of such standardized budget information, it is practically competition between the agencies for resource
impossible to assess the effectiveness of financial resources management that makes a coordination role at multiple
allocation in basic education.” There is the need for policy levels difficult. There is also the issue of political will
action both at the federal and state level to address the (taking decisions and follow through) at the state level to
dearth of financial data that makes it difficult to know how see that basic education services are delivered according
much of total federal and state budgets are allocated to to the standard envisaged in the national education policy
education through an accountability framework that will and strategic plan. There is a need to review the UBE Act
clearly define what amount of budget goes to what level of 2004 in the light of lessons from its implementation
of education. to create an accountability framework among the various
actors across the federal, state and local government to
Furthermore, funding levels vary between states. As strengthen the delivery of basic education service in the
argued multiple times above, even with basic education country.
declared as free, parents still bear a considerable burden
in getting their children to school because they have to 5.1.4 Barriers to access, retention and com-
pay PTA levies. While originally intended to cover gaps pletion
in spending, PTA levies or development levies contradict
Finally, if barriers to increasing enrolment, retention
free education promises and pose a serious challenge.
and completion are to be overcome, policy actions at
They are heavily contested and politically charged. The
the federal and state levels in consultation with relevant
policymakers at the federal and state levels, in consultation
stakeholders, like community leaders and PTAs, should
with relevant stakeholders such as the community and
focus on these key barriers that cut across out-of-school
PTA should give a clear policy direction and guide on
and basic education. These are well elaborated in Table
how development levies will be applied in schools so as
3.2 of this report. The key barriers are:
not to constitute a serious barrier to enrolment, as they are
• Sociocultural barriers and beliefs that impede girls’
presently.
education
• Inadequate and unfriendly school environments
5.1.3 Education governance
in terms of infrastructure, teaching and learning
Nigeria has a decentralized structure of governance with materials
responsibility for education administration divided among • Teacher shortage and low capacity of existing
the federal, state and local governments. Each level of teachers
government has a set of responsibilities. The federal • Weak political will and capacity to support basic
government sets policy, assures quality of education and education, in particular the UBE Act of 2004,
administers the national EMIS. A range of actors share including weak monitoring and data management
responsibility for education administration and delivery systems and mismanagement of funds
at the state level. The UBE Act created the Universal • Safety and security challenges in schools
Basic Education Commission (UBEC) at the federal level, • • inadequate funding of education from the
State Universal Basic Education Boards (SUBEBs) at state and federal levels and charging of PTA or
the state and Local Government Education Authorities development levies to parents.
(LGEA) at the local level. Moreover, the act created the
UBE-Intervention Fund responsible for disbursing funds
through UBEC to SUBEBs for improving the access and
quality of basic education.
140
Conclusions, Lessons Learned
and Recommendations
Chapter 6
6.1 Conclusions
• This section draws across the various evaluation questions to summarize and assess Nigeria’s
progress towards reaching SDG4.1. The conclusions from this evaluation are as follows:
• Policy review indicates and interviewees unanimously confirm that education sector policies and
strategies both at the federal and state levels align with the SDG4.1 target particularly in the for-
mulation of the plans. Most notable is the 2004 Compulsory, free, Universal Basic Education (UBE)
Act. Alignment is deliberate and the product of government and development partner efforts.
143
Education in Nigeria: Evaluation of the Effectiveness & Impact of SDG 4
• SDG4 is interconnected with other SDGs, most notably inadequate. These weaknesses also constitute major
poverty (SDG1), health (SDG3), gender equality barriers for the system.
(SDG5) and sanitation (SDG6). Intersectionality • Gaps between strategy and implementation have
between education, gender and poverty is commonly hindered Nigeria’s progress at multiple levels.
discussed in documents reviewed while intensified A governance challenge resides at the heart of
awareness of the importance of good health to the issue. Federal, state and local governments
education has become even more prominent during share responsibility for education in Nigeria. In
the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic. Moreover, both addition, SUBEBs and SMOEs have overlapping
NEDS and SDG4 evaluation school survey findings responsibilities, and coordination between them
point to illness as the number one reason for children was found to be weak. The UBE Act and UBEC
not attending school. lack the mandate to influence major investments in
• The federal government recognizes key barriers basic education at the state level. Moreover, while
to achieving SDG4 and addresses them within its the FMOE provides useful guidance to states, by
strategy priorities. All states also show evidence of design, states remain autonomous and apply FMOE
initiatives aimed at addressing barriers, improving suggestions at their discretion. Accountability is weak
school enrolment and fostering improved quality. between federal and state governments in terms of
Poverty, insecurity and a weak political will are the implementation of key programmes.
most concerning barriers. The government addresses • Similarly, a gap exists between the SDG offices and
these barriers through strategies aimed at promoting SDG implementing agencies as coordination is weak.
community engagement, addressing sociocultural • Monitoring and evaluation systems focusing on basic
barriers, developing state-level basic education education, and SDG4.1 in particular, are weak and, in
strategies and collaborating with development some cases, nonexistent. The 2020 Voluntary National
partners. In addition, the evaluation found education Review as well as the 2017 SDG baseline evaluation
financing to be lower than in other African countries report omit data on SDG4.1 entirely. Monitoring
and that transparency about budgeting and spending efforts within the FMOE, while improved since
is very poor. Findings also indicate that coordination the launch of the Sustainable Development Goals,
around budget allocation, release and spending is remain focused at the activity and output levels.
144
Conclusions, Lessons Learned and Recommendations
No tracking or monitoring reports were available attend school than rural peers, suggesting major gaps
for review, signalling the need for improvements. according to location.
Moreover, results frameworks for SDG4.1 and the • Quality: Quantitative evidence from NEMIS
FMOE do not exist. Nigeria’s overall education data presented within Figures 18 and 19 on access
financing is far below that of other African countries indicators and findings from NEDS (2015) on learning
and transparency in financing data is extremely weak. outcomes reveal that Nigeria is not likely to achieve
At the state level, actual expenditure regularly falls the global agenda of universal inclusive and equitable
below planned expenditure due to the non-release quality basic education for all (100 per cent) school-
of capital funds budgeted. The inability of some age children by 2030. The net enrolment rate shows
states to access UBEC counterpart funding is a lost that just over two thirds of children (69.9 per cent)
opportunity to enhance basic education at the state were attending school in 2019. Regarding quality,
level. NEDS 2020 data show that only 41 per cent of P2-age
• Funding for basic education is inherently shared children were able to read one word from a flashcard
between multiple actors, including the federal and 44 per cent were able to perform a single-digit
government, state governments, development addition problem. Results for literacy remained
partners, private actors and parents, among others. stable whereas numeracy results decreased by 10
Funding for basic education is complex and data are percentage points since 2015 (see Table 3.19). The
incomplete or nonexistent, thus precluding a robust absence of national benchmarks prevents meaningful
analysis of government funding sources. Funding comparisons of pupils’ proficiency over time and
levels vary between states. Even with basic education between states. Using NEDS benchmarking, results
declared as free, parents still bear a considerable are highly worrying as across the sample, nearly half
burden in getting their children to school. While of pupils complete P4 without being able to read
originally intended to cover gaps in spending, school one word from a flashcard or perform a single-digit
and PTA levies contradict free education promises addition problem. Pupils in urban areas outperform
and pose a serious challenge. They are heavily pupils in rural areas. Overall, the gender gap is small
contested and politically charged. with girls generally trailing behind, and more so in
• Conclusions on cost-effectiveness are limited by rural areas.
inaccessibility of budget information for three of the • Systems-strengthening: At the school level, SBMCs
six case-study states. From examination of Enugu, represent a powerful coordination mechanism and
Kaduna and Kwara State records, data confirm that garner enthusiasm among education stakeholders.
as enrolment increases, per pupil cost decreases. At the federal level, the National Education
These calculations, however, do not consider the Group (NEG), a body made up of government and
negative impact to quality of education that occurs as development partners, constitutes a potentially
school populations increase, often leading to higher strong coordination mechanism at the national level,
pupil-teacher ratios, the use of makeshift classrooms but could benefit from further broadening of its scope
and insufficient materials for pupils. In addition, to expand beyond specific development partner
Kaduna’s approach to enforcing universal basic projects. The UBE Act and the UBEC Intervention
education through the use of EduMarshals merits Fund hold promise as important structures, but
further exploration as a promising practice. also suffer from implementation flaws and weak
• Assessment of achievement of MSP outcomes is also coordination.
limited due to the absence of a results framework, • Close study of learning outcomes scores over time
weak monitoring and inadequate statistical data. demonstrates a gain between baseline measures
Findings from the SDG4 evaluation nonetheless (GEP3 2015 evaluation and ESSPIN 2015 Composite
provide insights into the outcome areas. Survey, used as “baseline” studies) and SDG4
• Access: Enrolment numbers continue to increase evaluation assessments for end-of-P2 and end-of-P4
though attendance rates indicate that less than two- literacy and numeracy overall and for almost all of
thirds of pupils attend school nationally while rates the six case-study states. Pupils in Enugu State
vary significantly between states. Children in urban consistently outperform others while Kwara State
areas are nearly 30 percentage points more likely to also showed significant improvement. Kaduna State
145
Education in Nigeria: Evaluation of the Effectiveness & Impact of SDG 4
P4 pupils also demonstrated noticeable improvement same time, development partner interventions
(analysis was not possible for P2 pupils due to school surface as the most common attribute for post-2016
closures for early primary levels). Conclusions are changes, and to a lesser extent the NHGSFP. The
limited, however, because comparison with baseline creation and success of SBMCs, a development
studies was not possible for all states. partner initiative, is also notable. Negative drivers
• Inadequate economic power remains a barrier to include the recession, insecurity and changes in
access, and more so for girls than boys, according national and state administration, as well as lacking
to SDG4 school survey findings and NEDS results. sustainability of activities becoming unsustainable
Government policies recognize that sociocultural when development partner projects recede.
beliefs and practices, including gender norms • The National Home-Grown School Feeding
minimizing the importance of girls’ education, as Programme (NHGSFP) is the most prominent
well as the significant challenge of insecurity in some flagship programme related to education. Although
of Nigeria’s states act as barriers. Interview findings results frameworks for measuring the impact of
underline repeatedly that insecurity in Katsina, government flagship policies such as the NHGSFP
Kaduna and Zamfara significantly hinders access. and the Nigerian National Cash Transfer Programme
Insecurity poses a serious threat to Nigeria meeting (NCCT) were not available to the evaluation
its SDG4 goals. It is likely that pupils in areas with team, interview data show great enthusiasm for the
continued insecurity will continue to fall behind and NHGSFP. While NHGSFP reports also demonstrate
not have an opportunity to learn like their peers in enrolment increases, analysis of learning outcomes
more stable environments. shows little improvement for participating schools
• Despite MSP-espoused actions to improve within the SDG4 school sample compared to non-
school infrastructure, findings show that lacking participating schools. Similarly, the programme
infrastructure, notably insufficient numbers of suffers from implementation inconsistencies that
classrooms and inadequate and poorly maintained require attention. The evaluation team notes that
structures and the need for WASH facilities, continues school feeding programmes alone may address access
to serve as a barrier to progress. Data were generally for a limited time, but they cannot address quality
inadequate for this analysis and NDES data, though or access in the long term without dedicated efforts
available, suffer from inconsistencies. Key informant to improve teaching, learning and the overall school
interview findings somewhat contradict statistics as environment.
education officials in some states emphasized efforts • At the time of writing, the NHGSFP was still
to improve infrastructure. This contradiction may suspended due to the pandemic. Nigeria is not alone
suggest that the dismal state of schools’ infrastructure in the subregion for suspending its programming,
is still an improvement over the previous situation or but the WFP strongly urges countries to resume
that infrastructure efforts were limited in their reach. operations (see World Food Program, 2020). Benin,
• Investigation of human resources as a potential driver for example, has resumed its programming and may
for improving quality shows that few gains have been be able to offer insights for Nigeria, not only for
made in increasing teacher coverage within the resumption during the pandemic, but also in general,
period of the SDG4 evaluation. Pupil-teacher ratios for its progress in school feeding.
have also unfortunately increased in this period as • While the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic will
teacher recruitment has not been able to keep up continue to emerge, schools experienced at least four
with population growth and enrolment increases. At months of learning loss. Of concern, more than half of
the same time, the qualifications of existing teachers pupils surveyed report not having participated in an
seem to have improved during this time period. alternative form of learning during school closures.
• Analysis of differences in drivers supporting and While findings are inconsistent, they indicate that
hindering success in reaching SDG4 goals during one fifth of schools had experienced a loss of a quarter
different periods within the time frame of the or more of their pupils at the time of data collection.
evaluation are inconclusive as there was variation Much needs to be done to support local economies
in experiences and outcomes for the different and enhance enrolment campaigns as well as to
case-study states during these periods. At the establish effective catch-up programming.
146
Conclusions, Lessons Learned and Recommendations
• Learning outcomes underline that children in the 6.2 Lessons learned
lowest wealth quintiles consistently underperform
The evaluation team developed the following lessons
their peers and evidence shows no meaningful
learned and explanations of shortfalls in effectiveness and
indication of change in improving learning and
impact of the MSP 2016–2020 towards SDG4 that emerged
lessening economic barriers between baseline studies
as reflections throughout the evaluation process:
(GEP3 2015 evaluation, ESSPIN 2015 composite
Complexity of the education sector: Findings from the
survey) and the SDG4 evaluation. National and
report point to a number of driving factors and contextual
state-level strategies, particularly UBE, emphasize
elements that all contribute to a challenging environment
education for all and providing services to the most
for basic educational delivery. When any one of these
marginalized groups. These strategies support
factors is out of balance, the system is likely to suffer.
principles of equity, universality and ‘leave no one
behind’. At the state level, where implementation
Findings highlight supporting factors that include, from
is most critical, however, deliberate strategies are
the supply side, Nigeria’s early and continued commitment
absent and education programmes are failing to
to the Universal Basic Education Act (2004), successful
meet the needs of the most vulnerable children,
state contributions to UBEC counterpart funding and the
including children with disabilities. Most insidious
establishment of school-based management committees
of the structural barriers are PTA levies, which are
(SBMCs). Notable demand-side factors include gender,
deliberately constructed by schools and PTAs.
SES, a mother’s education and support for reading at
Additional sensitization is required for education
home. Hindering factors include the current COVID
officials to recognize the challenges and structural
pandemic, increasing insecurity in growing portions of
barriers that prevent the most marginalized from truly
the country, recent economic recessions, and hidden out-
accessing and benefiting from educational services.
of-pocket education expenses for parents that negate the
• Similarly, the government policies demonstrate
promise of free basic education. The report also concludes
attention to gender equality and the empowerment
that there is a lack of deliberate government strategies to
of girls and women, yet completion rates of girls
support the most vulnerable children’s access to quality
continue to lag behind boys overall and comparison
education, including children with disabilities. Similarly,
of learning results between baseline studies and the
the gender gap persists as girls continue to trail boys in
SDG4 evaluation shows little progress in closing
learning outcomes.
the gender gap. There has been improvement
in recruitment of female teachers since 2016 and
Conclusions demonstrate that relevant evidence
generally female teachers are more qualified than
and monitoring data are also weak within the sector,
their male counterparts according to available data.
complicating analyses. There is a lack of education
Nonetheless, much remains to be done to make girls
benchmarks, which constrains meaningful discussions of
more comfortable, supported and successful at school
pupil proficiency, inadequate disaggregated and reliable
over the longer term in order to stay in school and
data, and a lack of standardized metrics to assess progress
complete primary school, including more deliberate
and implementation towards SDG4.
policies, activities and gender-sensitive monitoring
efforts.
6.3 Recommendations
• In terms of sustainability, the government’s espoused
commitment to basic education persists since the Table 5.1 presents 4 top-level and 20 detailed
establishment of UBE in 2004 and continues to recommendations that draw upon the findings and
grow. SBMCs present a particular promise for both conclusions above. Although the findings above suggest
effectiveness and sustainability and their potential many ways in which stakeholders are already implementing
should be harnessed and multiplied in order to initiatives to strengthen the sector, here we focus on the
continue to improve enrolment, retention and equity findings that identify areas for improvement. Recognizing
in schooling. Though less established, the use of the interdependence between the various drivers that
technology and public-private partnerships also affect education access and quality, the evaluation team
demonstrate sustainability. suggests a holistic approach to implementing these
recommendations. The actions suggested here will
147
Education in Nigeria: Evaluation of the Effectiveness & Impact of SDG 4
be much more effective if considered in their entirety of the SDG3 Evaluation organized by OSSAP-SDGs in
rather than individually. Implementing them with close Uyo, Akwa Ibom in September 2021 involving experts
coordination, synchronization and a holistic approach will from federal and state levels and UN Agencies (UN RCO,
maximize the likelihood of achieving positive impacts in UNICEF, and UNDP). Annex I includes the list of the
learning and within the basic education sector as a whole. participants of the Review and Validation Workshop.
For convenience, we have also included sub-tables that In addition, the UNICEF Country Office in Nigeria
regroup the recommendations by level of implementation: reviewed all the recommendations with a strategic lens
state, LGA and community, and development partners. during UNICEF’s Evaluation Panel Review Committee
The recommendations from the evaluation have been meetings chaired by the UNICEF Country Representative
discussed, revised, and finalized through participatory involving the UNICEF Deputy Representative, Planning
approaches in many successive meetings: the Technical & Monitoring Sections, Chiefs of Health & Nutrition
SDGs Evaluation Committee Meeting held at OSSAP- Sections, and the Chiefs of Field Offices and the UNICEF
SDGs in August 2021; the constructive participatory Evaluation Manager.
Review and Validation Workshop of the final draft report
148
Conclusions, Lessons Learned and Recommendations
Table 6.1: Recommendations
# Recommendation
Top-level recommendations for accelerating the attainment of SDG4 of education in Nigeria, as Nigeria is unlikely to achieve SDG4
by 2030
A Government must develop and implement with adequate resources,
a New Results Based Strategic Plan 2023-2030 of the Education Sec-
tor for Nigeria aligned with SDG2030 and the National Development
Plan 2021-2025 taking into account Covid19 negative effects on
pupil’s learnings and lessons learned from SDG4 Evaluation that will
enable Accelerated Progress of Nigeria towards the global agenda of
Universal Access and Quality of Basic Education in 2030. In addition,
a comprehensive analytical theory of change and results framework
plus road map (including indicators, baseline, expected targets for
federal level and each state) of SDG4 in Nigeria must be developed.
B Supply side: Massive investment must be made by government,
development partners and private sectors and communities to build
sufficient infrastructure, develop and recruit enough teachers and
procure sufficient learning materials that could enable the country to
meet the global commitment of universal access to basic education
considering the huge demographic growth of Nigeria
C Demand side: To address the issue of 10 million out-of-school
children, a major communication drive should be held and equita-
ble conditions established to reduce social and financial barriers to
attract and keep children to schools.
D Quality: National and state levels should define learning outcome
proficiency benchmarks. UNICEF’s Nigeria should support the Federal
Ministry of Education to establish a Nationally accepted standard for
calculating Minimum Proficiency Level in Literacy and Numeracy for
Nigeria including adequate Data Collection Tools
E Accelerating the attainment of SDG4: UNICEF should support the
Federal Ministry of Education to carry out further deeper analysis to
find out the proficiency level of learners in reading and mathematics
using primary data from the SDG4 evaluation completed in six states
and the technical agency
Policy Priority level Relevant stakeholder
develop-
ment
1 The Federal Ministry of Education should continue to strengthen the Immediate FMOE
coherence between national education policies, notably the 2004
UBE Act and the SDGs as the FMOE considers the next iteration of the
MSP to follow the current policy’s expiration in 2022.
2 The Federal Ministry of Education should initiate a collective process Immediate FMOE
to develop a theory of change for the basic education sector that will
be incorporated into the next MSP (in 2022). Consultative sessions SMOEs & SUBEBs
with key stakeholders such as State Ministries of Education, State
Development partners
Universal Basic Education Boards, civil society organizations in the ed-
ucation sector and development partners will improve the likelihood
of ownership and adherence to the theory of change.
3 Once the theory of change is established, the Federal Ministry of Immediate FMOE
Education should, in consultations with SMOEs and SUBEBs, develop
a proper results framework to guide the next MSP (2022). Empower SMOEs & SUBEBs
technical staff to develop outcome-based targets and indicators
in addition to output-based indicators and targets. The framework
should be gender- and conflict-sensitive.
149
Education in Nigeria: Evaluation of the Effectiveness & Impact of SDG 4
4 National and State level should define learning outcome proficien- Immediate FMOE
cy benchmarks. Both the ESSPIN and NEDS benchmarks provide
a starting point for understanding pupils’ competencies but they SMOEs & SUBEBs
were not developed through a ministry-led inclusive and credible
Development partners
benchmarking process. The evaluation team recommends fostering
a benchmarking process led by the Federal Ministry of Education in
collaboration with development partners to develop target profi-
ciency levels that will allow for consistent and contextually sound
comparison of learning outcomes countrywide. The process needs to
take into account a variety of stakeholders including state and federal
ministry officials, education technical staff, policymakers, linguists
and development partners. The process should be led by the Federal
Ministry of Education and should be consultative in order to ensure
buy-in to eventual benchmarks.
Education
financing
5 The Federal Ministry of Education should lead a process with the sup- Immediate FMOE-UBEC
port of the Office of OSSAP-SDGs to engage in advocacy, that would
help to build political will/incentives necessary to prioritize and OSSAP-SDGs
increase basic education financing up to 20per cent of the Federal
SMOEs & SUBEB
Budget, by increasing and earmarking budget lines both at the state
and federal level, so that basic education is truly free as promised by Federal and State
the UBE Act of 2004. In addition, increasing education financing will governments
also help Nigeria to be better in line with expectation of the Educa-
tion 2030 SDG4 Framework for Action and practices of other African
countries.
6 The ministries responsible for education and finance, both at the fed- Immediate FMOE
eral and state levels, should work together to ensure timely release
of funds for budgeted activities. At the state level, all states should SMOEs
take advantage of UBEC matching grants by making the required
Federal Ministry of
contributions. UBEC and the FMOE can develop systems to further
Finance, Budget and
incentivize states to make necessary commitments through sharing
National Planning
of best practices.
State Ministry of
Finance
UBEC
7 The FMOE along with states should commission a dedicated study Medium term FMOE-UBEC
to obtain complete information on education cost-effectiveness.
The study will need to be administered and framed in a way that SMOEs & SUBEB
promotes participation from all state authorities.
OSSAP
8 Both the Federal Ministry of Education and State Ministries of Edu- Immediate FMOE-UBEC
cation should delineate clear policies and strategies that go beyond
education for all to strategically target the most vulnerable. These SMOEs & SUBEBs
policies will need to recognize the structural barriers that may keep
children out of school, such as economic hardship, distance from
schools and sociocultural barriers, such as gender norms.
Options might include intensifying conditional cash transfer, reinforc-
ing the school feeding programme and ensuring adequate budget
provision for school operation expenses in order to eliminate PTA
levies.
150
Conclusions, Lessons Learned and Recommendations
9 Both the Federal and State Ministries of Education should jointly Immediate FMOEs
conduct listening sessions in each of the states to understand the
role and purpose of PTA levies with a view to developing a guideline SMOEs & SUBEBs
on the application of levies as an alternative form of funding.
School PTAs/SBMCs
Coordina-
tion and
implemen-
tation
10 Recognizing the important influence that devel- Immediate FMOE-UBEC
opment partner programming can have on the
education sector, as well as how states may expe- SMOEs & SUBEB
rience downturns when projects end, the develop-
Development partners
ment partners should take advantage of the National
Education Group to further harmonize their pro- NEG
grammes. The Federal Ministry of Education should
make efforts to strengthen and expand the scope
of the NEG, and to replicate coordination at the
state level. The Federal Ministry of Education should
include development partner programming within
the UBE section of the MSP to avoid duplication of
projects.
11 Development partners should ensure that sustain- Immediate, ongoing FMOE-UBEC
ability plans are built into government as well as
development partner programming. SMOEs & SUBEB
Development partners
NEG
12 The Federal Ministry of Humanitarian Affairs, Disaster Immediate Federal Ministry of Humanitarian
Management and Social Development should Affairs, Disaster Management and
resume the NHGSFP as soon as possible with pan- Social Development (FMHADMSD)
demic-appropriate measures in place. Seek guidance
from the WFP as well as other countries that have SMOEs & SUBEBs
successfully resumed operation.
13 Given governance challenges, the Federal Ministry Immediate FMOE-UBEC
of Education should initiate and support a process of
long-term planning with a set of standards to hold SMOEs & SUBEB
states accountable for implementation. As part of
this process, develop and strengthen coordination
mechanisms that can help tighten collaborations and
information sharing between federal- and state-level
entities.
14 OSSAP-SDGs should strengthen coordination efforts Immediate OSSAP-SDGs
between the OSSAP-SDGs and implementing agen-
cies (e.g., FMOE).
151
Education in Nigeria: Evaluation of the Effectiveness & Impact of SDG 4
15 Both the Federal and State Ministry of Education Immediate FMOE-UBEC
should further develop, strengthen and raise aware-
ness of Nigeria’s alternative education programming SMOEs & SUBEB
that can target OOSC. In order to deal with growing
insecurity, strengthen distance learning options.
This may include developing strategies for teachers
to provide pupils with schoolwork and feedback
during periods of school closures. Investigate ways to
increase access to alternative education for pupils in
rural areas and for girls.
16 Both the Federal and State Ministry of Education, in Immediate FMOE
collaboration with Development partners, should
develop initiatives at the federal and national level SMOEs & SUBEBs
to capitalize and promote the success of SBMCs and
Development partners
their operations to support equity, quality and access
to basic education. Examples might include compe-
titions, conferences, formalization of SBMC networks
and exchanges.
17 Both the Federal and State Ministry of Education in Immediate FMOE
collaboration with Development partners should
strengthen COVID-19 response strategies to prioritize SMOEs & SUBEBs
catch-up. Special attention is warranted for girls,
Development partners
as they are likely to have been more negatively
impacted than boys by the pandemic. Employ evi-
dence-based strategies that maintain instruction at
grade level rather than repeating missed instruction.
See USAID Strategies for
A ccelerating Learning During Crisis as well as other
resources from the Accelerated Education Working
Group.
Moni-
toring &
Evaluation
18 Both the Federal and State Ministry of Education Immediate FMOE-UBEC
should further strengthen EMIS and coordinate with
NDES to improve education data management for SMOEs-SUBEB
better planning, implementation, monitoring and
evaluation at both the federal and state levels.
19 OSSAP-SDGs should improve and enforce its moni- Immediate OSSAP-SDG
toring efforts of SDG progress within the FMOE, and
if applicable, across other relevant ministries. Create a FMOE
working group among concerned ministries to share
best practices and resources. Monitoring data should
allow for disaggregation that will support social
inclusion and equity, including by gender, socioeco-
nomic status and disability.
152
Conclusions, Lessons Learned and Recommendations
20 State Ministries of Education should analyse 2020– Immediate FMOE
2021 EMIS data to better understand the degree to
which school leaving occurred that may be attrib- SMOEs
utable to COVID-19 school closures and share with
the Federal Ministry of Education to have a national
report.
Table 5.2: Recommendations for stakeholders at state level
# Recommendation Priority Level Relevant Stakeholder
Policy develop-
ment
1 The Federal Ministry of Education should initiate a Immediate FMOE
collective process to develop a theory of change for
the basic education sector that will be incorporated SMOEs & SUBEBs
into the next MSP 2023-2030 (in 2022). Consultative
Development partners
sessions with key stakeholders such as State Minis-
tries of Education, State Universal Basic Education
Boards, civil society organizations in the education
sector and development partners will improve the
likelihood of ownership and adherence to the theory
of change.
2 Once the theory of change is established, the Fed- Immediate FMOE
eral Ministry of Education should, in consultations
with SMOEs and SUBEBs, develop a proper results SMOEs & SUBEBs
framework to guide the next MSP (2022). Empower
technical staff to develop outcome-based targets
and indicators in addition to output-based indicators
and targets. The framework should be gender- and
conflict-sensitive.
3 National and State level should define learning Immediate FMOE
outcome proficiency benchmarks. Both the ESSPIN
and NEDS benchmarks provide a starting point for SMOEs & SUBEBs
understanding pupils’ competencies but they were
Development partners
not developed through a ministry-led inclusive and
credible benchmarking process. The evaluation team
recommends fostering a benchmarking process led
by the Federal Ministry of Education in collabora-
tion with development partners to develop target
proficiency levels that will allow for consistent and
contextually sound comparison of learning out-
comes countrywide. The process needs to take into
account a variety of stakeholders including state and
federal ministry officials, education technical staff,
policymakers, linguists and development partners.
The process should be led by the Federal Ministry
of Education and should be consultative in order to
ensure buy-in to eventual benchmarks.
Education
financing
153
Education in Nigeria: Evaluation of the Effectiveness & Impact of SDG 4
4 The Federal Ministry of Education should lead a pro- Immediate FMOE-UBEC
cess with the support of the Office of OSSAP-SDGs to
engage in advocacy, that would help to build politi- OSSAP-SDGs
cal will/incentives necessary to prioritize and increase
SMOEs & SUBEB
basic education funding, by earmarking budget
lines both at the state and federal level, so that basic Federal and State governments
education is truly free as promised by the UBE Act of
2004. In addition, increasing education financing will
also help Nigeria to be better in line with expectation
of the Education 2030 SDG4 Framework for Action
and practices of other African countries.
5 The ministries responsible for education and finance, Immediate FMOE
both at the federal and state levels, should work
together to ensure timely release of funds for bud- SMOEs
geted activities. At the state level, all states should
Federal Ministry of Finance,
take advantage of UBEC matching grants by making
Budget and National Planning
the required contributions. UBEC and the FMOE can
develop systems to further incentivize states to make State Ministry of Finance
necessary commitments through sharing of best
practices. UBEC
6 The FMOE along with states should commission a Medium term FMOE-UBEC
dedicated study to obtain complete information on
education cost-effectiveness. The study will need to SMOEs & SUBEB
be administered and framed in a way that promotes
OSSAP
participation from all state authorities.
7 Both the Federal Ministry of Education and State Min- Immediate FMOE-UBEC
istries of Education should delineate clear policies
and strategies that go beyond education for all to SMOEs & SUBEBs
strategically target the most vulnerable. These poli-
cies will need to recognize the structural barriers that
may keep children out of school, such as economic
hardship, distance from schools and sociocultural
barriers, such as gender norms.
Options might include intensifying conditional cash
transfer, reinforcing the school feeding programme
and ensuring adequate budget provision for school
operation expenses in order to eliminate PTA levies.
8 Both the Federal and State Ministries of Education Immediate FMOEs
should jointly conduct listening sessions in each of
the states to understand the role and purpose of SMOEs & SUBEBs
PTA levies with a view to developing a guideline on
School PTAs/SBMCs
the application of levies as an alternative form of
funding.
Coordination
and implemen-
tation
154
Conclusions, Lessons Learned and Recommendations
9 Recognizing the important influence that devel- Immediate FMOE-UBEC
opment partner programming can have on the
education sector, as well as how states may expe- SMOEs & SUBEB
rience downturns when projects end, the develop-
Development partners
ment partners should take advantage of the National
Education Group to further harmonize their pro- NEG
grammes. The Federal Ministry of Education should
make efforts to strengthen and expand the scope
of the NEG, and to replicate coordination at the
state level. The Federal Ministry of Education should
include development partner programming within
the UBE section of the MSP to avoid duplication of
projects.
10 Development partners should ensure that sustain- Immediate, ongoing FMOE-UBEC
ability plans are built into government as well as
development partner programming. SMOEs & SUBEB
Development partners
NEG
11 The Federal Ministry of Humanitarian Affairs, Disaster Immediate Federal Ministry of Humanitar-
Management and Social Development should ian Affairs, Disaster Manage-
resume the NHGSFP as soon as possible with pan- ment and Social Development
demic-appropriate measures in place. Seek guidance (FMHADMSD)
from the WFP as well as other countries that have
successfully resumed operation. SMOEs & SUBEBs
12 Given governance challenges, the Federal Ministry Immediate FMOE-UBEC
of Education should initiate and support a process of
long-term planning with a set of standards to hold SMOEs & SUBEB
states accountable for implementation. As part of
this process, develop and strengthen coordination
mechanisms that can help tighten collaborations and
information sharing between federal- and state-level
entities.
13 Both the Federal and State Ministry of Education Immediate FMOE-UBEC
should further develop, strengthen and raise aware-
ness of Nigeria’s alternative education programming SMOEs & SUBEB
that can target OOSC. In order to deal with growing
insecurity, strengthen distance learning options.
This may include developing strategies for teachers
to provide pupils with schoolwork and feedback
during periods of school closures. Investigate ways to
increase access to alternative education for pupils in
rural areas and for girls.
14 Both the Federal and State Ministry of Education in Immediate FMOE
collaboration with development partners should
develop initiatives at the federal and national level SMOEs & SUBEBs
to capitalize and promote the success of SBMCs and
Development partners
their operations to support equity, quality and access
to basic education. Examples might include compe-
titions, conferences, formalization of SBMC networks
and exchanges.
155
Education in Nigeria: Evaluation of the Effectiveness & Impact of SDG 4
15 Both the Federal and State Ministry of Education in Immediate FMOE
collaboration with Development partners should
strengthen COVID-19 response strategies to prioritize SMOEs & SUBEBs
catch-up. Special attention is warranted for girls,
Development partners
as they are likely to have been more negatively
impacted than boys by the pandemic. Employ evi-
dence-based strategies that maintain instruction at
grade level rather than repeating missed instruction.
See USAID Strategies for
Accelerating Learning During Crisis as well as other
resources from the Accelerated Education Working
Group.
Monitoring &
Evaluation
16 Both the Federal and State Ministry of Education Immediate FMOE-UBEC
should further strengthen EMIS and coordinate with
NDES to improve education data management for SMOEs-SUBEB
better planning, implementation, monitoring and
evaluation both at the federal and state levels.
17 State Ministries of Education should analyse 2020– Immediate FMOE
2021 EMIS data to better understand the degree of
school leaving that may be attributable to COVID-19 SMOEs
school closures and coordinate with the Federal Min-
istry of Education to produce a national report.
Table 6.3: Recommendations for stakeholders at LGA and community levels
# Recommendation Priority Level Relevant Stakeholder
Policy development
Education financing
1 Both the Federal and State Immediate FMOEs
Ministries of Education should
jointly conduct listening ses- SMOEs & SUBEBs
sions in each of the states to
School PTAs/SBMCs
understand the role and pur-
pose of PTA levies with a view
to developing a guideline on
the application of levies as an
alternative form of funding.
Table 6.4: Recommendations for development partners
# Recommendation Priority Level Relevant Stakeholder
Policy devel-
opment
1 The Federal Ministry of Education should initiate a collec- Immediate FMOE
tive process to develop a theory of change for the basic
education sector that will be incorporated into the next SMOEs & SUBEBs
MSP (in 2022). Consultative sessions with key stakehold-
Development partners
ers such as State Ministries of Education, State Universal
Basic Education Boards, civil society organizations in the
education sector and development partners will improve
the likelihood of ownership and adherence to the theory
of change.
156
Conclusions, Lessons Learned and Recommendations
2 National and State level should define learning outcome Immediate FMOE
proficiency benchmarks. Both the ESSPIN and NEDS
benchmarks provide a starting point for understand- SMOEs & SUBEBs
ing pupils’ competencies but they were not developed
Development partners
through a ministry-led inclusive and credible benchmark-
ing process. The evaluation team recommends fostering
a benchmarking process led by the Federal Ministry of
Education in collaboration with development partners to
develop target proficiency levels that will allow for con-
sistent and contextually sound comparison of learning
outcomes countrywide. The process needs to take into ac-
count a variety of stakeholders including state and federal
ministry officials, education technical staff, policymakers,
linguists and development partners. The process should
be led by the Federal Ministry of Education and should
be consultative in order to ensure buy-in to eventual
benchmarks.
Coordination
and imple-
mentation
3 Recognizing the important influence that development Immediate FMOE-UBEC
partner programming can have on the education sector,
as well as how states may experience downturns when SMOEs & SUBEB
projects end, the development partners should take
Development partners
advantage of the National Education Group to further
harmonize their programmes. The Federal Ministry of NEG
Education should make efforts to strengthen and expand
the scope of the NEG, and to replicate coordination at the
state level. The Federal Ministry of Education should in-
clude development partner programming within the UBE
section of the MSP to avoid duplication of projects.
4 Development partners should ensure that sustainability Immediate, ongoing FMOE-UBEC
plans are built into government as well as development
partner programming. SMOEs & SUBEB
Development partners
NEG
5 Both the Federal and State Ministry of Education, in Immediate FMOE
collaboration with development partners, should develop
initiatives at the federal and national level to capitalize SMOEs & SUBEBs
and promote the success of SBMCs and their operations
Development partners
to support equity, quality and access to basic education.
Examples might include competitions, conferences, for-
malization of SBMC networks and exchanges.
6 Both the Federal and State Ministry of Education, in col- Immediate FMOE
laboration with development partners, should strength-
en COVID-19 response strategies to prioritize catch-up. SMOEs & SUBEBs
Special attention is warranted for girls, as they are likely
Development partners
to have been more negatively impacted than boys by
the pandemic. Employ evidence-based strategies that
maintain instruction at grade level rather than repeating
missed instruction. See USAID Strategies for Accelerating
Learning During Crisis as well as other resources from the
Accelerated Education Working Group.
157
Annexes
Endnotes
Annex A: Evaluation framework
Analytical techniques to be used to answer the evaluation questions.
Key Questions Evaluation Evaluation Questions Indicators Analytical tech- Data Sources
Criteria nique
KQ1: Is the Coherence C11: Are overall edu- Human rights-based Policy content Education sector analysis (ESSP
MSP content cation sector policies, approach integrated analysis 2016–2019)
clear and strategies in coher- into Education Sector
relevant and ence with SDG4 well Programming within and evidence review
in coherence mainstreamed into Key Flagship Pro-
with SDG4? ESSP 2016–2019 gramme design and
implementation
Relevance/ R1: What is the Conceptual and em- Evidence Literature on conceptual relation-
Appropri- relationship between pirical evidence sup- review ship between SDG4 and other
ateness SDG4 and other relat- ports a relationship related SDGs.
ed SDGs? between SDG4 and
other related SDGs. Data supporting the link between
SDG4 and other related SDGs
R2 To what extent Barriers are based Policy content Education sector analysis
were the barriers on education sector analysis
(and their causes) to analysis or evidenced Education Sector Plan strategies
achieving SDG4 iden- identified needs (ESSP 2016–2019)
tified and addressed
in the strategy prior- Education sector plan identified
ities? barriers
Qualitative data
KQ2: Was the Efficiency Effici1: To what extent Extent to which the Qualitative Qualitative data
policy imple- has the Education strategies and tools analysis
mented as Sector Strategic Plan used in the imple- Evidence review
intended? (2016–2019) been mentation of the Quantitative
efficiently implement- programmes are able analysis
ed? to achieve expected
outcomes
Outputs listed in the
EfC MSP against sec-
tor and programme
progress reports
159
Education in Nigeria: Evaluation of the Effectiveness & Impact of SDG 4
Effici2: What is the Unit Cost per pupil Cost-effective- Mobilization, procurement and
cost-effectiveness of per education level/ ness analysis programme documentation
interventions? Intervention
State-level Federal and state costed unit prices,
comparison implementation costs per pupil, per
intervention.
EMIS/UBEC
Effective- Effect1: To what Changes in net Document Education Strategic plan targets
ness extent have the enrolment ratio per review, Quanti-
outcomes of the MSP key group of state, by tative compar- Enrolment, Completion, learning
been achieved? gender and wealth ative analysis outcome, attendance, OOSC rates,
status disaggregated by social group (gen-
der, wealth, location)
Completion rate
change at primary National data; Primary data on learn-
education, by gender ing outcomes (School Survey)
and wealth status
Proportion of out-
of-school children
and improving girls’
education
Changes in learning
outcomes in prima-
ry and secondary
schools, disaggregat-
ed by gender
Reviewed challenges
in achieving the key
strategic objectives?
What are the chal-
lenges and strengths?
Systemic and student
outcomes detailed in
the plan have been
achieved
State actions flow on
from national policy
Effect2: What are the Planned funding Quantitative National and state disbursement
funding sources avail- sources (in the plan) and qualitative data
able to implement against actual dis- analysis
the plan? bursed funding Education Strategic Plan assigned
Education funding sources
Sector Budget
Analysis by Secondary Financial Data set FMoE/
comparing UBEC
what was bud-
geted, Actual, Qualitative data
and outturn
160
Annexes
KQ3: Did Imp1: To what extent To what extent were Quantitative Secondary evidence on completion,
the policy has the MSP contrib- the expected changes and qualitative enrolment and OOSC.
produce the uted to observed in pupil’s access & comparative
intended out- changes in education quality of learning analysis Primary data on learning outcomes
comes and access, completion, achieved (Impact and (School Survey)
impact? equity and quality in Outcome)?
Nigeria? Qualitative interviews (federal and
And the increase of net state)
Impact enrolment ratio per
KQ4: What key group of state
progress has
been made the extent to which
towards completion rate at
SDG4 in primary education
Nigeria? have been improved
the extent to which
progress has been
made in reduction of
out-of-school children
and improving girls’
education?
What are any unin-
tended impacts that
happened in commu-
nities or institutional
system?
Imp2: How and why? Implementation Qualitative and Secondary evidence on completion,
What are the drivers? of the plan against quantitative enrolment and OOSC.
observed results comparative
analysis Primary data on learning outcomes
Experienced policy (School Survey)
personnel perceive
MSP activities contrib- Qualitative interviews (federal and
uted to changes state)
Imp3: To what extent To what extent were Qualitative and Secondary evidence on completion,
did the following the expected changes quantitative enrolment and OOSC.
flagship policies in pupil’s access & comparative
and programmes quality of learning analysis Primary data on learning outcomes
of the education achieved where the (School Survey)
sector achieve overall Flagship Policies and Document
expected results: programmes were review Qualitative interviews (federal and
Homegrown School implemented (Impact state)
Feeding Programme, and Outcome)?
Social Cash Assistance Annual Performance Monitoring
to poorest families, Progress Report of Flagship pro-
etc.? grammes
the increase of net
enrolment ratio per
key group of state
the extent to which
completion rate at
primary education
have been improved
161
Education in Nigeria: Evaluation of the Effectiveness & Impact of SDG 4
the extent to which
progress has been
made in reduction of
out-of-school children
and improving girls’
education?
What are any unin-
tended impacts that
happened in commu-
nities or institutional
system?
Imp4: What are the The extent to which Trend and Secondary evidence on completion.
main driving factors completion rate at causal analysis
of increased com- primary education Contextual data
pletion rate at the have been improved
primary school level between 2011 and Disbursement data and other avail-
during the 2011-2013 2013 compared with able funding sources
period? 2013–2020.
Qualitative interviews (federal and
What changes in state)
funding, implementa-
tion and context have
occurred during each
of these periods?
Imp5: What are the The extent to which Trend and Secondary evidence on completion.
driving factors of completion rate at causal analysis
decreased primary primary education Contextual data
school completion have been improved
rates in the 2013- between 2011 and Disbursement data and other avail-
2018 period? 2013 compared with able funding sources
2013–2020.
Qualitative interviews/Key Docu-
What changes in ment Review (federal and state)
funding, implementa-
tion and context have
occurred during each
of these periods?
Imp6: How has To what extent has Qualitative and Secondary evidence on completion
COVID019 impacted access to educa- quantitative and enrolment and OOSC.
the education system, tion, retention and comparative
particularly in terms completion changed analysis Primary data from student question-
of access to educa- as a result of school naire, head teacher questionnaire.
tion, retention and closures and other Document
completion? COVID-19-related review Qualitative interviews (federal and
barriers? state)
Key documents
KQ4: What Human HR1: To what extent As above disaggregat- As above dis- As above
progress has Rights & did the programme ed by group, where aggregated by
been made ‘Leave no target the poorest possible group, where
towards one be- and help reduce possible
SDG4 in hind’ and inequalities between
Nigeria? equity the wealthier groups
and the poorest
groups?
162
Annexes
Cross-cutting Sustain- Sus1: To what extent Findings in answer Qualitative and Findings in answer to research ques-
ability can any observed to research ques- quantitative tions above
changes be main- tions above against analysis
tained? available resources Qualitative data
and momentum for Document
the future review Key documents
Cross-cutting Gender GE1: To what extent All indicators re- All types of As above, with a gender focus.
Equality did the Education viewed with a gender analysis
Sector Strategic Plan lens and disaggregat-
and flagship pro- ed by gender, using
grammes incorporate Gender Equity and
considerations of Social Inclusion (GESI)
gender equality and framework
the empowerment
of women and girls
into the design,
implementation and
monitoring of inter-
ventions?
Annex B: Map of Nigeria with states and regions
Sokoto
Katsina
Jigawa
Zamfara Yobe Borno
Kano
Kebbi
Kaduna Bauchi
Niger Gombe
Adamawa
Kwara
FCT Plateau
Abuja
Oyo Nassarawa
Taraba
Osun Ekiti Kogi
Benue
Ondo
Ogun
Lagos Edo Enugu Legend
Cross
Anambra Ebonyi River North Central Region
North East Region
Abia
Delta Imo North West Region
South East Region
BBaayyeellssaa Rivers A Ib k o w m a South South Region
South West Region
163
Education in Nigeria: Evaluation of the Effectiveness & Impact of SDG 4
Annex C: Detailed Sampling Pupil • A random number generator software on the
Strategy enumerators’ tablets was then used to generate a
random number. The girl with the number card
In total, 12 pupils were randomly selected in each of the matching the random number generated was then
schools surveyed, with six pupils sampled from P3 and six asked to step out. This process was repeated until
pupils from P5. Selection of pupils was stratified by gender three girls and three substitutes were selected
and an even number of boys and girls were randomly • The names of the selected girls were then written
selected from each class for assessment going by the down on the sampling sheets provided
following procedure: • For the boys, steps 1–6 were repeated to select 3 boys
• If there were fewer than 6 pupils in the target class: and 3 substitutes using a different set of cards (due to
All pupils were selected. COVID-related precautions).
• If there were fewer than 3 boys or 3 girls in the target • Once the selection of pupils was complete, ONLY
class: All pupils of that gender were selected. the sampled pupils were allowed to participate in the
• In a situation where one gender had fewer than the learning assessments.
target number of pupils, enumerators sampled more • Enumerators also ensured that they observed five
of the other gender to make up the target six pupils minutes of rest time between assessments for
for assessment. each child in each grade. This means that between
• Enumerators then separated the girls and boys and numeracy and literacy for P3 and P5 or vice versa, five
counted the total number of pupils present on the day minutes allowed for the child to rest
of the survey • The protocol above was deployed for sampling of
• With the help of numbered sampling cards, each girl pupils in both P3 & P5 classes
was given a card with a number starting with ‘1’ until
each girl present in the class had gotten a card.
Annex D: Overall Strength of Evidence Ratings
Domain Evaluation Question Strength of evidence Data source
Relevance R1: What is the relationship between SDG4 STRONG Literature review, MICS, NDHS, KIIs
and other related SDGs?
R2: To what extent were the barriers (and MEDIUM Literature review, KIIs
their causes) to achieving SDG4 identified
and addressed in the strategy priorities?
Coherence C1: Are overall education sector policies, MEDIUM Literature review, KIIs
strategies in coherence with SDG4 well
mainstreamed into ESSP 2016–2019?
Efficiency Effici1: To what extent has the Education MEDIUM Literature review, education financ-
Sector Strategic Plan (2016–2019) been ing analysis, KIIs
efficiently implemented?
Effici2: What is the cost-effectiveness of WEAK Literature review, education financ-
interventions? ing analysis, KIIs
Effectiveness Effect1: To what extent have the outcomes MEDIUM Literature review, School based
of the MSP been achieved? survey, MICS, NEDS 2015 & 2020,
NDHS, KIIs
Effect2: What are the funding sources avail- MEDIUM Literature review, education financ-
able to implement the plan? ing analysis, KIIs
Impact Imp1: To what extent has the MSP contrib- STRONG Literature review, School-based sur-
uted to observed changes in education vey, NEMIS 2019, MICS, NEDS 2015 &
access, completion, equity and quality in 2020, NDHS, KIIs
Nigeria?
Imp2: How and why? What are the drivers of MEDIUM Literature review, KIIs
Success or Shortfalls of Access & Quality?
164
Annexes
Imp3: What are the main driving factors of MEDIUM Literature review, KIIs
increased completion rate at the primary
school level during the 2011-2013 period?
Imp4: What are the driving factors of de- MEDIUM Literature review, KIIs
creased primary school completion rates in
the 2013–2018 period?
Imp5: To what extent did the following MEDIUM Literature review, KIIs
flagship policies and programmes of the
education sector achieve overall expected
results: Home-grown School Feeding Pro-
gramme, Social Cash Assistance to poorest
families, etc.?
Imp6: How has COVID-19 impacted the MEDIUM Literature review, School based
education system, particularly in terms of survey, KIIs
access to education, retention and comple-
tion?
Human Rights and HR1: To what extent did the programme STRONG Literature review, MICS, NDES, KIIs
LNOB target the poorest and help reduce inequal-
ities between the wealthier groups and the
poorest groups?
Gender Equality GE1: To what extent did the Education Sec- STRONG Literature review, NDES, MICS, DHS,
tor Strategic Plan and flagship programmes KIIs
incorporate considerations of gender
equality and the empowerment of women
and girls into the design, implementation
and monitoring of interventions?
Sustainability Sus1: To what extent can any observed MEDIUM Literature review, KIIs
changes be maintained?
Annex E: Mapping of MSP Objectives and Outcomes
The table below provides a synthesis from the MSP of how the 3 outcome areas and 10 pillars come together with strategic objectives
and outcomes statements. This table draws largely from the action plans detailed in the MSP.
Table 54 MSP Objectives and Outcomes
Outcome Pillars Objective Outcome statement
areas
165
sseccA
OOSC Federal: To ascertain the number of OOSC, to reduce the number of OOSC, to Enhanced capacity of
achieve an equitable balance of male and female teachers between urban and ru- Nigeria’s formal and
ral areas to serve as role models for boosting girls’ enrolment, to ensure equitable non-formal education
distribution of quality teachers for all children irrespective of their background, to systems that provide
attract more children into Basic Education Schools. qualitative access to 100
per cent of OOSC and
Non-Federal: To reduce the number of OOSC, to provide more equitable distribu- school-aged children,
tion of learner-friendly schools, to reduce the existing educational gender imbal- boys and girls in basic
ance between boys and girls, to accommodate number of students resulting from education; 70 per cent of
the increased enrolment, to provide technical, vocational and entrepreneurship eligible youths to TVET
skills and trade to the OOSC within the framework of basic education. and tertiary education
and 75 per cent of adults
to non-formal education
and lifelong learning
opportunities.
Youth Federal: To determine the current literacy level in the country, to determine the
and number of Nigerian adults and youths who need the mass literacy programme,
Adult to identify the types and location of potential Adults and Youth participants, to
Literacy ascertain the training needs of the potential youth and adult learners, to inform
the public on the need to revitalize the national Mass Literacy Campaign (NMLC),
to garner the necessary political will from major policy makers, to mobilize
stakeholder to support the NMLP, to motivate and enrol at least 30 million youth
and adult learners by the end of 2019, to coordinate the implementation of the
programmes at Federal, State and Local Government levels, to mobilize resources
and deploy the same in an approved manner through the programme implemen-
tation, to liaise with key stakeholders for optimum use of resources and strategies
Education in Nigeria: Evaluation of the Effectiveness & Impact of SDG 4
port States and the Federal Capital Territory (FCT) to review their enabling laws for
sustainable funding of youth and adult literacy and NFE programmes, to review
existing teaching and learning materials, to produce developed learning material
in adequate quantities, to distribute learning materials, to recruit and train literacy
facilitators, to ensure sustained instructions in all literacy centres, to monitor the
MLP, to conduct a summative evaluation after each literacy programme cycle,
strengthen post literacy programmes, integrate vocational skills into MLP and
strengthen the ability of learnings to participate in diverse economic activities.
Non-Federal: To coordinate implementation, mobilize resources, liaise with key
stakeholders, advise government and development partners on cost-effective-
ness, to support states and FCT to review their enabling laws, identify and recruit
suitable facilitators, train and/or retrain literacy facilitators, identify suitable loca-
tions for MLC locations, designate the MLCs, enrol adult and youth participating,
train literacy participant, strength post-literacy programmes, integrate vocational
skills into MLPs and strengthen the ability of learners to participate in diverse
economic activities.
STEM Ensure all curriculum meets global market needs, invest in STEM and TVET,
and TVET improve teaching and learning environment, improve teaching and learning,
promote innovation in STEM and TVET. Promote entrepreneurship and skills
development, use FSTCs and TVET centres as vehicles to train and certify em-
ployable young Nigerians, strengthen human capacity development in STEM,
improve teachers pedagogical skills, strengthen staff capacity to handle modern
equipment, empower unemployed STEM and TVET graduates for self-reliance,
strengthen capacity of principal officers of TVET institutions, provide information
on career guidance, popularize STEM, improve students competence and ICT,
organize programmes and activities to improve female enrolment and quality
in STEM, provide scholarships for STEM and TVET, conduct technical studies and
needs assessments, constitute a forum for industry, educational institutions and
other relevant stakeholders, improve STEM and TVET teachers’ welfare, enhance
the status of TVET trainees, provide research-based information on career status of
alumni and review public apathy.
Basic Ed- Federal: Improve the capacity of States to access counterpart funding, enhance Strengthened human
ucation access for disadvantaged groups, broaden the scope of UBE Act to include ECCDE, capacity for child-cen-
Basic Education funding and management and ANFE and nomadic education tred interactive teaching
matters of funding, improve the effectiveness of FEQAS, supervisors and QA and quality assurance at
officers at the state level, determine the level of pupils’ achievement in PS and all levels of educational
JSS, retain good teachers, share best practices, encourage synergy and promote development in Nigeria,
professional skills manpower, provide competitive sporting programmes, ensure enhanced innovative
available personnel for physical education (PE) in schools and give opportunities
to physically challenged pupils to participate.
166
ytilauQ
Non-Federal: Ensure all learners have access to textbooks, reduce gender dispar- ness, functionality,
ities in basic education, broader access for children with special needs, upgrade relevance, market-driven
unqualified teachers, enhance the quality of teachers, head teachers, school knowledge and skills
supervisors and principals in basic education, ensure an adequate supply of teach- acquisition and transi-
ers to rural schools, build prototype science and maths laboratories and improve tioning into formal and
teacher supply and quality in nomadic schools. on-formal education.
Annexes
Teacher Federal: Ensure all COEs and national teachers institute (NTI) Study Centres
Edu- nationwide key into the teacher education reforms, provide regular updating of
cation, the Nigeria certificate in education (NCE) curricula, generate ideas and stakehold-
Capacity er consensus on how to improve primary and secondary school teachers’ salary
Building and conditions, enhance the status of the teaching profession, make teaching
and Pro- and teacher education more effective through reform, promote National Teacher
fessional education policy (NTEP)’s acceptability and credence at federal and state levels,
Develop- sensitize stakeholders on the provisions of the NTEP and its implementation
ment framework, establish operational guidelines of Teacher Education Development
Funds Account (TEDFA), improve teacher quality promote early release of results,
improve competence of practising teachers, improve the skills and knowledge
of teachers, ensure all COEs and NTI NCE Study Centres key into education re-
forms, attract high quality candidates to enrol in teacher education, have all NCE
awarding institutions and other teacher education institution have linkages with
some, SUBEBs, COEs, national commission for nomadic education (NCNE), national
commission for mass, literacy, adult and non-formal education (NMECs), ensure
colleges have the requisite funds for carrying out their functions, enhance training
facilities and increase the number of science and mathematics teachers trained
annually and enable the institutions to implement Teaching Practice (TP) effec-
tively and as specified in guidelines and procedure.
Curricu- Federal: Produce and distribute new Pre-Primary curriculum, conduct sensitiza-
lum and tion and capacity building of inspectors, head teachers, ECCDE proprietors and
Policy caregivers, disarticulate and develop History and Social Studies curricula for Basic
matters Education, ensure History and Social Studies curricula are produce and distributed
to schools, develop the Teachers’ Guides, print, produce and distribute copies of
the Teachers’ Guide and related materials, sensitize and build the capacity of in-
spectors, teachers, curriculum Desk Officers and examiners, review Trade Subjects
at SSS level, produce, print and distribute Trade Curricula and make them available
on the FMOE website, development Teachers’ Guides, produce, print and distrib-
ute teachers Guides, sensitize on Teachers’ Guides, pass into laws the proposed
National Book Policy, conduct a Book survey, develop a National Language Policy,
establish a National Board for Arabic and Islamic Studies, make PE policy docu-
ment available to stakeholders, sensitive stakeholders on PE policy, identify talents
and actualise optional potential of learners, ensure availability of qualified person-
nel to handle PE in schools, ascertain if the policy has been implemented.
Tertiary Federal: Ensure only suitable persons are appointed as Council Chairmen and
educa- Member, ensure quality governance in tertiary institutions, improve efficiency
tion and accountability of tertiary institutions, provide legislations for new tertiary
institutions, promote public-private partnership in addressing hostel accommo-
dation shortages, ensure the currency of the curricula, improve the capacity of
Nigerian tertiary institutions, enhance entrepreneurial skills of graduates, ensure
strict adherence to the core mandate, promote partnerships with international ac-
ademic community in teaching and research, prevent abuse in visiting lectureship,
improve the quality of instructional delivery in higher education, ensure higher
education institutions have adequate funds for infrastructural development and
day-to-day operations and improve efficiency and effective coordination of the
scholarship scheme.
Non-Federal: Improve the quality of teaching and learning, promote R&D in
tertiary institutions, address current and projected teacher supply gap. In higher
education, fight plagiarism and promote originality in academic research and
publication, enable staff and students to acquire laptops and tablets, ensure the
availability of and access to ICT to staff and student and improve internet con-
nectivity in tertiary institutions, train academic staff to use ICT and integrate it in
teaching, enhance access to higher education for qualified graduates of secondary
schools, generate additional funding for teaching and research, attract technical
support to enhance institutional capacity, foster networking between Nigerian
institutions and their foreign counterparts.
167
Education in Nigeria: Evaluation of the Effectiveness & Impact of SDG 4
Educa- Federal: Have accurate and reliable education data, ensure prompt global Improved evi-
tional reporting of data, supervise the relevant activities of agencies and institutions dence-based decision
data and that produce education data, rationalize the flow of efficient and effective EMIS, making that will assist
planning eliminate duplication in support by MDAs, ensure standard quality of data, acquire transparency, gover-
necessary skills required for data management and data processing analysis, cre- nance, accountability
ate awareness on the need to support EMIS for accurate, reliable and timely data, and innovation in educa-
ensure data is entered at the first node and transferred to other nodes, ensure tion delivery.
accurate record keeping culture in schools, update the EMIS policy and implemen-
tation guidelines, enhance effective implementation of EMIS policy, include other
policy matters for adherence to global practices, assess States and agencies for
compliance, ensure quality and credible data, provide facilities and equipment for
EMIS activities, carry out exact school location for proper planning and
decision-making, print ASC instruments for non IDPs supported states, publish
and disseminate Nigeria Digest of Education statistics, outline activities that are
necessary to achieve the goals of Education, undertake needs assessment survey
of FUCs to update the ten-year FMOE plan and annual evaluation of performance
of FUCs, parastatals and FMOE Departments, define and articulate medium term
goals and objectives of the education sector in line with the six pillars of the stra-
tegic thrust of the Federal Government of Nigeria (FGN) and the 10 pillars of the
Education for Change MSP of the FME to define the MSE framework including the
KPIs for the sector and monitor and track progress effectively and transparently in
line with the National Monitoring and Evaluation Policy Framework.
Non-Federal: Make available reliable, accurate and timely education data and
increase the capacity of the EMIS staff to generate timely and accurate data.
168
gninehtgnertS
smetsyS
Infor- Federal: Review the existing policy an strategies to reflect emerging trends,
mation restructure the teaching and learning environment to be ICT-driven, provide inter-
Commu- active access to online data in education, strengthen and expand Open, Distance
nication and E-learning (ODeL), prepare learners for emerging and future markets, build
Tech- the capacity of staff/teachers to be computer-literate for greater efficiency and
nology productivity and deliver of 21st Century skills, ensure a coordinated implemen-
(ICT) in tation of ICT in education, achieve a broad-based consensus on ICT in education,
educa- identify and showcase ingenuity among young on ICT, obtain value for money
tion and efficient utilization of resources, ensure compliance with policy directives and
set standards and establish a baseline on ICT infrastructure and ICT teachers in
education.
Non-Federal: Build the capacity of staff/teachers to be computer literate, restruc-
ture the teaching and learning environment to be ICT-driven, strengthen and
expand ODeL and provide content for anytime anywhere, at any pace and any
path learning.
Library Federal: provide minimum standards and guidelines for operating libraries,
services promote e-learning, increase availability of resource materials and scale up the
in educa- knowledge and skills of Librarians and Library Officers to deliver credible profes-
tion sional services.
Non-Federal: improve quality library service delivery, promote the awareness of
the use of library among pupils and students in all education sub-sectors and
establish Local Government Public Libraries in all 774 LGAs in Nigeria.
Annexes
Annex F: COVID-19 confirmed cases by state in Nigeria
(As of June 30, 2021)
State No. of Cases No. of Cases No. Discharged No. of Deaths
(Lab confirmed) (on Admission)
Lagos 60,272 1,301 58,515 456
FCT 19,906 187 19,552 167
Kaduna 9,127 8 9,054 65
Plateau 9,068 5 9,006 57
Rivers 7,364 52 7,211 101
Oyo 6,882 20 6,736 126
Edo 4,910 0 4,725 185
Ogun 4,696 12 4,633 51
Kano 4,006 5 3,891 110
Ondo 3,483 27 3,391 65
Kwara 3,156 33 3,068 55
Delta 2,650 22 2,556 72
Osun 2,578 6 2,520 52
Enugu 2,482 18 2,435 29
Nasarawa 2,384 0 2,345 39
Katsina 2,110 21 2,055 34
Gombe 2,104 22 2,038 44
Ebonyi 2,039 5 2,002 32
Akwa Ibom 1,935 5 1,912 18
Anambra 1,909 64 1,826 19
Abia 1,693 -2 1,673 22
Imo 1,661 0 1,624 37
Bauchi 1,549 0 1,532 17
Benue 1,366 15 1,327 24
Borno 1,344 1 1,305 38
Adamawa 1,134 4 1,098 32
Taraba 1,001 0 977 24
Niger 935 5 913 17
Bayelsa 906 1 879 26
Ekiti 881 7 863 11
Sokoto 775 0 747 28
Jigawa 536 8 512 16
Yobe 499 0 490 9
Kebbi 450 42 392 16
Cross River 402 0 384 18
Zamfara 244 3 233 8
Kogi 5 0 3 2
Source: Nigeria CDC
169
Education in Nigeria: Evaluation of the Effectiveness & Impact of SDG 4
Annex G: Additional Tables
Table G1: SDG4 evaluation – Numeracy scores – end of P2 by gender
State Male Female Total
ENUGU (n=467) 595.28 605.02 600.09
(95 per cent CI) [581.38,609.19] [595.75,614.28] [589.74,610.44]
KANO (n=478) 461.36 450.01 455.59
(95 per cent CI) [448.14,474.58] [437.73,462.29] [444.24,466.94]
KATSINA (n=479) 463.14 452.71 457.95
(95 per cent CI) [455.31,470.97] [439.93,465.48] [449.55,466.35]
KWARA (n=453) 563.55 562.43 563.01
(95 per cent CI) [551.30,575.81] [551.76,573.10] [555.38,570.63]
ZAMFARA (n=465) 447.01 438.64 443.39
(95 per cent CI) [437.02,457.00] [430.46,446.81] [436.14,450.65]
Total (n=2,342) 469.67 460.55 465.17
(95 per cent CI) [462.46,476.88] [452.76,468.34] [458.57,471.78]
Table G2: SDG4 evaluation – Numeracy scores – end of P4 by gender
State Male Female Total
ENUGU (n=465) 609.25 608.26 608.79
(95 per cent CI) [597.42,621.07] [595.46,621.06] [598.22,619.35]
KADUNA (n=473) 508.95 488.88 499.12
(95 per cent CI) [495.32,522.58] [474.91,502.86] [487.50,510.74]
KANO (n=479) 465.69 454.40 459.96
(95 per cent CI) [452.69,478.68] [441.99,466.80] [448.89,471.03]
KATSINA (n=478) 476.86 468.01 472.30
(95 per cent CI) [464.94,488.77] [457.46,478.55] [463.30,481.30]
KWARA (n=458) 561.16 568.53 564.79
(95 per cent CI) [548.94,573.39] [556.76,580.30] [555.66,573.93]
ZAMFARA (n=464) 439.68 426.05 433.84
(95 per cent CI) [427.61,451.75] [412.07,440.03] [423.26,444.42]
Total (n=2,817) 484.52 472.95 478.80
(95 per cent CI) [477.25,491.79] [465.86,480.05] [472.50,485.11]
Table G3: SDG4 evaluation – Literacy scores – end of P2 by gender
State Male Female Total
ENUGU (n=467) 588.36 610.83 599.46
(95 per cent CI) [575.52,601.20] [599.06,622.60] [589.95,608.97]
KANO (n=478) 461.75 451.46 456.52
(95 per cent CI) [448.04,475.46] [439.25,463.66] [444.50,468.54]
KATSINA (n=479) 478.48 467.32 472.93
(95 per cent CI) [467.00,489.97] [455.07,479.58] [462.81,483.05]
KWARA (n=453) 558.83 572.00 565.28
(95 per cent CI) [547.51,570.15] [555.55,588.45] [554.03,576.53]
ZAMFARA (n=465) 437.23 436.78 437.03
170
Annexes
(95 per cent CI) [426.96,447.50] [426.64,446.92] [428.10,445.97]
Total (n=2,342) 472.14 466.02 469.13
(95 per cent CI) [464.26,480.02] [458.09,473.95] [461.91,476.35]
Table G4: SDG4 evaluation – Literacy scores – end of P4 by gender
State Male Female Total
ENUGU (n=465) 601.23 621.85 610.82
(95 per cent CI) [590.22,612.24] [608.73,634.97] [600.83,620.81]
KADUNA (n=473) 513.61 513.15 513.38
(95 per cent CI) [497.90,529.31] [496.67,529.63] [498.93,527.83]
KANO (n=479) 454.74 457.09 455.93
(95 per cent CI) [443.16,466.32] [445.12,469.07] [445.67,466.20]
KATSINA (n=478) 479.76 474.33 476.96
(95 per cent CI) [466.65,492.88] [459.03,489.62] [463.51,490.41]
KWARA (n=458) 552.82 565.71 559.18
(95 per cent CI) [540.37,565.28] [550.19,581.24] [547.42,570.94]
ZAMFARA (n=464) 452.23 444.93 449.10
(95 per cent CI) [438.32,466.14] [432.40,457.46] [437.51,460.70]
Total (n=2,817) 483.34 483.24 483.29
(95 per cent CI) [475.65,491.04] [475.16,491.32] [476.05,490.54]
Table G5: Additional detail on external support in cash or in kind within case study states
Enugu Kaduna Kano Katsina Kwara Zamfara
Non-Governmental Organization 2.5 per cent 15 per cent 20 per cent 7.6 per 5 per cent 10 per cent
(NGO) cent
Religious Institutions (e.g. Church or 0 per cent 1.3 per cent 0 per cent 0 per cent 3.8 per cent 0 per cent
Mosque)
UNICEF/Girls Education Programme 1.3 per cent 31.3 per cent 26.3 per cent 41.8 per 1.3 per cent 32.5 per
(GEP) cent cent
Foreign donor (other than UNICEF / 0 per cent 3.8 per cent 1.3 per cent 22.8 per 1.3 per cent 5 per cent
DFID such as JICA, WB, USAID) cent
Private individual 12.5 per cent 6.3 per cent 5 per cent 2.5 per 3.8 per cent 6.3 per cent
cent
Alumni Association 0 per cent 2.5 per cent 0 per cent 0 per cent 3.8 per cent 0 per cent
Private company 0 per cent 0 per cent 0 per cent 1.3 per 0 per cent 0 per cent
cent
Other (specify) 17.5 per cent 8.8 per cent 22.5 per cent 12.7 per 16.3 per 2.5 per cent
cent cent
No funding/Don’t know 66.3 per cent 31.3 per cent 25 per cent 11.4 per 65 per cent 43.8 per
cent cent
Comparison – School Feeding Programme
Table G6: Number of schools that received school feeding programme by state
feed_program
0 1 Total
State
171
Education in Nigeria: Evaluation of the Effectiveness & Impact of SDG 4
ENUGU
Frequency 25 55 80
Percent 31.2 per cent 68.8 per cent 100.0 per cent
KADUNA
Frequency 18 62 80
Percent 22.5 per cent 77.5 per cent 100.0 per cent
KANO
Frequency 22 58 80
Percent 27.5 per cent 72.5 per cent 100.0 per cent
KATSINA
Frequency 11 68 79
Percent 13.9 per cent 86.1 per cent 100.0 per cent
ZAMFARA
Frequency 20 61 81
Percent 24.7 per cent 75.3 per cent 100.0 per cent
Total
Frequency 96 304 400
Percent 24.0 per cent 76.0 per cent 100.0 per cent
End of P2 Literacy Results
Table G7: Average score for schools that did not receive (0) and received (1) the programme
feed_program
0 1
State
ENUGU
Mean 589.13 604.11
Standard error of the mean 5.17 3.67
KANO
Mean 463.76 454.35
Standard error of the mean 5.28 3.72
KATSINA
Mean 461.31 474.64
Standard error of the mean 7.94 3.19
ZAMFARA
Mean 423.71 440.15
Standard error of the mean 4.18 2.87
Total
Mean 462.18 462.00
Standard error of the mean 3.09 1.85
feed_program feed_program
Coefficient p-value
Enugu 18.93903 0.036
Kano -15.86018 0.142
Katsina 6.6123 0.621
Zamfara 11.07901 0.148
172
Annexes
Overall -12.50076 0.141
End of P2 Numeracy Results
Table G8: Average score for schools that did not receive (0) and received (1) the programme
feed_program
0 1
State
ENUGU
Mean 595.26 602.26
Standard error of the mean 6.24 3.51
KADUNA
Mean . .
Standard error of the mean . .
KANO
Mean 461.52 453.81
Standard error of the mean 5.75 3.72
KATSINA
Mean 450.85 458.99
Standard error of the mean 6.78 2.84
ZAMFARA
Mean 435.05 445.34
Standard error of the mean 5.28 3.35
Total
Mean 460.63 457.31
Standard error of the mean 3.23 1.80
feed_program feed_program
Coefficient p-value
Enugu 1.270564 0.913
Kano -14.41461 0.165
Katsina .9844369 0.885
Zamfara 9.560961 0.381
Overall -16.01232 0.064
End of P4 Literacy Results
Table G9: Average score for schools that did not receive (0) and received (1) the programme
feed_program
0 1
State
ENUGU
Mean 595.61 616.45
Standard error of the mean 6.03 3.80
KADUNA
Mean 511.50 513.88
Standard error of the mean 8.55 3.96
KANO
173
Education in Nigeria: Evaluation of the Effectiveness & Impact of SDG 4
Mean 461.02 454.37
Standard error of the mean 5.79 3.67
KATSINA
Mean 474.86 477.20
Standard error of the mean 7.63 3.48
ZAMFARA
Mean 439.24 451.21
Standard error of the mean 4.90 3.38
Total
Mean 479.00 478.40
Standard error of the mean 3.32 1.82
feed_program feed_program
Coefficient p-value
Enugu 12.49511 0.165
Kaduna 14.10208 0.356
Kano -5.773324 0.625
Katsina -10.02772 0.386
Zamfara 13.07548 0.170
Overall -.8008696 0.920
End of P4 Numeracy Results
Table G10: Average score for schools that did not receive (0) and received (1) the programme
feed_program
0 1
State
ENUGU
Mean
p5_numeracy_score 611.63 607.73
Standard error of the mean
p5_literacy_score 6.03 3.80
KADUNA
Mean
p5_numeracy_score 501.83 498.41
Standard error of the mean
p5_literacy_score 8.55 3.96
KANO
Mean
p5_numeracy_score 464.05 458.70
Standard error of the mean
p5_literacy_score 5.79 3.67
KATSINA
Mean
p5_numeracy_score 477.20 471.75
Standard error of the mean
174
Annexes
p5_literacy_score 7.63 3.48
ZAMFARA
Mean
p5_numeracy_score 418.69 437.07
Standard error of the mean
p5_literacy_score 4.90 3.38
Total
Mean
p5_numeracy_score 476.18 472.72
Standard error of the mean
p5_literacy_score 3.32 1.82
feed_program feed_program
Coefficient p-value
Enugu -5.365438 0.745
Kaduna 2.508387 0.855
Kano -3.794574 0.771
Katsina -8.984498 0.348
Zamfara 15.29847 0.136
Overall -5.848887 0.466
Table G11: Average SES by time and state for end-of-grade-2 students assessed in literacy
time
Baseline Endline p-value
state
ENUGU 0.50
KADUNA
KANO -0.13
KATSINA -0.20 -0.06 0.139
KWARA 0.42
ZAMFARA -0.03 -0.29 0.002
Total -0.11 -0.12 0.825
Table G12: Average SES by time and state for end-of-grade-4 students assessed in literacy
time
Baseline Endline p-value
state
ENUGU 0.55 0.61 0.410
KADUNA 0.25 0.19 0.505
KANO -0.05 0.04 0.305
KATSINA -0.01
KWARA 0.80 0.42 0.000
ZAMFARA -0.11
Total 0.33 0.12 0.000
175
Education in Nigeria: Evaluation of the Effectiveness & Impact of SDG 4
Table G13: Average SES by time and state for end-of-grade-4 students assessed in numeracy
time
Baseline Endline p-value
state
ENUGU 0.49 0.61 0.164
KADUNA -0.11 0.19 0.014
KANO -0.24 0.04 0.051
KATSINA -0.01
KWARA 0.78 0.42 0.001
ZAMFARA -0.11
Total -0.15 0.12 0.005
Table G14: Proportion of qualified teachers by gender and by state
States 2016-2017 2017-2018 2018-2019
Male Female Male Female Male Female
Enugu 96 per cent 97.5 per cent 91.1 per cent 97.1 per cent 93.6 per cent 97.7 per cent
Kaduna 68.2 per cent 82.3 per cent 74.4 per cent 74.8 per cent 79.9 per cent 88.5 per cent
Kano 53.1 per cent 55.6 per cent 62.3 per cent 59.2 per cent 69.6 per cent 67.9 per cent
Katsina 69.4 per cent 80.2 per cent 63.7 per cent 78 per cent 76.9 per cent 86.6 per cent
Kwara 58.6 per cent 61 per cent 76.9 per cent 66.8 per cent 75.9 per cent 87.3 per cent
Zamfara 55.6 per cent 72.9 per cent 56.7 per cent 71.8 per cent 64.2 per cent 80.2 per cent
Nigeria 65.6 per cent 78.8 per cent 69.2 per cent 69.1 per cent 72.1 per cent 82.2 per cent
Table G15: Comparison of completion rates by gender and by state
States 2016-2017 2017-2018 2018-2019
Boys Girls Boys Girls Boys Girls
Enugu 80.1 per cent 72.0 per cent 48 per cent 53 per cent 81.2 per cent 80.6 per cent
Kaduna 88.4 per cent 74.8 per cent 127 per cent 132 per cent 90.1 per cent 81.3 per cent
Kano 123.2 per cent 115.8 per cent 110 per cent 124 per cent 80.9 per cent 90.5 per cent
Katsina 130.9 per cent 102.25 per cent 114 per cent 113 per cent 102.7 per cent 88.3 per cent
Kwara 51.9 per cent 44.9 per cent 56 per cent 60 per cent 41.9 per cent 37.3 per cent
Zamfara 79.3 per cent 47.7 per cent 60 per cent 43 per cent 89.6 per cent 43.2 per cent
Nigeria 93.8 per cent 80.7 per cent 127 per cent 121 per cent 72.6 per cent 75.4 per cent
Annex H: Tools the Government of Nigeria, is currently conducting an
evaluation of its progress on education relevant to the
KII Protocols
Sustainable Development Goals. I am a researcher and
I work directly for EdIntersect, an evaluation firm in the
Informed Consent
United States that has been tasked with this assignment.
Note: The process for obtaining informed consent is the We are working with UNICEF and the Government of
same for all stakeholders.
Nigeria to better understand the country’s progress in
providing basic education. As part of the evaluation, we
“My name is………………………………………….
will be collecting data in schools within six states. We also
You may be aware that UNICEF, in collaboration with
176
Annexes
are conducting key informant interviews at the Federal • While I will not associate your name directly with
and State levels with important officials like yourself. We information provided in the report, given the unique
know that your perspective is unique and we would like to position that you hold, It is possible that someone
include your insights in our report so that the Government looking at the findings may be able to identify you.
of Nigeria can learn of its progress and make adjustments Please be aware of that possibility.
as needed. • We may take pictures of the data collection activities.
These pictures will be professional and respectful
I would like to ask you a series of questions about your and used only in reporting. Your name will not be
work and your understanding of basic education delivery associated with the picture.
in Nigeria. The interview may take up to one hour. I will • You can ask any additional questions before beginning
be taking notes as well as recording our conversation. This the interview.
recording is for my own use. I will use it to aid my analysis.
It will be destroyed and it will not be shared with UNICEF Do you have any questions?” [Allow the interviewee time
nor with the Government of Nigeria. to think of questions and ask them if relevant. Respond
to questions as needed.]
Before we begin, I want you to know that:
“Do we have your permission to interview you?”
• Your participation in this study is entirely voluntary.
Yes [ ] No [ ] If no, stop and thank the individual and
You can stop at any time without giving a reason.
let them go.
• If you stop the interview, all data collected will be
“If you would like additional information. Or, if you
destroyed. There is no penalty for stopping.
have a concern or complaint that is directly related to the
• While we cannot offer you anything for your
evaluation, you may contact Dr. Mary Faith Mount-Cors,
participation, your comments will help us to assist the
President of EdIntersect at maryfaith@edintersect.com.”
Government of Nigeria and UNICEF in making their
basic education services as strong as possible for the
benefit of Nigeria.
Interviewer’s Name:
Participant’s Name: Sex (M/F)
Organization Participant’s Title:
Date (dd/mm/yy) Location:
Start time: End time:
Mode of Interview:
(In-person, Virtual, Phone,
etc.)
177
Education in Nigeria: Evaluation of the Effectiveness & Impact of SDG 4
[Provide each participant with the brief description of What do you understand to be supportive factors as well as
the study Proceed with the interview.] hindering factors?
Preamble
Impact
For each interview, record the following information:
From your perspective, what changes in education access,
completion, equity and quality, have occurred since 2016?
KII Protocol – SDG4 Working Group
Please provide examples.
Introduction
To what extent has the ESSP/MSP contributed to these
The evaluation is specifically focusing on Nigeria’s efforts
changes in education access, completion, equity and quality
to address SDG target 4.1: “By 2030, ensure that all girls
in Nigeria?
and boys complete free, equitable and quality primary
and secondary education leading to relevant and effective
Do you have any reference, report or data that shows it?
learning outcomes.” We are specifically looking at basic
Could you share it please? (or the interviewer may take the
education and the Ministerial Strategic Plan.
exact document’s bibliographic reference)
Before we begin, what is your title and role? How long have
What factors have contributed to these changes? How?
you been in this position?
Why?
Now, please tell us about your organization/office’s role in
To what extent did the following flagship policies and
supporting Nigeria MSP related to basic education.
programmes of the education sector achieve overall
expected results: Homegrown School Feeding Programme,
Coherence
Social Cash Assistance to poorest families, etc.? What
Based on your experience, do you see the overall Education factors supported and hindered their implementation?
Sector policies and strategies to be aligned with the SDG4,
specifically target 4.1? Do you have any reference, report or data that shows it?
Could you share it please (or the interviewer may take the
Are SDG4 supportive strategies well mainstreamed into exact document’s bibliographic reference)
ESSP 2016–2019/2018-2022? Please explain why or why
Effectiveness
not.
What are the funding sources available to implement the
Relevance
education sector strategic plan? What are their strengths
What do you identify as the principal barriers to achieving and weaknesses?
SDG4? (List three and rank accordingly.)
Human Rights
What are their causes [go one-by-one through the list].
To what extent did the ESSP/MSP target the poorest and
To what extent does ESSP address these barriers in its
help reduce inequalities between the wealthier groups and
strategy?
the poorest groups?
Efficiency
To what extent is providing services to the poorest and
To what extent has the Education Sector Strategic Plan/MSP reducing inequities integrated into education sector
(2016–2019;2018-2022) been efficiently implemented? programme design?
To what extent are strategies and tools used in To what extent is providing services to the poorest and
implementation able to achieve expected outcomes? reducing inequalities integrated into Key Flagship
What structures and mechanisms have been mobilized to programme implementation?
support progress towards SDG4? How do you qualify their
performance (success or failure)? Please provide some examples.
178
Annexes
Gender Equality KII Protocol – FMOE
To what extent did the Education Sector Strategic Plan and Introduction
flagship programmes incorporate considerations of gender
The evaluation is specifically focusing on Nigeria’s efforts
equality and the empowerment of women and girls into the
to address SDG target 4.1: “By 2030, ensure that all girls
design, implementation and monitoring of interventions?
and boys complete free, equitable and quality primary
How so?
and secondary education leading to relevant and effective
learning outcomes.” We are specifically looking at basic
What were successes of this incorporation? What challenges
education and the Ministerial Strategic Plan.
needed to be overcome? What challenges remain?
Before we begin, what is your title and role? How long have
Impact of COVID-19
you been in this position?
While we remain in the midst of fighting the pandemic,
so far, what has been the impact of COVID-19 on the Now, please tell us about your organization/office’s role in
education system, particularly in terms of access to supporting Nigeria ESSP/MSP related to basic education.
education, retention and completion?
Coherence
What challenges and opportunities do you perceive in terms
Based on your experience, do you see the overall Education
of mitigating this impact? [Probe to understand if pupils are
Sector policies and strategies to be aligned with the SDG4,
returning to school and what may be done.]
specifically target 4.1?
Sustainability
Are SDG4 supportive strategies well mainstreamed into
To what extent can any observed changes be maintained? ESSP/MSP 2016–2019/2018-2022? Please explain why or
What assurances//mechanisms have been put into place why not.
to promote longevity? At the federal level? State level?
Communication and synergies between levels? Also, with Now, I’m going to ask a similar question but at the state
development partners? level: Based on your experience, do you see overall state-
level education sector policies and strategies to be aligned
Recommendations with the SDG4, specifically target 4.1?
What recommendations do you have to strengthen Nigeria’s
Relevance
strategy and implementation to attain SDG4?
What do you identify as the principal barriers to achieving
Specifically directed at the government of Nigeria? SDG4? (List three and rank accordingly), What are their
causes [go one-by-one through the list]. To what extent
Specifically directed at development partners? does ESSP/MSP address these barriers in its strategy?
Closing Efficiency
Is there a theme or issue that we did not discuss during To what extent has the Education Sector Strategic Plan/MSP
this interview that you would like to communicate to the (2016–2019;2018-2022) been efficiently implemented?
evaluation team?
To what extent are strategies and tools used in
Thank the interviewee and remind them of any necessary implementation able to achieve expected outcomes?
follow-up. Provide them with the info sheet if you have not What structures and mechanisms have been mobilized to
done so already. support progress towards SDG4? How do you qualify their
performance (success or failure)?
179
Education in Nigeria: Evaluation of the Effectiveness & Impact of SDG 4
What do you understand to be supportive factors as well as Human Rights
hindering factors?
To what extent did the ESSP/MSP target the poorest and
Impact help reduce inequalities between the wealthier groups and
the poorest groups?
“From your perspective, what changes in education access,
completion, equity and quality, have occurred since 2016? To what extent is providing services to the poorest and
Please provide examples. reducing inequities integrated into education sector
programme design?
To what extent has the MSP contributed to these changes
in education access, completion, equity and quality in To what extent is providing services to the poorest and
Nigeria? reducing inequalities integrated into Key Flagship
programme implementation?
Do you have any reference, report or data that shows it? Please provide some examples.
Could you share it please (or the interviewer may take the
exact document’s bibliographic reference)” Gender Equality
To what extent did the Education Sector Strategic Plan and
What factors have contributed to these changes? How?
flagship programmes incorporate considerations of gender
Why?
equality and the empowerment of women and girls into the
design, implementation and monitoring of interventions?
Statistics demonstrate an increased completion rate for the
How so? What were successes of this incorporation? What
primary level between 2011-2013. What driving factors
challenges needed to be overcome? What challenges
of increased completion rate at the primary school level
remain?
can you identify during this period? Provide examples as
possible. If you can, provide at least three and rank them
Impact of COVID-19
in importance.
While we remain in the midst of fighting the pandemic,
Conversely, statistics demonstrate a decreased completion
so far, what has been the impact of COVID-19 on the
rate for the primary level between 2013-2018. What driving
education system, particularly in terms of access to
factors of increased completion rate at the primary school
education, retention and completion?
level can you identify during this period? If you can,
provide at least three and rank them in importance. Provide
What challenges and opportunities do you perceive in terms
examples as possible.
of mitigating this impact? [Probe to understand if pupils are
returning to school and what may be done.]
“To what extent did the following flagship policies and
programmes of the education sector achieve overall Sustainability
expected results: Homegrown School Feeding Programme,
Social Cash Assistance to poorest families, etc.? What To what extent can any observed changes be maintained?
factors supported and hindered their implementation? What assurances//mechanisms have been put into place
to promote longevity? At the federal level? State level?
Do you have any reference, report or data that shows it? Communication and synergies between levels? Also, with
Could you share it please (or the interviewer may take the development partners?
exact document’s bibliographic reference)”
Recommendations
Effectiveness
What recommendations do you have to strengthen Nigeria’s
What are the funding sources available to implement the strategy and implementation to attain SDG4?
education sector strategic plan? What are their strengths Specifically directed at the government of Nigeria?
and weaknesses? Specifically directed at State level in Nigeria
Specifically directed at development partners?
180
Annexes
Closing Efficiency
Is there a theme or issue that we did not discuss during To what extent has the Education Sector Strategic Plan/MSP
this interview that you would like to communicate to the (2016–2019;2018-2022) been efficiently implemented?
evaluation team?
To what extent are strategies and tools used in
Thank the interviewee and remind them of any necessary implementation able to achieve expected outcomes?
follow-up. Provide them with the info sheet if you have not
done so already. What structures and mechanisms have been mobilized to
support progress towards SDG4? How do you qualify their
performance (success or failure)?
KII Protocol – Development Partners
What do you understand to be supportive factors as well as
Introduction
hindering factors?
The evaluation is specifically focusing on Nigeria’s efforts
to address SDG target 4.1: “By 2030, ensure that all girls Effectiveness
and boys complete free, equitable and quality primary
How has your organization contributed financially to sup-
and secondary education leading to relevant and effective
porting Nigeria’s progress towards SDG4?
learning outcomes.” We are specifically looking at basic
education and the Ministerial Strategic Plan. Impact
Before we begin, what is your title and role? How long have
From your perspective, what changes in education access,
you been in this position?
completion, equity and quality, have occurred since 2016?
Please provide examples.
Now, please tell us about your organization/office’s role in
supporting Nigeria ESSP/MSP related to basic education.
To what extent has the ESSP/MSP contributed to these
changes in education access, completion, equity and quality
Coherence
in Nigeria?
Based on your experience, do you see the overall Education
Sector policies and strategies to be aligned with the SDG4, Do you have any reference, report or data that shows it?
specifically target 4.1? Could you share it please (or the interviewer may take the
Are SDG4 supportive strategies well mainstreamed into exact document’s bibliographic reference)
ESSP/MSP 2016–2019/2018-2022? Please explain why or
why not. What factors have contributed to these changes? How?
Why?
Now, I’m going to ask a similar question but at the state
level: Based on your experience, do you see overall state- Statistics demonstrate an increased completion rate for the
level education sector policies and strategies to be aligned primary level between 2011-2013. What driving factors
with the SDG4, specifically target 4.1?” of increased completion rate at the primary school level
can you identify during this period? Provide examples as
Relevance possible. If you can, provide at least three and rank them
in importance.
What do you identify as the principal barriers to achieving
SDG4? (List three and rank accordingly).
Conversely, statistics demonstrate a decreased completion
What are their causes [go one-by-one through the list]. rate for the primary level between 2013-2018. What driving
To what extent does ESSP/MSP address these barriers in factors of increased completion rate at the primary school
its strategy? level can you identify during this period? If you can,
provide at least three and rank them in importance. Provide
examples as possible.
181
Education in Nigeria: Evaluation of the Effectiveness & Impact of SDG 4
To what extent did the following flagship policies and Communication and synergies between levels? Also, with
programmes of the education sector achieve overall development partners?
expected results: Homegrown School Feeding Programme,
Social Cash Assistance to poorest families, etc.? What Recommendations
factors supported and hindered their implementation?
What recommendations do you have to strengthen Nigeria’s
strategy and implementation to attain SDG4?
Do you have any reference, report or data that shows it?
Specifically directed at the government of Nigeria?
Could you share it please (or the interviewer may take the
Specifically directed at the state level?
exact document’s bibliographic reference)
Specifically directed at development partners?
Human Rights
Closing
To what extent did the ESSP/MSP target the poorest and
Is there a theme or issue that we did not discuss during
help reduce inequalities between the wealthier groups and
this interview that you would like to communicate to the
the poorest groups?
evaluation team?
To what extent is providing services to the poorest and
Thank the interviewee and remind them of any necessary
reducing inequities integrated into education sector
follow-up. Provide them with the info sheet if you have not
programme design?
done so already.
To what extent is providing services to the poorest and
reducing inequalities integrated into Key Flagship
KII Protocol – Non-State Actors
programme implementation?
(Federal)
Gender Equality
Introduction
To what extent did the Education Sector Strategic Plan and
flagship programmes incorporate considerations of gender The evaluation is specifically focusing on Nigeria’s efforts
equality and the empowerment of women and girls into the to address SDG target 4.1: “By 2030, ensure that all girls
design, implementation and monitoring of interventions? and boys complete free, equitable and quality primary
How so? and secondary education leading to relevant and effective
learning outcomes.” We are specifically looking at basic
What were successes of this incorporation? education and the Ministerial Strategic Plan.
What challenges needed to be overcome? What challenges
remain? Before we begin, what is your title and role? How long have
you been in this position?
Impact – COVID-19
Now, please tell us about your organization/office’s role in
supporting Nigeria MSP related to basic education.
While we remain in the midst of fighting the pandemic,
so far, what has been the impact of COVID-19 on the
Coherence
education system, particularly in terms of access to
education, retention and completion? Based on your experience, do you see the overall Education
Sector policies and strategies to be aligned with the SDG4,
What challenges and opportunities do you perceive in terms specifically target 4.1?
of mitigating this impact? [Probe to understand if pupils are
returning to school and what may be done.] Are SDG4 supportive strategies well mainstreamed into
ESSP/MSP 2016–2019/2018-2022? Please explain why or
Sustainability
why not.
To what extent can any observed changes be maintained?
Now, I’m going to ask a similar question but at the state
What assurances//mechanisms have been put into place
level: Based on your experience, do you see overall state-
to promote longevity? At the federal level? State level?
182
Annexes
level education sector policies and strategies to be aligned factors of increased completion rate at the primary school
with the SDG4, specifically target 4.1?” level can you identify during this period? If you can
provide at least three and rank them in importance. Provide
Relevance examples as possible.
What do you identify as the principal barriers to achieving
To what extent did the following Flagship Policies and
SDG4? (List three and rank accordingly).
Programmes of Education Sector achieve overall expected
results: Homegrown School Feeding Programme, Social
What are their causes [go one-by-one through the list].
Cash Assistance to poorest families, etc.? What factors
To what extent does ESSP address these barriers in its
supported and hindered their implementation?
strategy?
Do you have any reference, report or data that shows it?
Efficiency
Could you share it please (or the interviewer may take the
To what extent has the Education Sector Strategic Plan/MSP exact document’s bibliographic reference)
(2016–2019;2018-2022) been efficiently implemented?
Human Rights
To what extent are strategies and tools used in
To what extent did the ESSP/MSP target the poorest and
implementation able to achieve expected outcomes?
help reduce inequalities between the wealthier groups and
the poorest groups?
What structures and mechanisms have been mobilized to
support progress towards SDG4? How do you qualify their
To what extent is providing services to the poorest and
performance (success or failure)?
reducing inequities integrated into education sector
What do you understand to be supportive factors as well as
programme design?
hindering factors?
To what extent is providing services to the poorest and
reducing inequalities integrated into Key Flagship
Impact
programme implementation?
From your perspective, what changes in education access, Please provide some examples.
completion, equity and quality, have occurred since 2016?
Please provide examples. Gender Equality
To what extent has the ESS/MSP contributed to these
To what extent did the Education Sector Strategic Plan and
changes in education access, completion, equity and quality
flagship programmes incorporate considerations of gender
in Nigeria?
equality and the empowerment of women and girls into the
design, implementation and monitoring of interventions?
Do you have any reference, report or data that shows
How so?
it? Could share it please (or take the exact document’s
bibliographic reference)”
What were successes of this incorporation? What challenges
What factors have contributed to these changes? How?
needed to be overcome? What challenges remain?
Why?
Impact of COVID-19
Statistics demonstrate an increased completion rate for the
primary level between 2011-2013. What driving factors While we remain in the midst of fighting the pandemic,
of increased completion rate at the primary school level so far, what has been the impact of COVID-19 on the
can you identify during this period? Provide examples as education system, particularly in terms of access to
possible. If you can, provide at least three and rank them education, retention and completion?
in importance.
What challenges and opportunities do you perceive in terms
Conversely, statistics demonstrate a decreased completion of mitigating this impact? [Probe to understand if pupils are
rate for the primary level between 2013-2018. What driving returning to school and what may be done.]
183
Education in Nigeria: Evaluation of the Effectiveness & Impact of SDG 4
Sustainability Relevance
To what extent can any observed changes be maintained? What do you identify as the principal barriers to achieving
What assurances//mechanisms have been put into place SDG4? (List three and rank accordingly)
to promote longevity? At the federal level? State level? What are their causes [go one-by-one through the list]. To
Communication and synergies between levels? Also, with what extent does [State education sector policies] address
development partners? these barriers in its strategy?
Recommendations Efficiency
What recommendations do you have to strengthen Nigeria’s To what extent has the [State education sector policy/
strategy and implementation to attain SDG4? strategies] been efficiently implemented?
Specifically directed at the government of Nigeria?
Specifically directed at the State level? To what extent are strategies and tools used in
Specifically directed at development partners?” implementation able to achieve expected outcomes?
Closing What structures and mechanisms have been mobilized to
support progress towards SDG4? How do you qualify their
Is there a theme or issue that we did not discuss during
performance (success or failure)?
this interview that you would like to communicate to the
evaluation team?
What do you understand to be supportive factors as well as
hindering factors?
Thank the interviewee and remind them of any necessary
follow-up. Provide them with the info sheet if you have not
Impact
done so already.
From your perspective, what changes in education access,
KII Protocol – State Education Officials completion, equity and quality, have occurred since 2016?
Introduction Please provide examples.
The evaluation is specifically focusing on Nigeria’s efforts
To what extent has the [State Education Sector Plan]
to address SDG target 4.1: “By 2030, ensure that all girls
contributed to these changes in education access,
and boys complete free, equitable and quality primary
completion, equity and quality in Nigeria?
and secondary education leading to relevant and effective
learning outcomes.” We are specifically looking at basic
Do you have any reference, report or data that shows
education and education sector strategic plans.
it? Could share it please (or take the exact document’s
Before we begin, what is your title and role? How long have
bibliographic reference)”
you been in this position?
Now, please tell us about your organization/office’s role in
What factors have contributed to these changes? How?
supporting Nigeria ESSP/MSP related to basic education.
Why?
Coherence
Is your state participating in the FGoN flagship policies
(Homegrown School Feeding Programme, Social Cash
Based on your experience, do you see the overall state-
Assistance to poorest families)? If so, how? Are there any
level education sector policies and strategies to be aligned
other flagship programmes of which that we may not be
with the SDG4, specifically target 4.1?
aware?
Are SDG4 supportive strategies well mainstreamed into
the state-level policies and strategies? Please explain why
To what extent did the following flagship policies and
or why not.
programmes of the education sector achieve overall
184
Annexes
expected results such as increase in enrolment and Gender Equality
completion: Homegrown School Feeding Programme,
To what extent did the [State Education Sector Plan] and
Social Cash Assistance to poorest families, etc.? What
flagship programmes incorporate considerations of gender
factors supported and hindered their implementation?
equality and the empowerment of women and girls into the
design, implementation and monitoring of interventions?
Do you have any reference, report or data that shows
How so? What were successes of this incorporation? What
it? Could share it please (or take the exact document’s
challenges needed to be overcome? What challenges
bibliographic reference)
remain?
Impact
Impact – COVID-19
Statistics demonstrate an increased completion rate for the
While we remain in the midst of fighting the pandemic,
primary level between 2011-2013. What driving factors
so far, what has been the impact of COVID-19 on the
of increased completion rate at the primary school level
education system, particularly in terms of access to
can you identify during this period? Provide examples as
education, retention and completion?
possible. If you can, provide at least three and rank them
What challenges and opportunities do you perceive in terms
in importance.
of mitigating this impact? [Probe to understand if pupils are
returning to school and what may be done.]
1Conversely, statistics demonstrate a decreased completion
rate for the primary level between 2013-2018. What driving
Sustainability
factors of increased completion rate at the primary school
level can you identify during this period? If you can
To what extent can any observed changes be maintained?
provide at least three and rank them in importance. Provide
What assurances//mechanisms have been put into place
examples as possible.
to promote longevity? At the federal level? State-level?
Communication and synergies between levels? Also, with
Effectiveness
development partners?
What are the funding sources available to implement the
Recommendations
education sector strategic plan? What are their strengths
and weaknesses?
What recommendations do you have to strengthen Nigeria’s
Follow-up on Request for Financial data – if have already
strategy and implementation to attain SDG4?
received, ask clarifying questions. If have not yet received
Specifically directed at the government of Nigeria?
the data, find out how we can support them completing and
Specifically directed at the State level?
forwarding this information.
Specifically directed at development partners?”
Human Rights
Closing
To what extent did the [State Education Sector plans]
Is there a theme or issue that we did not discuss during
target the poorest and help reduce inequalities between
this interview that you would like to communicate to the
the wealthier groups and the poorest groups?
evaluation team?
To what extent is providing services to the poorest and
19Thank the interviewee and remind them of any necessary
reducing inequities integrated into education sector
follow up. Provide them with the info sheet if you have not
programme design?
done so already.
To what extent is providing services to the poorest and
reducing inequalities integrated into Key Flagship
programme implementation?
Please provide some examples.
185
Education in Nigeria: Evaluation of the Effectiveness & Impact of SDG 4
KII Protocol – State Education Officials – Gender Equality
Gender
To what extent did the [State Education Sector Plan] and
Introduction flagship programmes incorporate considerations of gender
equality and the empowerment of women and girls into the
The evaluation is specifically focusing on Nigeria’s efforts
design, implementation and monitoring of interventions?
to address SDG target 4.1: “By 2030, ensure that all girls
How so? What were successes of this incorporation? What
and boys complete free, equitable and quality primary
challenges needed to be overcome? What challenges
and secondary education leading to relevant and effective
remain?
learning outcomes.” We are specifically looking at basic Impact of COVID-19
education and education sector strategic plans.
Before we begin, what is your title and role? How long have While we remain in the midst of fighting the pandemic,
you been in this position? so far, what has been the impact of COVID-19 on the
education system, particularly in terms of access to
Now, please tell us about your organization/office’s role in education, retention and completion particularly as it
supporting Nigeria ESSP/MSP related to basic education. relates to boys and girls?
Coherence What challenges and opportunities do you perceive in terms
of mitigating this impact? [Probe to understand if pupils are
Based on your experience, do you see the overall state-
returning to school and what may be done.]
level education sector policies and strategies to be aligned
with the SDG4, specifically target 4.1? Sustainability
Are SDG4 supportive strategies well mainstreamed into To what extent can any observed changes as it relates to
the state-level policies and strategies? Please explain why gender issues be maintained? What assurances//mechanisms
or why not. have been put into place to promote longevity? At the
federal level? State-level? Communication and synergies
Relevance between levels? Also, with development partners?
What do you identify as the principal barriers to achieving Recommendations
SDG4? (List three and rank accordingly)
What are their causes [go one-by-one through the list]. To What recommendations do you have to strengthen Nigeria’s
what extent does [State education sector policies] address strategy and implementation to attain SDG4?
these barriers in its strategy?
Specifically directed at the government of Nigeria?
Human Rights Specifically directed at the State level?
Specifically directed at development partners?
To what extent did the [State Education Sector plans]
target the poorest and help reduce inequalities between Closing
the wealthier groups and the poorest groups?
Is there a theme or issue that we did not discuss during
To what extent is providing services to the poorest and this interview that you would like to communicate to the
reducing inequities integrated into education sector evaluation team?
programme design?
Thank the interviewee and remind them of any necessary
To what extent is providing services to the poorest and follow-up. Provide them with the info sheet if you have not
reducing inequalities integrated into Key Flagship done so already.
programme implementation?
Please provide some examples.
186
Annexes
KII Protocol – Non-State Actors (State) Impact
Introduction From your perspective, what changes in education access,
completion, equity and quality, have occurred since 2016?
The evaluation is specifically focusing on Nigeria’s efforts
Please provide examples.
to address SDG target 4.1: “By 2030, ensure that all girls
To what extent has the [State Education Sector Plan]
and boys complete free, equitable and quality primary
contributed to these changes in education access,
and secondary education leading to relevant and effective
completion, equity and quality in Nigeria?
learning outcomes.” We are specifically looking at basic
education and education sector strategic plans.
Do you have any reference, report or data that shows
it? Could share it please (or take the exact document’s
Before we begin, what is your title and role? How long have
bibliographic reference)”
you been in this position?
What factors have contributed to these changes? How?
Why?
Now, please tell us about your organization/office’s role in
supporting Nigeria ESSP/MSP related to basic education.
Is your state participating in the FGoN Flaghip Policies
(Homegrown School Feeding Programme, Social Cash
Coherence
Assistance to poorest families)? If so, how? Are there any
other flagship programmes of which that we may not be
Based on your experience, do you see the overall state-
aware?
level education sector policies and strategies to be aligned
with the SDG4, specifically target 4.1?
To what extent did the following flagship policies and
programmes of the education sector achieve overall
Are SDG4 supportive strategies well mainstreamed into
expected results: Homegrown School Feeding Programme,
the state-level policies and strategies? Please explain why
Social Cash Assistance to poorest families, etc.? What
or why not.
factors supported and hindered their implementation?
Relevance Do you have any reference, report or data that shows it?
Could you share it please (or the interviewer may take the
What do you identify as the principal barriers to achieving
exact document’s bibliographic reference)”
SDG4? (List three and rank accordingly).
Statistics demonstrate an increased completion rate for the
What are their causes [go one-by-one through the list]. To
primary level between 2011-2013. What driving factors
what extent does [State education sector policies] address
of increased completion rate at the primary school level
these barriers in its strategy?
can you identify during this period? Provide examples as
possible. If you can, provide at least three and rank them
Efficiency
in importance.
To what extent has the [State education sector policy/
Conversely, statistics demonstrate a decreased completion
strategies] been efficiently implemented?
rate for the primary level between 2013-2018 What driving
factors of increased completion rate at the primary school
To what extent are strategies and tools used in
level can you identify during this period? If you can
implementation able to achieve expected outcomes?
provide at least three and rank them in importance. Provide
examples as possible.
What structures and mechanisms have been mobilized to
support progress towards SDG4? How do you qualify their
Human Rights
performance (success or failure)?
To what extent did the [State Education Sector plans]
What do you understand to be supportive factors as well as
target the poorest and help reduce inequalities between
hindering factors?
the wealthier groups and the poorest groups?
187
Education in Nigeria: Evaluation of the Effectiveness & Impact of SDG 4
To what extent is providing services to the poorest and Thank the interviewee and remind them of any necessary
reducing inequities integrated into education sector follow-up. Provide them with the info sheet if you have not
programme design? done so already.
To what extent is providing services to the poorest and
School-level survey
reducing inequalities integrated into Key Flagship
programme implementation?
Informed consent protocols
Please provide some examples.
Consent/Assent Instructions and Forms
Gender Equality
To what extent did the [State Education Sector Plan] and Instructions for Data Collectors
flagship programmes incorporate considerations of gender
Prior to beginning data collection activities, obtain consent/
equality and the empowerment of women and girls into the
assent from the participant using the process below. Note
design, implementation and monitoring of interventions?
that the process is an oral process for all participants.
How so? What were successes of this incorporation? What
• Be sure to identify and use the language that is most
challenges needed to be overcome? What challenges
comfortable for the participant.
remain?
• For headteachers, headteachers will be asked to
provide informed consent for themselves as well as
Impact of COVID-19
to provide consent to meet with and assess students
While we remain in the midst of fighting the pandemic, as per sampling protocols. Data collectors will obtain
so far, what has been the impact of COVID-19 on the students’ oral assent in all cases.
education system, particularly in terms of access to • For pupils, data collectors will provide an overview
education, retention and completion? of the evaluation and orally obtain students’ assent
before proceeding.
What challenges and opportunities do you perceive in terms • For Federal government, State government, Civil
of mitigating this impact? [Probe to understand if pupils are Society and all other actors. Read the form aloud to
returning to school and what may be done.] participants. Be sure to have the participant’s oral
consent piror to proceeding.
Sustainability • As part of the process, provide each participant with a
brief write-up of the activity (see below.)
To what extent can any observed changes be maintained?
• If consent/assent is not granted STOP immediately,
What assurances//mechanisms have been put into place
thank them for their time and let them go.
to promote longevity? At the federal level? State-level?
Communication and synergies between levels? Also, with
Throughout this process be aware of any accommodations
development partners?
that the participant may need and make reasonable
Recommendations
adjustments. If you have questions, stop and contact the
What recommendations do you have to strengthen Nigeria’s data collector supervisor or national evaluator before
strategy and implementation to attain SDG4? proceeding.
Specifically directed at the government of Nigeria?
Specifically directed at the state level? Informed Consent tools:
Specifically directed at development partners?
• Informed consent – Head teachers
Closing • Informed assent – Students
• Informed consent – Federal Government and State-
Is there a theme or issue that we did not discuss during
level actors
this interview that you would like to communicate to the
• Information sheet about evaluation
evaluation team?
188
Annexes
Informed Consent: Head Teacher: You do not have to agree. You can choose to say no and any
basic education services that you and your school receive
Interviewer: Introduce yourself to the respondent
will not change.
and read out the text below. Note that by filling this
section of the questionnaire, you confirm that you have
If you have any questions you may ask them now or later,
completed all tasks involved in seeking consent that
are outlined below to the best of your knowledge and even after the study has started. If you wish to ask questions
ability. later, you may contact any of the people listed on the form
I gave you.
“My name is………………………………………… I’m
Do you agree for your school to take part in this study?
working for Hanovia Limited, a research company in the
country. We are working with UNICEF and the Government
Yes [ ] No [ ] If no, stop and thank the individual and
of Nigeria to better understand the country’s progress in
let them go.
providing basic education. As part of the evaluation, we will
be collecting data in six states. Your school has been chosen
“If you would like additional information. Or, if you
to participate in the evaluation and your input is important
have a concern or complaint that is directly related to the
for us.
evaluation, you may contact ‘Gbenga Adedayo, General
Manager of Hanovia Limited.”
As part of the evaluation, we would like to talk to teachers
and pupils from your school. [Provide each participant with the brief description of
the study that contains Hanovia’s contact information.
Your school was selected at random from all available schools
Proceed with the interview.]
within the LGA. The results of this study will only be used
to for the purpose of informing and the Government of
Nigeria’s provision of basic education. Informed Consent: Pupil:
Specifically, we would like to talk to yourself about your Data Collector: Read out the text below. Note that by
filling this section of the questionnaire, you confirm that
school and your experience leading the school. We also
you have completed all tasks involved in seeking assent
would like to speak to six pupils from primary 2 and six
that are outlined below to the best of your knowledge
pupils from primary 4.
and ability.
As you are responsible for the children’s wellbeing during My name is ____and my job is to research what you are
their time in school, I would like to seek your permission to being taught in your school. We want to know if teaching
talk to the children. We are asking your pupils to participate in your school is getting better and we think this research
in an interview as well as some numeracy and literacy could help tell us that.
exercises. The entire process will take about one hour. If
the pupil does not wish to answer some of the questions You can choose whether or not you want to participate
included in the questionnaire, she/he may skip them and in this study. We have discussed this research with your
move on to the next question. The information recorded is school’s head teacher and they know that we are also asking
confidential, and no one else except the research team will you for your agreement. If you do not wish to take part in
have access to the personal information. I will provide you the research, you do not have to, even if your head teacher
with a sheet with information on how to contact them. has agreed. It’s up to you. If you decide not to be in the
research, it’s okay. Even if you say “yes” now, you can
If you agree, then the next thing we will do is to ask your change your mind later and it’s still okay.
pupils for their agreement as well. You may also choose not
to have your pupils participate in this study and your pupil There may be some words you don’t understand or things
does not have to take part in this evaluation if he or she does that you want me to explain more about because you are
not wish to do so. Both of you have to agree independently. interested or concerned. Please ask me to stop at any time
and I will take time to explain
189
Education in Nigeria: Evaluation of the Effectiveness & Impact of SDG 4
We are asking children some questions about math and be taking notes as well as recording our conversation. This
English. You have been selected from your class randomly. recording is for my own use. I will use it to aid my analysis.
There is no reason why you have been selected, only It will be destroyed and it will not be shared with UNICEF
chance. If you decide that you want to do this, I will ask you nor with the Government of Nigeria.
to do things like counting, doing sums, spelling or reading.
Altogether this will take about one hour. Before we begin, I want you to know that:
• Your participation in this study is entirely voluntary.
This exercise will not affect how you are graded. I will not You can stop at any time without giving a reason.
talk to your teachers or anybody else about what you tell • If you stop the interview, all data collected will be
me. The results that will be collected will be put away destroyed. There is no penalty for stopping.
and no-one but the researchers will be able to see it. But • While we cannot offer you anything for your
you can talk to whoever you like about this exercise, you participation, your comments will help us to assist the
friends, your parents or your teacher. Government of Nigeria and UNICEF in making their
basic education services as strong as possible for the
You can ask me questions now or later. I have given the benefit of Nigeria.
head teacher a number and address where you can reach us. • While I will not associate your name directly with
If you want to talk to someone else that you know about us, information provided in the report, given the unique
like your teacher, that’s okay too. position that you hold, It is possible that someone
looking at the findings may be able to identify you.
Can I interview you? Please be aware of that possibility.]
• We may take pictures of the data collection activities.
Yes ̂ No ̂ If no, STOP and thank the individual and let These pictures will be professional and respectful
them go. and used only in reporting. Your name will not be
associated with the picture.
Informed Consent: Federal Government offi- • You can ask any additional questions before beginning
cials, State Government Officials, Civil Society the interview.
officials and other policy-level implementers:
Do you have any questions?” [Allow the interviewee time
“My name is………………………………………….
to think of questions and ask them if relevant. Respond to
You may be aware that UNICEF, in collaboration with
questions as needed.]
the Government of Nigeria is currently conducting an
evaluation of its progress on education relevant to the
“Do we have your permission to interview you?”
Sustainable Development Goals. I am a researcher and
Yes [ ] No [ ] If no, stop and thank the individual and
I work directly for EdIntersect, an evaluation firm in the
let them go.
United States that has been tasked with this assignment.
We are working with UNICEF and the Government of
“If you would like additional information. Or, if you
Nigeria to better understand the country’s progress in
have a concern or complaint that is directly related to
providing basic education. As part of the evaluation, we
the evaluation, you may contact Mary Faith Mount-Cors,
will be collecting data in schools within six states. We also
President of EdIntersect.”
are conducting key informant interviews at the Federal
and State level with important officials like yourself. We
[Provide each participant with the brief description of
know that your perspective is unique and we would like to
the study that contains Hanovia’s contact information.
include your insights in our report so that the Government
of Nigeria can learn of its progress and make adjustments Proceed with the interview.]
as needed.
I would like to ask you a series of questions about your
work and your understanding of basic education delivery
in Nigeria. The interview may take up to one hour. I will
190
Annexes
Information sheet for school-level survey:
What Is This SDG4 Evaluation?
The government of Nigeria has made a commitment to improve education for its population. The initiative is part
of the United Nations Sustainable Development Goals (SDG). Goal number 4 specifically addresses basic educa-
tion. This study helps to provide the Federal Republic of Nigeria with a better understanding of children’s progress
in reading and mathematics. As part of the evaluation, we will be surveying students and head teachers within
six states. We also will be meeting with officials and other policy-level stakeholders within each State and at the
Federal level. Please know the following about your involvement with this study:
• Your participation in this study is entirely voluntary. You can stop at any time without giving a reason.
• If you stop the interview, all data collected will be destroyed. There is no penalty for stopping.
• We cannot offer you anything for your participation.
• You will not be identified by name in reports.
• We may take pictures of the data collection activities to be used in our reports. Your name will not be
associated with the picture.
• Recordings are for internal use only.
If you have any questions or concerns
regarding the study, please contact
Mr. ‘Gbenga Adedayo, General Manager at Hanovia Limited, +234 805 602 6845 OR
Dr. Adeboye Adeyemo, Co-Principal Investigator, +234 805 602 6845.
Information sheet for school-level survey:
What Is This SDG4 Evaluation?
The government of Nigeria has made a commitment to improve education for its population. The initiative is part
of the United Nations Sustainable Development Goals (SDG). Goal number 4 specifically addresses basic educa-
tion. This study helps to provide the Federal Republic of Nigeria with a better understanding of children’s progress
in reading and mathematics. As part of the evaluation, we will be surveying students and head teachers within
six states. We also will be meeting with officials and other policy-level stakeholders within each State and at the
Federal level. Please know the following about your involvement with this study:
• Your participation in this study is entirely voluntary. You can stop at any time without giving a reason.
• If you stop the interview, all data collected will be destroyed. There is no penalty for stopping.
• We cannot offer you anything for your participation.
• You will not be identified by name in reports.
• We may take pictures of the data collection activities to be used in our reports. Your name will not be
associated with the picture.
• Recordings are for internal use only.
If you have any questions or concerns
regarding the study, please contact
Dr. Adeboye Adeyemo, Co-Principal Investigator, +234 805 602 6845.
191
Education in Nigeria: Evaluation of the Effectiveness & Impact of SDG 4
Questionnaires talk to the children. We are asking your pupils to participate
in a short contextual interview as well as some numeracy
and literacy exercises. The entire process will take about
SDG4 Evaluation 2021
one hour. If the pupil does not wish to answer some of the
questions included in the questionnaire, she/he may skip
Head Teacher/Assistant Head Teacher Question-
naire them and move on to the next question. The information
recorded is confidential, and no one else except the
Draft January 2021
research team will have access to the personal information.
I have provided you with a sheet with information on how
Informed Consent to contact the research team if you have any questions later.
Interviewer: Introduce yourself to the respondent If you agree, then the next thing we will do is to ask your
and read out the text below. Note that by filling this
pupils for their assent to participate as well. You may also
section of the questionnaire, you confirm that you have
choose not to have your pupils participate in this study and
completed all tasks involved in seeking consent that
your pupil does not have to take part in this evaluation if
are outlined below to the best of your knowledge and
ability. he or she does not wish to do so. Both of you will have the
option to choose whether to participate in this evaluation
“My name is………………………………………… I’m
independently. You can choose to say no and any basic
working for Hanovia Limited, a research company in the
education services that you and your school receive will not
country. We are working with UNICEF and the Government
change.
of Nigeria to better understand the country’s progress in
providing basic education. As part of the evaluation, we will
If you have any questions you may ask them now or later,
be collecting data in six states. Your school has been chosen
even after the study has started. If you wish to ask questions
to participate in the evaluation and your input is important
later, you may contact any of the people listed on the form
for us.
I gave you.
As part of the evaluation, we would like to talk to head
Do you agree for your school to take part in this study?
teachers and pupils from your school.
Yes [ ] No [ ] If no, stop and thank the individual and
Your school was selected at random from all available schools
let them go.
within the LGA. The results of this study will only be used
to for the purpose of informing and the Government of
“If you would like additional information. Or, if you
Nigeria’s provision of basic education.
have a concern or complaint that is directly related to the
evaluation, you may contact ‘Gbenga Adedayo, General
Specifically, we would like to talk to you about your school
Manager of Hanovia Limited.”
and your experience leading the school. We also would like
to speak to six pupils from primary 2 and six pupils from
[Provide each participant with the brief description of
primary 4. the study that contains Hanovia’s contact information.
Proceed with the interview.]
As you are responsible for the children’s wellbeing during
their time in school, I would like to seek your permission to
# Question Hausa Translation Response options Notes Source
Preamble
001 State Pre-populated on tablet N/A
002 LGA Pre-populated on tablet N/A
003 School name Pre-populated on tablet N/A
192
Annexes
004 School code Pre-populated on tablet N/A
005 Head Teacher ID Automatically generated by N/A
tablet
006 Location Rural
Urban
007 Language of surrounding Pre-populated on tablet
area
008 Name of data collector Pre-populated on tablet N/A
009 Date of data collection Automatic N/A
Consent
011 Record whether you have 1.Yes If “No,” Message: “Read the con- ESSPIN (mod-
read out the consent sheet sent sheet to the head teacher ified using
to the head teacher to 2.No before continuing with the consent forms
conduct the interview, interview” submitted to
making sure to the best of NHERC)
your ability that the person
understood the text.
012 The head teacher has given 1. Yes HT is consenting for pupils ESSPIN (mod-
consent for 12/24 pupils to 2. No interview ified using
be interviewed. The head consent forms
teacher is aware that oral submitted to
assent will be sought from NHREC)
the pupil. Confirm that the If “No,” message: “Stop and thank
head teacher has not been the individual and let them go.”
coerced into giving consent
to conduct the interview,
and the consent has been
given freely and voluntarily.
The head teacher agrees to
be interviewed.
013 A copy of the Evaluation 1. Yes If “No,” message: “Please provide a ESSPIN (mod-
Information Sheet has 2. No copy of the Evaluation Informa- ified using
been provided to the head tion Sheet to him/her”. consent forms
teacher. submitted to
NHERC)
Background questions N/A
101 Are you a head teacher or Kaine/kece shug- 1. Head Teacher Role: Probe whether he/she ESSPIN
an assistant head teacher or aba, mataimakin 2. Assistant Head is a head teacher, an assistant
acting head teacher? shugaba, ko Teacher head teacher or an acting head
kuma kana/kina 3. Acting Head teacher.
shugabancin Teacher
rikon kwarya ne
a makarantar?
102 First Name Menene sunan- ESSPIN
ka/ki?
What is your first name?
103 Last Name or Surname? Menene sunan ESSPIN
babanka/ki (ko
What is your last name or maigidanki)?
surname?
193
Education in Nigeria: Evaluation of the Effectiveness & Impact of SDG 4
104 Sex 1. Male Select the sex of the respondent ESSPIN
2. Female
105 What is your contact num- Menene lambar Contact number: Record contact ESSPIN
ber? wayarka/ki? number of the teacher excluding
the initial 0. The phone number
should be 10 digits long begin-
ning with 7, 8 or 9.
106 What is your age? Shekarunka/ki [Numeral] Enter the respondent’s age ESSPIN
nawa ne? in completed years. Probe if
required. Ask for his month and
year of birth if age not known.
Enter 98 if the response is don’t
know.
Range: 14 to 80 or 98
107 How many years of expe- Shekarunka/ki [Numeral] Enter years of experience of the
rience do you have as a nawa ne da ko- respondent as a teacher includ-
formal teacher including as yarwa, da kuma ing his experience as a head
a head teacher? zama a matsayin teacher. Enter 98 if the response
shugaban ma- is ‘don’t know’. Enter 0 if no previ-
karanta? ous experience. Probe to exclude
years when the respondent was
not teaching in between.
Range: 0 to 70 or 98
108 [If 101 is Head Teacher] In A wane shekara [Year] Ask only if the respondent is a ESSPIN
which year did you become ne ka/kika zama head teacher. Record the year
head teacher of this school? shugaban wan- at which the respondent first
nan makarantar? became the head teacher of this
school.
Enter “9998” if the response is
‘don’t know’.
Range: 1951-2021
109 [If 101 is Head Teacher] A wane shekara [Year] Enter “9998” if the response is ESSPIN
In which year were you ne ka/kika fara ‘don’t know’.
first appointed to a head zama shugaban Range: 1951-2021
teacher post (in any school makaranta a
including this current rayuwarka/ki, ba
school)? lallai sai a wan-
nan makarantar
ba?’
Professional training
201 Do you have a professional 1. Yes ESSPIN
education qualification? 2. No
194
Annexes
201a [If “yes” to 201] What is 1. Grade II or Interviewer: Select only the high- GEP3
the highest professional equivalent est qualification. You may only
education qualification that 2. National Certif- select one response.
you have? icate in Education
(NCE)
3. Post-Graduate
Diploma in Educa-
tion (PGDE)
4. B.Ed. or equiv-
alent degree in
education
5. M.Ed, MSc.Ed or
equivalent degree
in education
6. M.Phil Ed or
equivalent degree
in education
96. Other (specify)
202 What is the highest aca- 1. Primary School GEP3
demic qualification that you Certificate
have? 2. Junior Sec-
ondary School
Certificate
3. Senior Second-
ary Certificate Ex-
amination (SSCE)/
West African
School Certificate
(WASC)/O-level
4. Ordinary
National Diploma
(OND) / Diploma
5. BA / BSc /
Higher National
Diploma (HND) /
LLB (not in educa-
tion)
6. MA / MSc (not in
education)
7. PhD (doctoral
degree)
8. None
96. Others (speci-
fy) ____
203 In the past two years (Sep- 1. Yes
tember 2018 to July 2020), 2. No - Skip
have you attended any 3. Don’t know -
trainings related to teach- Skip
ing while being employed
as a teacher or a head
teacher, either in the school
or anywhere else (including
other schools or education-
al settings)?
195
Education in Nigeria: Evaluation of the Effectiveness & Impact of SDG 4
203a [If ‘Yes’ to 203]: What were Horon akan Teaching methods Interviewer: Do not prompt but ESSPIN
the trainings mainly about? menene musam- probe if necessary. It’s a multiple
man? Literacy response question - select all that
apply.
Numeracy
Social-emotional
learning (SEL)
Other Curriculum
subject (not liter-
acy, numeracy or
social-emotional
learning)
Extra-curricular
School leadership
Management or
school develop-
ment planning
Development
of instructional
materials
Others (specify)
Don’ t know/re-
fused to answer
203b [If ‘Yes’ to 203]: Who (which Wa (ko wace Local government Interviewer: Do not prompt but ESSPIN
organization) organized the kungiya ce) ta education authori- probe if necessary. It’s a multiple
training? shirya wannan ty (LGEA) response question - select all that
horon? apply.
ESSPIN Ask UNICEF and FMOE for inputs
Administration
301 During the last academic A zangon ma- 1. Always on time ESSPIN
year from September 2019 karanta ta karshe 2. Usually/Mostly
until schools closed in – wato Satumba on time
March 2020, did you get ta 2019 zuwa 3. Usually/Mostly
your salary on time? Yuli ta 2020 – an delayed
biya ka/ki albashi 4. Always delayed
akan lokaci? 98. Don’t know/re-
fused to answer
302 From April 2020 until now, 1. Always on time
have you received your 2. Usually/Mostly
salary on time? on time
3. Usually/Mostly
delayed
4. Always delayed
98. Don’t know/re-
fused to answer
196
Annexes
303 Does this school currently Yes ESSPIN
receive support in cash or
kind from any other organi- No
sation or programmes (such
as NGOs, mosques, foreign I don’t know/No
projects, GEP, ESSPIN, pri- response
vate, etc.)?
Girls Education
Programme
(GEP) / UNICEF
School Improve-
ment Pro-
gramme (SIP) or
Teacher Support
Programme
(TSP)
State Universal
Basic Education
Board (SUBEB)
Universal Basic
Education Com-
mission (UBEC)
National Teach-
ers’ Institute (NTI)
Nigeria Educa-
tion Research
Development
Council (NERDC)
Teachers Regis-
tration Council of
Nigeria (TRCON)
National Institute
for Education
Planning and
Administration
(NIEPA)
Donor organisa-
tion (World Bank,
FCDO – formerly
DFID, JICA,
USAID)
Non-govern-
ment organiza-
tion
Community
organization
Others (specify)
Don’t know / re-
fused to answer
197
Education in Nigeria: Evaluation of the Effectiveness & Impact of SDG 4
303a [If yes to 303]Who does 1. Non-govern- ESSPIN
the school receive external mental organisa-
support in cash or in kind tion (NGO)
from?
2. Religious
Institutions
(e.g. Church or
Mosque)
3. UNICEF/Girls
Education Pro-
gramme (GEP)
4. FCDO – previ-
ously DFID
5. Foreign donor
(other than
UNICEF / DFID
such as JICA, WB,
USAID)
6. Private individ-
ual
7. Alumni Associ-
ation
8. Private com-
pany
96.Other (specify)
_________
304 For the last academic year Yes The inspection/support visit ESSPIN
from September 2019 to could be from either a SUBEB or
March 2020, did you receive No an LGA supervisor.
a visit from a supervisor for
inspection or for support? I don’t know/No
response
304a [If yes to 304]: How fre- More than three
quently did you receive a times a month
visit?
Two or three times
a month
At least once
a year but no
more than once a
month
98. Don’t know /
refused to answer
198
Annexes
305 While your school was Yes Does not include periods when GEP3
open during the 2019- schools were closed due to
2020 school year, were you No COVID-19 pandemic
absent from school for a
full day at any time? By I don’t know/No
‘absence’ I mean a full day response
where you did not come to
school at all, for example
when you had to go for a
training or to collect your
salary.
305a [If “yes” to 305]: What were Elections/cam- Open-ended question. Enumera- GEP3
the main reasons for you paigning tor codes based on the response.
not coming to school on
these days? Transport
Teacher strikes
Other mass strikes
Own illness
Illness of family
members
Maternity/preg-
nancy
Late or non-pay-
ment of salary
Salary collection
Training
Meeting or event
at LGA / SUBEB
Social or religious
obligations (fu-
nerals, weddings,
festivals)
Epidemic/disease
outbreak (e.g.
COVID-19, yellow
fever, etc.)
Weather-related
reasons (rain,
flooding, land-
slides)
Safety/security
concerns
96. Others (spec-
ify)
98. Don’t know
199
Education in Nigeria: Evaluation of the Effectiveness & Impact of SDG 4
306 Is there any written record Yes This may be the timesheet or
of pupil attendance for the time book, or any other written
current term available? No record. Enumerator should ask to
see the record. Select only “yes”
if have seen it. Otherwise, select
“no.”
307 Is there any documentation Yes We are looking for written
or record kept of pupils hav- records that would identify a
ing special needs (physical No pupil’s particular special needs.
or mental challenges) at Ideally, this would also include
this school? information about accommo-
dations or other services or
approaches specific to support-
ing this child. We can also include
timesheets or timebooks that
make specific record of pupils
with special needs. Enumerator
should ask to see the record.
Select only “yes” if have seen it.
Otherwise, select “no.”
307 In your view, while your Multiple response Do not prompt. Record all issues ESSPIN/GEP3?
school was open during the that apply with pupil attendance.
2019-2020 school year what Pupils need to Select ‘none’ if there are no
problems prevented pupils help with income issues.
from attending school generating activi-
regularly? ty e.g. farming
Pupils need to
help with house-
hold chores
Lack of uniform
Parents cannot
afford payments
for school
Corporal punish-
ment
Child abuse
Social or religious
obligations (fu-
nerals, weddings,
festivals)
Poor quality of
teaching and
learning
Parents are not
supportive about
sending children
to schools
Disease/illness/
health issues
Traffic, danger
roads/crossings
200
Annexes
Bullying/Harass-
ment/abuse from
other children
Harassment from
teachers
Harassment from
authorities (police,
local officials, local
security outfits)
Rebels/thieves/
bandits
Natural hazards
(floods, erosion,
bush fire)
Long distance to
get to school
Risk of kidnapping
Risk of sexual
violence
Spirits/ghosts
Hazardous terrain
to travel (moun-
tains, rivers,
ravines)
Lack of means of
transportation
None
Others (specify)
Don’t know/No
response
308a [If “yes” for 308]: Do any of Yes
your pupils have difficulties
seeing, even if wearing No
glasses?
I don’t know/Does
not respond
308b [If “yes” for 308]: Do any of Yes
your pupils have difficulties
hearing, even if using a No
hearing aid?
I don’t know/Does
not respond
308c [If “yes” for 308]: Do any of Yes
your pupils have difficulties
walking or climbing steps? No
I don’t know/Does
not respond
201
Education in Nigeria: Evaluation of the Effectiveness & Impact of SDG 4
308d [If “yes” for 308]: Do any of Yes
your pupils have difficulties
remembering or concen- No
trating?
I don’t know/Does
not respond
308e [If “yes” for 308]: Do any of Yes
your pupils have difficul-
ties (with self-care such No
as ) washing all over or
dressing? I don’t know/Does
not respond
308f [If “yes” for 308]: When using Yes
their usual language, do
any of your pupils have dif- No
ficulties communicating (for
example, being understood I don’t know/Does
by others?) not respond
309 Have you or any teacher at Yes
this school received training
to support students with No
special needs such as the
difficulties we have just I don’t know/No
discussed? response
310 How many teachers are cur- Numeric] P1-P6 teachers only
rently on staff at the school
(P1-P6 only)?
311 How many male teachers [Numeric] Does not include head teacher;
are currently on staff at the P1-P6 teachers only
school (P1-P6 only)?
312 How many of those male [Numeric]
teachers are trained?
313 How many of those male [Numeric]
teachers receive their salary
from the state government
payroll?
314 How many female teachers [Numeric] Does not include head teacher;
are currently on staff at the P1-P6 teachers only
school (P1-P6 only)?
315 How many of those female [Numeric]
teachers are trained?
316 How many of those female [Numeric]
teachers receive their salary
from the state government
payroll?
317 Is there any written record Yes This may be the timesheet or ESSPIN
of teacher attendance for time book, or any other written
the current term available? No record. Enumerator should ask to
see the record. Select only “yes”
if have seen it. Otherwise, select
“no.”
202
Annexes
318 In your view, what prob- A naka/ki ganin, Security and safe- Not related to COVID-19
lems prevented teachers me nene ya hana ty related issues
from attending school reg- mallamai zuwa
ularly in the last school year makaranta yan Pay/Salary related
(September 2019 – March day a kamata a Select all that apply
2020)? zangon ma- Low motivation
karanta ta karshe among teachers/
– wato Satumba laziness
ta 2019 zuwa Yuli
ta 2020? Social or religious
obligations (fu-
nerals, weddings,
festivals)
Training
Own or family
illness/disease
Childcare/ma-
ternity/paternity
leave
Epidemic/disease
outbreak
Weather-related
reasons (rain,
flooding, land-
slides)
Lack of supervi-
sion
Political activities/
strikes
Involved in other
income generat-
ing activities
Bad School
infrastructure/
conditions
Lack of teaching
materials
Distance/Travel
time
None
Others (specify)
319 Have you done anything to Yes
improve teacher atten-
dance during the last No
school year (September
2019 – March 2020)? I don’t know/No
response
320 What have you done to im- Ruling attendance Select all that apply
prove teacher attendance book at opening
during the last school year time and follow-
(September 2019 – March ing up absences
2020)?
Insist on written
absence requests
Complete move-
ment book during
school hours
Discuss with
teachers about
attendance
203
Education in Nigeria: Evaluation of the Effectiveness & Impact of SDG 4
Address pay/
salary related
grievances
Address childcare/
maternity/paterni-
ty related issues
Address issues
related to school
infrastructure/
conditions
Address lack of
teaching materials
Others (specify)
___________
School environment
400 Does the school have Makarantar na Yes First ask if there is electricity in ESSPIN/GEP3
electricity? da wutar lan- the school and then probe how
tarki? No regular the electricity supply is.
Electricity supply also includes
I don’t know/No electricity from generator or solar
response power.
400a [If “yes” for 400]: Is the In e, tana samun Regular
electricity supply regular or wuta a kowane
irregular? lokaci ko kuma Irregular
akan kawo a
kuma dauke? I don’t know/No
response
401 Does the school have a Yes GEP3
collection of reading books
(or library) that pupils can No
borrow from? (This does
not include not course I don’t know/No
books.) response
402 Does the school have a Yes GEP3
playground or a sports
area? No
I don’t know/No
response
402a [If “yes” to 402]:Do girls have Yes GEP3
access to the playground or
sports area? No
I don’t know/No
response
402b [If “yes” to 402]: With what Very often
frequency do girls use the
playground or sports area? Often
Sometimes
Rarely
Never
204
Annexes
403 What is the main source Tanker truck GEP3
of drinking water at this
school? Surface water
Rainwater
Protected dug
well or spring
Tube well or
borehole
Piped water
River or stream
Unprotected dug
well or spring
Purchased from
vendors
No water source
Others, specify
____
404 Does the school current- Makarantar na Yes ESSPIN
ly have a School-Based da kwamitin
Management Committee or hadin-kan iyaye No
SBMC? da malamai,
wato I don’t know/No
response
404a [If “yes” to 404]: When did Yaushe rabon 1. This ESSPIN
the SBMC last meet? SBMC da zaman term or during
taro? the preceding
vacation
2. The last
term of the previ-
ous school year
3. Earlier
than that
4. It has
not yet met
98. Don’t
know / refused to
answer
404b [[If ‘has not yet met’ to 404]: It just recently
What is the reason for the formed
SBMC not yet having met?
There was a
change in leader-
ship
COVID-19 precau-
tions have pre-
vented meeting
Other: specify:
_______
405 Does instruction officially Yes Enumerator hint: This refers to New
occur in a language other a language used in teaching
than English? No of pupils in this school, other
than English language. May also
I don’t know/No known as Bilingual instruction/
response Mother-tongue instruction/Mul-
tilingual instruction
205
Education in Nigeria: Evaluation of the Effectiveness & Impact of SDG 4
45a [If “yes,” to 405] which lan- Hausa Include dropdown menu for New
guages? Other:
Igbo
Pidgin English
Yoruba
Benin/Edo
Nupe
Ebira
Other: specify
_____________ Esan
Don’t know/No Fulfulde
response
Gbagyi
Ibibio
Kanuri
Nupe
Tiv
Arabic
405b [If “yes,” to 405], which P1 New
grades? (Select all that
apply) P2
P3
P4
P5
P6
405c [If “yes,” to 405], which sub- Reading/language Identify class periods being New
ject areas? arts taught in a national language
(a language that is not English).
Mathematics Perhaps the school also has other
courses taught in a national
Basic Science language as well during the day.
&Technology Select all those subject areas the
head teacher indicates are taught
Religion and Na- in a national language.
tional Values (Civic
Education)
Creative Arts
Pre-Vocational
Studies
Other: specify
_______
Impact of COVID-19
501 During the 2019-2020 Numeric [Range Enumerators clarify – are focus- New
school year, for how long 0-30] ing on months in 2020.
was your school closed
due to COVID closures? (In
number of weeks)
502 During the 2020-2021 Numeric [Range Enumerators clarify – are focus- New
school year, for how long 0-30] ing on months in 2021.
was your school closed
due to COVID closures? (In
number of weeks)
206
Annexes
503 During COVID-related Yes New
closures, did students at
your school have the op- No
portunity to attend virtual
learning? Don’t know/No
response
503a [If yes to 503]: What type? Radio lessons New
TV lessons
Lessons via
Internet, Tablet or
Smartphone
SMS-based les-
sons
WhatsApp-based
lessons
Paper lessons
distributed by
school
Small study
groups
503b [If yes to 503], what actors NGOs New
provided this instruction?
SUBEB
State Ministry of
Education
UBEC
UNICEF
Teachers
503c [If yes to 503]: How do you Very good New
assess the quality of that
instruction? Good
Fair
Poor
Very poor
Don’t know/No
response
503d [If yes to 503]: What propor- Nearly all New
tion of students were able
to access virtual instruction Three-quarters
during school closures?
Half
A quarter
Less than a
quarter
Don’t know/No
response
207
Education in Nigeria: Evaluation of the Effectiveness & Impact of SDG 4
504 What proportion of female Nearly all New
students have returned to
school after the most recent Three-quarters
COVID-related school
closure? Half
A quarter
Less than a
quarter
Don’t know/No
response
505 What proportion of male Nearly all New
students have returned to
school after the most recent Three-quarters
COVID-related school
closure? Half
A quarter
Less than a
quarter
Don’t know/No
response
506 Regarding student promo- Yes
tion, did qualifying students
move to the next primary No
level in October 2020 when
classes resumed after the Don’t know/No
covid closures? response
506a [If no to 506] In what month November 2020
did promotions occur?
December 2020
January 2021
February 2021
Other, specify:
_______
507 What was the nature of Based on exam
promotion? results
Based on complet-
ing the curriculum
of the grade
Based on atten-
dance
Based on the need
to free up space
for the new stu-
dents coming into
P1, so all students
were promoted
to the next grade
regardless of cur-
ricular progress,
attendance, or
assessment results
Direct promotion
(did not take into
account results)
Other, specify
_______
208
Annexes
Contextual factors
601 Which factor(s) can you Improved teacher Do not prompt. Probe for more New
identify as possibly con- practice information. Select all that apply.
tributing to improved pupil
learning since 2016? Improved parental
engagement
Reduction or elim-
ination of school
fees
National school
feeding program
Use of national
languages for
instruction
Improved tracking
of student prog-
ress
Reduction in num-
ber of students
Increase in num-
ber of teachers on
staff
Contributions of
external donors/
programs
I can’t – learning
did not improve
Other, specify:
_________
I don’t know/No
response
602 Which factor(s) can you Increased financial Do not prompt. Probe for more New
identify as possibly contrib- hardship/inability information. Select all that apply.
uting to weakened pupil to pay school fees
learning since 2016?
Insecurity
Changes in teach-
ing methods
Suspension of
national school
feeding program
Increases in stu-
dent enrolment
(overpopulation)
Lack of adequate
materials
Inadequate teach-
er training
Inadequate teach-
er professional
development (in-
cluding coaching
and retraining)
209
Education in Nigeria: Evaluation of the Effectiveness & Impact of SDG 4
Poor teacher
attendance
Poor pupil atten-
dance
School closures
– related to
COVID-19
School closures –
all other reasons
(not COVID-19)
Inconsistent or
insufficient admin-
istrative practices
at state or federal
level (Teacher as-
signment, payroll,
etc.)
I can’t – Learning
did not weaken
since 2016
I don’t know/No
response
603 Between September 2018 Yes Question is asking about closures New
and present, did the school NOT related to COVID.
experience closures lasting No
more than two weeks (not
including COVID-19 related Don’t know/No
closures)? response
603a [If ‘yes,’ to 603]: What was Teacher strikes New
the cause of the school clo-
sure? (Select all that apply.) Student strikes
Transportation
strike
Natural disaster
(flood, earth-
quake, sand
storm)
Insecurity
Other, specify:
_________
603b [If ‘yes’ to 603]: What was Numeric New
the duration of the school
closures between Septem- Range: 0 to 100
ber 2018 and January 2020?
(In weeks)
210
Annexes
Schoolgrounds Observation
These questions are to be answered directly by the enumerator based on their observations. The enumerator will need to
visit the schoolgrounds in order to see each of these elements. A few questions may require additional clarity. Seek informa-
tion from the head teacher or other teachers at the school.
1 Does the school have make-shift Yes Make-shift classrooms include the
classrooms? use of tents, huts, spaces under a tree,
No open space, and dilapidated structures
that were not part of the govern-
ment-built school.
2 Does the school have a fence or Yes GEP3
boundary wall?
No
3 [If yes to 3] Is the fence or bound- Yes
ary wall in need of repair?
No
4 Are windows in need of repair? Yes Respond yes if 1 or more windows are
in need of repair.
No
Don’t exist
Teacher Attendance Worksheet Instructions: This worksheet addresses all P1-P6
teachers. If the teacher attendance record is available
then please record the date and the number of absent
School _____________________________ teachers from the attendance record. Start with the
date of the visit and work backwards. If the attendance
record is not please estimate the number of teachers
LGA________________________________ absent for the last 5 days when the school was open. For
the sake of efficiency, the head teacher may complete
the table while enumerators begin data collection.
Date________________________________
5 Is the roof or ceiling in need of Yes
repair?
No
Don’t exist
6 Are the classroom walls in need Yes Respond yes if 1 or more walls are in
of repair? need of repair.
No
Don’t exist
7 Is the playground in need of Yes
repair?
No
Don’t exist
211
Education in Nigeria: Evaluation of the Effectiveness & Impact of SDG 4
8 How many functioning toilets [Numeric] Make sure to observe and only include GEP3
does the school have for pupils? toilets that are in full working condi-
tion. This means toilets that have water
and are being used today.
8a [If greater than 1 for 8]:How [Numeric] If not evident that the toilets are specif- GEP3
many of these toilets are specifi- ic to girls, ask a teacher or head teacher
cally for girls? for clarity.
9 How many functioning toilets [Numeric] Make sure to observe and only include
does the school have for teach- toilets that are in full working condi-
ers? tion. This means toilets that have water
and are being used today.
9a [If more than 1 for 9]: How many [Numeric] If not evident that the toilets are specif-
of these are specifically for ic to girls, ask a teacher or head teacher
female teachers? for clarity.
Student enrolment and attendance worksheet
School _________________________ LGA _____________________ Date_______________________________
P1 P2 P3 P4 P5 P6
Girls Boys Girls Boys Girls Boys Girls Boys Girls Boys Girls Boys
AY 19-20
# pupils enrolled
at beginning of AY
19-20
# pupils with dis-
abilities enrolled
at beginning of AY
19-20
AY 20-21
# pupils enrolled
at beginning of AY
20-21
# pupils with dis-
abilities enrolled
at beginning of AY
20-21
# pupils repeating
current grade
during AY 20-21
# pupils present
on Monday of this
current week
Percentage of
presence at school
during the week
starting Monday,
2 November 2020
Note: Record only if present within the Register. If not already calculated, enter “Not available.”
212
Annexes
Date Date # of male teachers absent # of female teachers absent
Day of visit
1 day previous to the date of visit
2 days previous to the date of visit
3 days previous to the date of visit
4 days previous to the date of visit
Student Survey
SDG4 Evaluation 2021
Pupil Questionnaire
Draft January 2021
# Question Response options Notes Source
Preamble
001 State Pre-populated on N/A
tablet
002 LGA Pre-populated on N/A
tablet
003 School name Pre-populated on N/A
tablet
004 School code Pre-populated on N/A
tablet
005 Pupil ID Automatically gener- N/A
ated by tablet
006 Name of data collector Pre-populated on N/A
tablet
007 Date of data collection Automatic N/A
008 Class of student P2 Data collector makes N/A
selection
P4
Background questions N/A
101 How old are you? [Numeral] 99 for No answer/ N/A
don’t know
Data validation
Shekarar ka/ki nawa? range: 5-20
213
Education in Nigeria: Evaluation of the Effectiveness & Impact of SDG 4
102 Pupil’s gender Female Data collector makes N/A
selection
Mace
Jinsin Yaro/Yarinya
Male
Namiji
103 Did you attend nursery or ECCDE Yes New –
before starting Primary 1? allows
Eh triangu-
lation
with
Ko ka/kin halarci rabin aji ko “ajin MICS
yara” kafin ka/ki shiga aji daya na No indicator
firamare? for early
A’a
child-
hood
educa-
Don’t know/No response tion
Ban sani ba / Bai/Bata ce komai ba
104 Did you attend Quranic school Yes
before starting Primary 1?
Eh
No
A’a
Don’t know/No response
Ban sani ba / Bai/Bata ce komai ba
105 Do you do home lessons with a Yes Quranic or religious New –
tutor/private teacher? (Islamiyya) tutor/ judged
Eh private teacher does OPM
not count. question
inappro-
Ko kana/kina yin darusan karatun priate
boko a gida da wani mai koyarwa/ No – similar
malami? to TDP
A’a
ques-
tion:” Are
you at-
Don’t know/No response tending
any other
Ban sani ba / Bai/Bata ce komai ba school
besides
this
school?
This
can be
during
the day
or the
evening.
214
Annexes
105a [If yes to Q105] Reading/language arts Open-ended – New –
Enumerator chooses judged
Which subjects do you study answer that best OPM
during the home lessons? aligns with pupil’s question
Mathematicss response inappro-
priate
Lissafi Select all that apply
Wadanne darusa kuke nazari akai
yayin karatun a gida?
Basic Science & Technology
Religion and National Values (Civic Educa-
tion)
Creative Arts
Pre-Vocational Studies
Other: specify________
Wani daban: fayyace _______
Don’t know/No response
Ban sani ba / Bai/Bata ce komai ba
106 Does someone you live with help Yes Could be brother, New – in
you with your homework or help sister, mother, father, order to
you to review lessons? Eh uncle, guardian. sepa-
Someone that lives rate out
in the home with private
them (apart from addi-
Ko wani da kuke zaune tare na No the tutor/private tional
taimaka maka/miki wajen yin aikin teacher) support
makaranta na gida (assigment) ko A’a from
ya/ta taimaka maka/miki wajen familiar
bitar karatu? support.
Don’t know/No response
Ban sani ba / Bai/Bata ce komai ba
215
Education in Nigeria: Evaluation of the Effectiveness & Impact of SDG 4
106a [If yes to 106] Who is the individual Mother This should be family
that helps you most often? member or someone
Mahaifiya they live with. (Not
a tutor or private
teacher.). If the child
Wanene ke taimaka maka/miki mentions more than
mafi akasari? Father one person, probe
for the one that
Mahaifi
helps the pupil the
most
Sister
Ya/Kanwa
Brother
Wa/Kani
Aunt
Anti
Uncle
Kawu
Grandmother
Kaka Mace
Grandfather
Kaka Namiji
Guardian
Mariki/Marikiya (Mai kula da yaron/yarinyar)
Other: specify _____________
Wani daban: Fayyace _______
107 Do you have any of the following New –
books/materials that you can read question
at home? allows
for some
compari-
son with
Ko akwai littatafai ko kayan karatu MICS
da zaka/zaki iya karantawa a gida? data –
Su menene? books
within
the
home for
young
children
specifi-
cally
216
Annexes
107a Newspaper Yes
Jarida No
I don’t know/No response
107b Magazine Yes
Mujalla No
I don’t know/No response
107c Children’s books Yes
Littattafan Yara No
I don’t know/No response
107d Comics/Cartoons Yes
Littattafan Tatsuniya No
I don’t know/No response
107e Coloring books Yes
Littattafan zane (shafa kala) No
I don’t know/No response
107f Bible Yes
Injila (Bible) No
I don’t know/No response
107g Quran Yes
Al-Kur’ani No
I don’t know/No response
107h Schoolbooks Yes
Litattafan makaranta No
I don’t know/No response
107i Other books Yes
Wasu littattafan daban No
I don’t know/No response
107j Written notes, letters, lists, doctor’s Yes
notes (received or used within the
family) No
Rubuce-rubuce a takarda, wasika, I don’t know/No response
jerin lis na abubuwa, rubutun likita
(da aka karba ko akayi amfani
dashi a cikin gidan)
107k Cellphone materials (text messag- Yes
es, digital books, etc.)
No
Abubuwan cikin waya (sakonni
waya, littattafan waya, da sauran I don’t know/No response
su)
107l Other, specify: ______ Yes
No
I don’t know/No response
217
Education in Nigeria: Evaluation of the Effectiveness & Impact of SDG 4
107 [If yes to any 106 option] Do you Yes A broad question – if
read at home? ever have the oppor-
Eh tunity to read very
Kana/kina karatu a gida? small texts to larger
No ones., ie., Do you
ever read at all?
A’a
Don’t know/No response
Ban sani ba / Bai/Bata ce komai ba
108 Do you have any challenges that Yes TDP
make it difficult for you to come to
school? Eh
Ko kana/kina samun kalubale No
wajen zuwa makaranta?
A’a
Don’t know/No response
Ban sani ba / Bai/Bata ce komai ba
108a [If yes to 108] [ ] Need to help with income generating Open-ended –
activities (e.g. farming) Enumerator chooses
What are the main challenges? [ ] Need to help with household chores answer(s) that best
[ ] Lack of uniform aligns with pupil’s
[ ] Parents cannot afford payments for responses
school
Wadanne kalubalen ake fuskanta? [ ] Corporal punishment
[ ] Child abuse
[ ] Social or religious obligations (funerals,
weddings, festivals)
[Select all that apply]
[ ] Poor quality of teaching and learning
[ ] Parents are not supportive about sending
child to school
[ ] Disease/illness/health issues
[ ] Traffic, danger roads/crossings
[ ] Cinkoso, manyan titi/ko masu hadari
wajen tsallakawa.
[ ] Bullying/Harassment/abuse from other
children
[ ] Cin zarafi/zagi daga sauran yara
Harassment from teachers
[ ] Harassment from authorities (police, local
officials, local security outfits)
[ ] Cin zarafi daga hukuma (yan sanda,
hukumomin unguwa, ma’aikatan tsaro na
unguwa)
[ ] Rebels/thieves/bandits
[ ] Yan ta’adda/Barayi
[ ] Natural hazards (floods, erosion, bush
fire…)
[ ] Hadarin yanayi (Ambaliya, zaizayar kasa,
gobarar daji…)
[ ] Long distance to get to school
[ ] Nisan hanya zuwa makaranta
[ ] Risk of kidnapping
[ ] Hadarin garkuwa da mutane (kidnapping)
[ ] Risk of sexual violence
[ ] Hadarin fyade
[ ] Spirits/ghosts
[ ] Iskokai/fatalwa
[ ] Hazardous terrain to travel (mountains,
rivers, ravines,…)
[ ] Hadarin rashin kyan hanya (Tsaunika,
kogi, korama mai gudanar da ruwa….)
[ ] Lack of means of transportation
[ ] Rashin abin hawa
218
Annexes
[ ] Don’t know/No response
[ ] Ban sani ba / Bai/Bata ce komai ba
Learning during COVID
Each of the following questions re- The COVID closure
fers to how you may have learned period refers to
while schools were closed due to March thru Septem-
COVID. ber 2020 as well as
additional closures
in 2021.
Kowanne daga cikin tambayoyin
da zasu biyo baya suna magana
ne akan ta yadda ka/kika iya koyan
karatu yayin da aka rufe makaran-
tu saboda KORONA.
201 During school closures due to Yes
COVID, did you read or practice
your schoolwork on your own? A’a
Lokaci da aka rufe makarantu a No
dalilin KORONA, ko ka/kin yi karatu
ko gwajin wani aikin makaranta da A’a
kanka/kanki?
Don’t know/No response
Ban sani ba / Bai/Bata ce komai ba
202 During school closures due to Yes
COIVD, did you have private
lessons with a tutor or private A’a
teacher?
No
Lokaci da aka rufe makarantu a
dalilin KORONA, ko kayi/kinyi daru- A’a
san karatu da wani mai koyarwa ko
malami?
Don’t know/No response
Ban sani ba / Bai/Bata ce komai ba
203 During school closures due to Yes
COVID, did you work on any activi-
ties that your school teachers sent/ A’a
gave you?
No
Lokaci da aka rufe makarantu a
dalilin KORONA, ko kayi/kinyi aiki A’a
akan wasu abubuwa da malaman
ku suka turo maka/miki?
Don’t know/No response
Ban sani ba / Bai/Bata ce komai ba
219
Education in Nigeria: Evaluation of the Effectiveness & Impact of SDG 4
204 During school closures due to Yes
COVID (March to September last
year), did you listen to or partici- A’a
pate in any radio lessons?
No
Lokaci da aka rufe makarantu a
dalilin KORONA, ko ka/kin saurari/ A’a
halarci wasu darusan karatu a
rediyo?
Don’t know/No response
Ban sani ba / Bai/Bata ce komai ba
205 During school closures due to Yes
COVID (March to September last
year), did you watch or participate A’a
in any TV lessons?
No
Lokaci da aka rufe makarantu a
dalilin KORONA ko ka/kin kalli A’a
ko halarci wasu darusan karatu a
talabijin (TV)?
Don’t know/No response
Ban sani ba / Bai/Bata ce komai ba
206 During school closures due to Yes
COVID did you participate in les-
sons that used SMS messages? A’a
Lokaci da aka rufe makarantu a No
dalilin KORONA, ko ka/kin halarci
wasu darusan karatu wanda aka yi A’a
amfani da bangaren tura sakonni
na waya?
Don’t know/No response
Ban sani ba / Bai/Bata ce komai ba
207 During school closures due to Yes
COVID, did you participate in
online lessons using a computer/ A’a
tablet or smartphone?
No
Lokaci da aka rufe makarantu a
dalilin KORONA, ko ka/kin halarci A’a
wasu darusan karatu na yanar gizo
ta komfuta/babbar waya ko kara-
mar waya mai bada damar shiga
Don’t know/No response
yanar gizo?
Ban sani ba / Bai/Bata ce komai ba
People you live with
220
Annexes
301 How many people are there in [Numeral] 99 for No answer/ ESSPIN
your family? Explain: The people don’t know
in your family are those that you
normally share food with and who
treat the same person as their
head of household. Data validation
range: 0-35
Mutane nawa ne a gidanku?
Explain: Mutanen gidanku sune
wadanda kuke cin abinci tare
kuma suke kallo mutum daya da
ku a matsayin maigidan/shugaba
a gidan.
The child should include him/her-
self. If the child is unsure, ask him/
her to list all the people and help
him/her count.
302 What language do you speak most Hausa Ask what language New
often at home? the child speaks the
Hausa most often at home.
We are looking for
Igbo the language spoken
Wanne yare kuke yi a gida? most often by the
Inyamuranci child. If there are
multiple languag-
Yoruba
es the child has in
mind, the data col-
Yarabanci
lector should probe
Pidgin English in order to identify
the language the
Brokin child speaks the
most often at home.
English
Turanci
Insert a list of lan-
Benin/Edo guages for Other.
Benin/Edo
Ebira
Ebira
Esan
Esan
Fulfulde
Fulatanci
Gbagyi
Gbagyi
Ibibio
Ibibio
Kanuri
Barbanci/ Kanuri
Nupe
221
Education in Nigeria: Evaluation of the Effectiveness & Impact of SDG 4
Nufanci
Tiv
Yaren Tibi
Other: specify _____________
Wanni daban: Fayyace _________
Don’t know/No response
Ban sani ba / Bai/Bata ce komai ba
303 Does your mother live in the same Yes ESSPIN
house as you?
A’a
Ko mahaifiyar ka/ki na zaune a
gida daya da kai/ke? No
A’a
Some of the time
Wani lokacin
Don’t know/No response
Ban sani ba / Bai/Bata ce komai ba
303a [If No for 303]: My mother lives in another house ESSPIN
Where does your mother live? Mahaifiyata na zama a wani gidan daban
A ina mahaifiyar ka/ki ke zama? My mother is not alive
Mahaifiyata bata raye
Don’t know/No response
Ban sani ba / Bai/Bata ce komai ba
303b [If Yes/Some of the time for 303]: Yes Refers to ability to New –
read in any lan- replaces
Does your mother know how to A’a guage. ESSPIN
read? ques-
tions:
No Did your
Ko mahaifiyar ka/ki ta iya karatu? mother
A’a go to
school?
Did your
Don’t know/No response
mother
complete
Ban sani ba / Bai/Bata ce komai ba
Primary
school?
222
Annexes
304 Does your father live in the same Yes ESSPIN
house as you?
A’a
Ko mahaifin ka/ki na zaune a gida
daya da kai/ke? No
A’a
Some of the time
Wani lokacin
Don’t know/No response
Ban sani ba / Bai/Bata ce komai ba
304a [If no for 304]: My mother lives in another house ESSPIN
Where does your father live? Mahaifina na zama a wani gidan daban
A ina mahaifin ka/ki ke zama? My mother is not alive
Mahaifina baya raye
Don’t know/No response
Ban sani ba / Bai/Bata ce komai ba
304b [If Yes/Some of the time for 304]: Yes Refers to ability to New –
read in any lan- replaces
Does your father know how to A’a guage. ESSPIN
read? ques-
tions:
No Did your
Ko mahaifin ka/ki ya iya karatu? father
A’a go to
school?
Did your
Don’t know/No response
father
complete
Ban sani ba / Bai/Bata ce komai ba
Primary
school?
305 [If No for 303 AND 304]: [TEXTBOX] This is the person ESSPIN
the child lives with.
What is the name of the main In the case that they
person who looks after you? do not live with a
biological mother or
father.
Menene sunan ainahin wanda/
wadda ke kula da kai/ke?
223
Education in Nigeria: Evaluation of the Effectiveness & Impact of SDG 4
305 Does [insert guardian’s name] Yes Refers to ability to New –
know how to read? read in any lan- replaces
A’a guage. ESSPIN
ques-
tions:
Ko [insert guardian’s name] ya/ta
iya karatu? No Did your
guardian
A’a go to
school?
Did your
Don’t know/No response
guardian
complete
Ban sani ba / Bai/Bata ce komai ba
Primary
school?
306 What religion does your family Christianity ESSPIN
practice?
Kiristanci
Wanne addini kuke yi a gida?
Islam
Musulunci
Other
Wani daban
No religion
Ba addini
Don’t know/No response
Ban sani ba / Bai/Bata ce komai ba
Socioeconomic status (Assets)
Now I want you to look at some Use “Asset cards” to ESSPIN
pictures of things. Please look at illustrate concepts to
these pictures one by one and tell children.
me if you have any of these things
in your home.
Yanzu ina so ka/ki kalli wasu hotu-
na na wasu abubuwa. Ka/ki duba
hotunan nan daya bayan daya
ka/ki gayamin idan kuna da wani
daga cikin wadannan abubuwan a
gidanku?
401 Does your family have a sofa? Yes ESSPIN
A’a
Ko gidanku akwai kujerar kushin
mai kamar gado?
No
A’a
Don’t know/No response
Ban sani ba / Bai/Bata ce komai ba
224
Annexes
402 Does your family have a chair? Yes ESSPIN
A’a
Ko gidanku akwai kujera?
No
A’a
Don’t know/No response
Ban sani ba / Bai/Bata ce komai ba
403 Does your family have a table? Yes ESSPIN
A’a
Ko gidanku akwai tebur?
No
A’a
Don’t know/No response
Ban sani ba / Bai/Bata ce komai ba
404 Does your family have a mattress Yes ESSPIN
/ bed?
A’a
Ko gidanku akwai katifa / gado?
No
A’a
Don’t know/No response
Ban sani ba / Bai/Bata ce komai ba
405 Does your family have a mat? Yes ESSPIN
A’a
Ko gidanku akwai tabarma?
No
A’a
Don’t know/No response
Ban sani ba / Bai/Bata ce komai ba
406 Does your family have a sewing Yes ESSPIN
machine?
A’a
Ko gidanku akwai keken dinki?
No
A’a
Don’t know/No response
Ban sani ba / Bai/Bata ce komai ba
225
Education in Nigeria: Evaluation of the Effectiveness & Impact of SDG 4
407 Does your family have a fridge? Yes ESSPIN
A’a
Ko gidanku akwai firiji?
No
A’a
Don’t know/No response
Ban sani ba / Bai/Bata ce komai ba
408 Does your family have a bicycle? Yes ESSPIN
A’a
Ko gidanku akwai keke?
No
A’a
Don’t know/No response
Ban sani ba / Bai/Bata ce komai ba
409 Does your family have a motor- Yes ESSPIN
bike?
A’a
Ko gidanku akwai babur/mashin?
No
A’a
Don’t know/No response
Ban sani ba / Bai/Bata ce komai ba
410 Does your family have a car? Yes ESSPIN
A’a
Ko gidanku akwai mota?
No
A’a
Don’t know/No response
Ban sani ba / Bai/Bata ce komai ba
411 Does your family have a genera- Yes ESSPIN
tor?
A’a
Ko gidanku akwai jannareto / inji?
No
A’a
Don’t know/No response
Ban sani ba / Bai/Bata ce komai ba
226
Annexes
412 Does your family have a fan? Yes ESSPIN
A’a
Ko gidanku akwai fanka?
No
A’a
Don’t know/No response
Ban sani ba / Bai/Bata ce komai ba
413 Does your family have a radio? Yes ESSPIN
A’a
Ko gidanku akwai rediyo?
No
A’a
Don’t know/No response
Ban sani ba / Bai/Bata ce komai ba
414 Does your family have a TV? Yes ESSPIN
A’a
Ko gidanku akwai talabijin (TV)?
No
A’a
Don’t know/No response
Ban sani ba / Bai/Bata ce komai ba
415 Does your family have a comput- Yes ESSPIN
er?
A’a
Ko gidanku akwai komfuta?
No
A’a
Don’t know/No response
Ban sani ba / Bai/Bata ce komai ba
416 Does your family have a mobile Yes ESSPIN
phone?
A’a
Ko gidanku akwai wayar salula?
No
A’a
Don’t know/No response
Ban sani ba / Bai/Bata ce komai ba
227
Education in Nigeria: Evaluation of the Effectiveness & Impact of SDG4
417 Does your family have an air con- Yes ESSPIN
ditioner?
A’a
Ko gidanku akwai na’urar sanyaya
daki (AC)? No
A’a
Don’t know/No response
Ban sani ba / Bai/Bata ce komai ba
Mapping of literacy and numeracy tools by competency
Literacy tool
Competency Test item end of P2 (administered to P3 students) Test item end of P4
(administered to P5 students)
Phoneme awareness Rhyming words – The pupil is asked to say words
which rhyme with the word said by the asses-
sor. Score is calculated in terms of numbers of
correct answers.
Fluency Letter knowledge – The pupils is asked to read
letters from a grid in one minute. Score is calcu-
lated in terms of number of correct letters read
in one minute
Fluency Familiar Words – The pupils is asked to read Familiar Words – The pupils is asked to read words from
words from a grid in one minute. Score is calcu- a grid in one minute. Score is calculated in terms of
lated in terms of number of correct words read number of correct words read in one minute
in one minute
Decoding Initial letter of words – The pupil is asked to
identify the initial letter of words represented by
pictures. Score is calculated in terms of number
of letters correctly identified
Oral comprehension Listening comprehension – The pupils is asked Listening comprehension – The pupils is asked to
to answer questions after the assessor has read answer questions after the assessor has read a short
a short passage in English. Score is calculated in passage in English. Score is calculated in terms of num-
terms of numbers of correct answers. bers of correct answers.
Fluency Reading aloud – the pupil is asked to read a Reading aloud – the pupil is asked to read a short
short passage out loud. Score is calculated in passage out loud. Score is calculated in terms of correct
terms of correct words read. words read.
Written comprehen- Reading comprehension – The pupils is asked to answer
sion questions after reading a short passage. Score is calcu-
lated in terms of numbers of correct answers.
Numeracy tool
Competency Test item P3 Test item P5
Number recognition
Number order Counting – The pupil is asked to count Counting – The pupil is asked to count numbers
numbers up from 1 to 10. Correct score up from 1 to 10. Correct score is given when the
is given when the child manages to child manages to count to 10.
count to 10.
Counting (2)– The pupil is asked to count num-
bers up from 50 to 60. Correct score is given
when the child manages to count to 60.
228
Prelims
Counting (3) – The pupil is asked to count in 10s
from 800 to 900. Correct score is given when
the child manages to count to 900.
Counting (4) – The pupil is asked to count in
100s from 1000 to 2000. Correct score is given
when the child manages to count to 2000.
Number order Numbers in order – The pupil is asked to
write group of numbers in the correct
order. Score is calculated as number of
correct answers
Number patterns Number patterns – The pupil is asked
to identify the missing number in a
group of numbers. Score is calculated as
number of correct answers.
Mathematical operations Addition – The pupil is asked to com- Addition – The pupil is asked to compute results
pute results of additions. Score is calcu- of additions. Score is calculated as number of
lated as number of correct answers correct answers
Mathematical operations Subtractions – The pupil is asked to Subtractions – The pupil is asked to compute
compute results of subtractions. Score is results of subtractions. Score is calculated as
calculated as number of correct answers number of correct answers
Problem solving Money Sums – The pupil is asked to Money Sums – The pupil is asked to compute
compute results of money sum oral results of money sum oral problems. Score is
problems. Score is calculated as number calculated as number of correct answers
of correct answers
Problem solving Word problems – The pupil is asked to compute
results of oral problems. Score is calculated as
number of correct answers
Annex I:
Participants of the Review and Validation Workshop in Uyo, Akwa-Ibom State, September 2021
S/N NAME OF PARTICIPANT ORGANIZATION
1 H.E Princess Adejoke Olrelokadefolire SSAP-SDGs
2 Engr. Ahmad Kawu SOP-SDGs
3 Dr Zakari Lawal MFBNP/Chair TWG-SDGs
4 Dr Uzodinma Adirieje Nigeria association of evaluators
5 Angela Nathaniel National Bureau of Statistics
6 Madukwe Solomon FMoH
7 Bello Aliyu.S. FMoH
8 Uguuanyi Carolina Enugu State Ministry of education
9 Dr George Nwosu Federal Ministry of education
10 A.B. Saadu OSSAP-SDGS
11 Nonso Obikili UN RCO
12 Dr Robert Ndamobissi UNICEF
229
Education in Nigeria: Evaluation of the Effectiveness & Impact of SDG 4
13 Beatrice Angaye Olomieije Bayelsa SMoH
14 Dr Olukayode J. Kusimo Ogun SMoH
15 Desmond Utomwen OSSAP-SDGS
16 Mualu Lawal Abdullahi Kaduna SMoE
17 Bawale Muhammad Kebbi State Ministry of Health
18 Murtula Mohammed UNICEF
19 Bala Y. Yunosa OSSAP-SDGS
20 Yahaya Umar OSSAP-SDGS
21 Abubakar Metcho Mohammed OSSAP-SDGS
22 Abudu Usman SMoH-Gombe
23 Raji Risikat Folashade Kwara SMoE
24 Dr Zakariya Mohammed OSSAP-SDGS
25 Ayodeji Olugbemi UNRCO Abuja
26 Dr Ify Ukaegbu OSSAP-SDGS
27 Sani Muhammed Kabara Kano SMoE
28 Ime David SDGS AUS
29 Arua M.A Mrs FME SDG4
30 Jatau Jonathan Snami SMOH Nasarawa
31 Khalilu Muhammed UNICEF
32 Dr Erudo E.D UNICEF
33 Husamatu M.Gona Katsina SMOE
34 Rose Keffas OSSAP-SDGs
35 Akor Francis OSSAP-SDGs
Annex J: SDG4 Indicator Definitions Out-of-school rate: The number of students of the
official age for the given level of education enrolled in pre-
primary, primary, secondary or higher levels of education
Definit ions for these indicators derive from
is subtracted from the total population of the same age.
UNESCO .
The result is expressed as a percentage of the population
of the official age for the respective level of education. For
Gross intake ratio to the last grade: The number of new
primary, lower secondary and upper secondary education,
entrants in the last grade of the given level of education,
the official age groups for the respective level of education
regardless of age, is expressed as a percentage of the
are used in the indicator calculation. For pre-primary
population of the intended entrance age to the last grade
education, the indicator is calculated for children aged one
of that level of education. Note: If data on new entrants are
year before the official age of entry into primary education.
not collected directly, they can be calculated by subtracting
the number of pupils repeating the last grade from total
Percentage of children over-age for grade: The sum of
enrolment in the last grade.
enrolments across all grades in the given level of education
which are 2 or more years older than the intended age for
Net enrolment ratio in primary education: Divide the total
the given grade is expressed as a percentage of the total
number of students in the official school age range for the
enrolment in the given level of education
given level of education who are enrolled in any level of
education by the population of the same age group and
multiply the result by 100.
230
Endnotes
Endnotes
1. Government of Nigeria, Nigeria’s Road to SDGs: Country and numeracy results by gender for the present evaluation.
Transition Strategy, 2015. 12. ESSPIN results are recalculated for the SDG4 evaluation
2. In Nigeria, defined as six years of primary and three years of and reflect findings for sampled states.
junior secondary education. 13. Two assessments (NEDS and ESSPIN) merit particular
3. Established on page 14 of the ToR. attention though neither satisfies the requirements for
4. Years of publication referenced in the report are as follows: being a nationally representative learning assessment using
MICS: 2007, 2011, 2016-2017; NDES: 2016, 2017, 2018, nationally established grade-appropriate benchmarks. See
2019. NDHS: 2008, 2012, 2018; and NEDS: 2015, 2020. the response to the Impact 2 EQ for a detailed discussion.
5. Federal Ministry of Education, 2017, p. 10. Note that 14. See Annex J for descriptions of indicators based on
UNICEF’s 2018 survey calculates this number to be 13.2 UNESCO’s definitions.
million. 15. The Compulsory, Free, Universal Basic Education Act 2004
6. Per the ToR, the ESSP (2016–2019) is the focus of this establishes basic education as six years of primary and three
evaluation. The FMOE has also released a modification of years of junior secondary education. See Effectiveness 2
that plan for 2018–2022. Analysis of the plans shows that response for discussion of practices that impose practical
there is not much difference between the plans, with the barriers on education truly being free for all children. Given
notable difference that the 2018–2022 plan has a framework that the SDG4 evaluation’s scope covers the basic education
for activity monitoring and estimated cost for each activity. cycle, we focus here solely on those initial years of education.
7. Figure numbering refers to that in main report. 16. Retrieved from: https://sdgs.un.org/2030agenda
8. Recall that SDG4.1 addresses not only access but, critically, 17. Federal Ministry of Education, 2017, p. 10. Note that
the quality of education. UNICEF’s 2018 survey calculates this number to be 13.2
9. Numbering of indicators was determined by UNICEF million.
Nigeria based on UNESCO, 2017. The order of indicators 18. OPM began the process with UNICEF, established the
differs slightly from a more recent source: UNESCO Institute evaluation questions and methodology, and co Federal
for Statistics, 2021. UNICEF Nigeria added indicator 4.1.4a Ministry of Education, 2017, p. 10. Note that UNICEF’s
for consistency with SDG4 evaluation findings. 2018 survey calculates this number to be 13.2 million.
10. Grade 2 and 3 reading and mathematics scores are reported 19. OPM began the process with UNICEF, established the
in this table. See section 3.5, “Impact” for a more detailed evaluation questions and methodology, nducted the
discussion. inception workshop in 2019 under an initial ToR. Alegre
11. These results are from project-linked assessments rather Associates and EdIntersect came under contract in response
than a national assessment and rely on project-determined to an updated ToR in September 2020 and carried through
benchmarks rather than nationally determined proficiency the remainder of the process.
levels. See Effectiveness 1 response for nuanced discussion 20. The purpose of the evaluation as well as the audience are
and Tables 3.10 and 3.11 for comparisons of proficiency laid out in the ToR – see pp. 11–13.
criteria. Note that the NEDS (2020) report accessible to 21. Established on p. 14 of the ToR.
the evaluation team does not present learning proficiency 22. See ESSPIN’s evaluation of SBMC contributions to
results disaggregated by gender. See section 3.7 for literacy community engagement in education: ESSPIN/UKAID,
233
Education in Nigeria: Evaluation of the Effectiveness & Impact of SDG 4
School-based management: engaging communities in school 38. Extracted from data.uis.unesco.org on 3 June 2021 from UIS.
improvement, n.d. Stat for all countries except Nigeria as no data are available
23. Per the ToR, the ESSP (2016–2019) is the focus of this for the country. Nigeria data are calculated using federal
evaluation. The FMOE has also released a modification of budgeted and NOT spent amounts.
that plan for 2018–2022. Analysis of the plans shows that 39. Better Evaluation, 2014, Paragraph 1. Cost Effectiveness
there is not much difference between the plans, with the Analysis. https://www.betterevaluation.org/en/evaluation-
notable difference that the 2018–2022 plan has a framework options/CostEffectivenessAnalysis
for activity monitoring and estimated cost for each activity. 40. The 2017 baseline report also refers to SMed data but the
24. Central Bank of Nigeria, ‘Annual Statistical Bulletin’, reference for the acronym was not provided and it is not
<www.cbn.gov.ng/documents/statbulletin.asp> known to the evaluation team.
25. FMOE 2013, p. ii. 41. This is in comparison to other known assessment
26. The 6th National Policy on Education, which is still being techniques, like the early grade reading assessment (EGRA)
used at the time of writing this report, was produced in and early grade mathematics assessment (EGMA) as well as
2013 when the SDG was not in place; this is why it does not Education Sector Support Programme in Nigeria (ESSPIN),
reference the SDGs. Girls Education Project Phase 3 (GEP3) and Teacher
27. Adapted from Outhred and Turner, 2019. Development Programme (TDP) studies.
28. BESDA has not yet become operational, but will operate 42. NEDS 2020 was funded by the World Bank and sought to
in the five NIPEP states, and aims to improve educational specifically provide data relevant to the 17 states where the
outcomes, primarily through the implementation of a BESDA project intervenes. The methodology section of the
payment for results framework, focusing on directing report indicates that the
UBEC funding more effectively to improve educational 43. survey covered all 36 states of the Federation and the
quality and sector accountability, and reduce the number Federal Capital Territory. The states were divided into
of out-of-school children. For more details see the BESDA focus and non-focus states based on selected indicators –
Programm Appraisal Document: <documents.worldbank. number of children in school, disaggregated by sex – which
org/curated/en/839251498183393835/pdf/BESDA-PAD- is required for BESDA’s Disbursement Linked Indicator
May-30-2017-06012017.pdf> (DLI). The number of Enumeration Areas (EAs) for focus
29. This exercise builds upon the draft ToC included within the states was 9,711 (36,418 households), and 458 EAs for the
SDG4 evaluation ToR (see p. 7). non-focus states (1,811 households) giving a total of 10,169
30. Revised Supplementary Programme Note on the Theory of EAs in both urban and rural areas across the country for the
Change for the UNICEF Strategic Plan, 2014–2017 United survey. A total of 116,912 children (112,324 in the 17 focus
Nations Children’s Fund Executive Board Annual session states and 4,588 in the non-focus states) were covered in the
2014 (3–6 June 2014). households interviewed” (p. 4).
31. Girl Child Education in Kano State: Policy Brief, June 2018 44. It is unclear to the SDG4 evaluation team from the NEDS
32. Ministry of Education, Enugu State Inclusive Education 2020 report whether or not the aggregate results cover all 36
Policy 2014, pp. 4–5. states or just the 17 BESDA states. Four of the six SDG4
33. Interview with Permanent Secretary, Kaduna State Ministry evaluation case-study states were part of the 2020 sample:
of Education Kaduna, Kano, Katsina and Zamfara. Enugu and Kwara
34. This definition and subsequent definitions were were not.
informed by the following resource: OECD Home, 45. The languages are not indicated in the NEDS (2015) report.
‘Evaluation Criteria’, <oecd.org/dac/evaluation/ 46. Funds derive from crude oil sales, royalties, customs duties,
daccriteriaforevaluatingdevelopmentassistance.htm> direct taxes, value added tax, dividends, etc.
35. Federal Republic of Nigeria, UBE Act, 2004, p. 29. 47. PTA levies include contributions from SBMC and other
36. This refers to various charges that a school or SBMC may groups such as Mother’s Associations.
require. These fees are often ‘hidden’. 48. The actual name of the state is masked to assure
37. Multiple related acronyms are employed to describe confidentiality.
Nigeria’s school feeding programme and include: Home- 49. Unity Schools are Federal Government owned Junior and
Grown School Feeding (HGSF), Home-Grown School Senior Secondary Schools, there are 103.
Feeding Programme (HGSFP), National Home-Grown 50. Guardian Nigeria, 2016.
School Feeding Programme (NHGSFP). 51. The authorized list of approved payments by the Federal
234
Endnotes
Ministry of Education for the 2016/2017 session. Fees and barriers on education truly being free for all children. Given
Levies excludes Tuition fees, which are free for all students. that the SDG4 evaluation’s scope covers the basic education
52. PTA levies are in some cases higher than the total approved cycle, we focus here solely on those initial years of education.
by government as they may engage PTA teachers. 63. UNICEF’s Equity Determinants Analysis Framework
53. Comparison with Kaduna State was not possible for both (MORES) guides this analysis as indicated by the ToR. The
P2 literacy and numeracy assessments because P2 had not framework (2014) puts forth 10 determinants or “critical
resumed after COVID-19 related school closures at the time conditions” that “are necessary to ensure coverage of
of data collection. It was also not possible to compare for quality interventions/services/care practices for the most
the other states for various assessments because these data disadvantaged children and families” (p. 5). The evaluation
were not included in the baseline data sets provided to the team wishes to emphasize that the evaluation design
evaluation team. produces correlational analysis rather than causal analysis.
54. Closer analysis of the data does not provide additional In some cases, factors have been widely acknowledged
explanation for this increase between 2007 and 2008. While repeatedly within the literature as having a relationship with
there are differences in the MICS and DHS methodologies, educational outcomes.
we do not see such differences for other years. Instead, we 64. Results indicating significance need to be interpreted with
hypothesize that there may have been an event or policy caution. A significant p-value means that there is at least
change that may have caused this positive disturbance. one significant difference between states, not that all states
55. We cannot run a significance test when all pupils are in the are significantly different. This comment applies for each
same category of reading comprehension. comparison between states.
56. Numbering of indicators was determined by UNICEF 65. Information was elicited from parents/guardians on children
Nigeria based on UNESCO, 2017. The order of indicators age 4–16 who have ever attended school but stopped
differs slightly from a more recent source, UNESCO Institute attending at any time (NEDS, 2020).
for Statistics, 2021. UNICEF Nigeria added indicator 4.1.4a 66. Nigeria Policy Innovation Unit, National Home-Grown
for consistency with SDG4 evaluation findings. School Feeding Programme Impact Evaluation Report,
57. Grade 2 and 3 reading and mathematics scores are reported 2019, Slide deck. Slide 2.
in this table. See impact section (section 3.5) for more 67. When identifying records of children with disabilities that
detailed discussion. were enrolled in schools, data collectors asked specifically
58. These results are from project-linked assessments rather about ‘children with special needs’ as it was confirmed prior
than a national assessment and rely upon project-determined to data collection that this term is more frequently used at
benchmarks rather than nationally determined proficiency the school level.
levels. See Effectiveness 1 response for nuanced discussion 68. UNICEF Deputy Representative in Nigeria, Pernille
and Tables 20 and 21 for comparisons of proficiency Ironside made the announcement at a Northern Nigeria
criteria. Note that the NEDS (2020) report accessible to Traditional Leaders Conference on Out-of-School Children
the evaluation team does not present learning proficiency held in Kaduna in October 2018 (reported by Ibrahim
results disaggregated by gender. See section 3.7 for literacy Mohammed in the Premium Times of 11 October 2018).
and numeracy results by gender for the present evaluation. 69. The exception is numeracy between 2004 and 2010 for the
59. ESSPIN results are recalculated for the SDG4 evaluation lowest quintile, which stayed the same.
and reflect findings for sampled states. 70. Nigeria Policy Innovation Unit, National Home-Grown
60. Two assessments (NEDS and ESSPIN) merit particular School Feeding Programme Impact Evaluation Report,
attention though neither satisfies the requirements for 2019, Slide deck. Slide 4.
being a nationally representative learning assessment using 71. Interview data revealed that Kwara State is not benefiting
nationally established grade-appropriate benchmarks. See from the development partners’ intervention to address
the response to the Impact 2 EQ for a detailed discussion. girls’ and women’s empowerment initiatives because the
61. See Annex J for descriptions of indicators based on state has not been able to meet the donor requirements. No
UNESCO’s definitions. development partner has been working in the state since
62. The Compulsory, Free, Universal Basic Education Act 2004 2017.
establishes basic education as six years of primary and three 72. As obtained from UBEC website, such states include Kwara
years of junior secondary education. See Effectiveness 2 from 2015–2019; Ekiti, Enugu, Nasarawa from 2017–2019;
response for discussion of practices that impose practical Abia, Adamawa, Osun, Oyo and Plateau from 2018–2019. No
235
Education in Nigeria: Evaluation of the Effectiveness & Impact of SDG 4
state has accessed special grant for curriculum development P2 literacy and numeracy assessments because P2 had not
from 2009–2019. resumed after COVID-19 related school closures at the time
73. Kwara State is the only state in the case study states for this of data collection. It was also not possible to compare for
evaluation that did not access the grant during a five-year the other states for various assessments because these data
period but the cumulative total of UBEC funds was released were not included in the baseline data sets provided to the
in early 2021 after the state met all the requirements for the evaluation team.
grant. 75. https://learningportal.iiep.unesco.org/en/glossary
74. Comparison with Kaduna State was not possible for both
236