EVALUATION REPORT
April 2021
Evaluation of the UNICEF
Response to the South Sudan
Humanitarian Crisis (2016-2019)
Part 2: Emergency Education, Child
Protection and related issues
EVALUATION REPORT
April 2021
Evaluation of the UNICEF
Response to the South Sudan
Humanitarian Crisis (2016-2019)
Part 2: Emergency Education, Child
Protection and related issues
© UNICEF/UN0372916/Naftalin
EVALUATION OF THE UNICEF RESPONSE TO THE
SOUTH SUDAN HUMANITARIAN CRISIS (2016-2019)
© United Nations Children’s Fund, New York, 2021
United Nations Children’s Fund
Three United Nations Plaza
New York, New York 10017
April 2021
The purpose of publishing evaluation reports produced by the UNICEF Evaluation Office is to
fulfil a corporate commitment to transparency through the publication of all completed evalu-
ations. The reports are designed to stimulate a free exchange of ideas among those interested
in the topic and to assure those supporting the work of UNICEF that it rigorously examines its
strategies, results, and overall effectiveness.
The report was prepared by independent consultants - James Darcy (team leader), Francesca
Ballarin, Sophie Busi, Rui da Silva, and Volker Huls. Jane Mwangi managed the overall evalu-
ation process with active engagement and support from UNICEF South Sudan country office.
The purpose of the report is to facilitate the exchange of knowledge among UNICEF personnel
and its partners. The contents of the report do not necessarily reflect the policies or views of
UNICEF. The text has not been edited to official publication standards and UNICEF accepts no
responsibility for error. The designations in this publication do not imply an opinion on the legal
status of any country or territory, or of its authorities, or the delimitation of frontiers.
The copyright for this report is held by the United Nations Children’s Fund. Permission is re-
quired to reprint/reproduce/photocopy or in any other way to cite or quote from this report
in written form. UNICEF has a formal permission policy that requires a written request to be
submitted. For non-commercial uses, the permission will normally be granted free of charge.
Please write to the Evaluation Office at the address below to initiate a permission request.
For further information, please contact: This report is available online at:
unicef.org/evaluation/reports#/detail/8897
Evaluation Office
United Nations Children’s Fund UNICEF 2021. Evaluation of the UNICEF
3 United Nations Plaza Response to the South Sudan Humanitarian
New York, New York 10017 Crisis (2016-2019)
evalhelp@unicef.org UNICEF Evaluation Office, New York.
CONTENT
Preface 08
Abbreviations 10
Executive Summary 14
I. Introduction 24
1.1 Background to the evaluation 25
1.2 Evaluation purpose, scope and intended use 26
1.3 Evaluation process, approach and methodology 28
II. Context: the South Sudan crisis 34
2.1 The South Sudan crisis 35
2.2 UNICEF and the wider international response to the crisis 38
III. UNICEF and the education response 41
3.1 The education context and needs analysis 42
3.2 UNICEF role and strategy in education 46
3.3 UNICEF education in emergencies strategy: clarity, coherence, logic 47
3.4 Designing the response: coverage, focus and target-setting 50
3.5 Effectiveness against stated objectives 52
3.6 UNICEF and the education cluster 58
3.7 Capacity development, sustainability, resilience and future prospects 59
IV. UNICEF and the child protection response 61
4.1 Child protection context and needs analysis 62
4.2 UNICEF CPiE strategy: clarity, coherence, logic 66
4.3 Designing the response: coverage, focus and target-setting 68
4.4 Implementing the strategy 72
4.5 Coordinating the CP response: 78
UNICEF, the protection cluster and CP sub-cluster
4.6 Capacity development, sustainability and future prospects 79
V. UNICEF and the WASH, health and nutrition responses 81
5.1 Background 82
5.2 The WASH response 82
5.3 The health response 86
5.4 The nutrition response 91
VI. Cross-cutting issues 95
6.1 ‘Centrality of protection’ and protection mainstreaming 96
6.2 UNICEF partnerships in South Sudan 100
6.3 The generation and use of child-related data and evidence 104
VII. Conclusions and recommendations 109
7.1 Overall conclusions on the UNICEF response, 2016-2019 110
7.2 Conclusions on education and child protection 113
7.3 Conclusions on WASH, health and nutrition 118
7.4 Recommendations 119
PREFACE
This report contains the results of Part Two of the evaluation of the UNICEF
Level 3 emergency response in South Sudan (from January 2016 to De-
cember 2019). The focus of Part Two is on child protection and emergency
education, although it also covers some cross-cutting issues including the
humanitarian-development nexus and the centrality of protection principle.
It also updates the analysis of ‘child survival’ sectors from Part One of the
evaluation (Nutrition, Health and Water, Sanitation and Hygiene). While the
formal cutoff date for the evaluation is the end of 2019, the report also makes
reference to the more recent situation, particularly as affected by the coro-
navirus (COVID-19) pandemic and related control measures. The report’s rec-
ommendations are framed with this in mind.
Although much of the work on the evaluation was undertaken in 2019, com-
pletion was delayed by a number of factors, including changes in personnel
on the evaluation team and in the South Sudan country office, and more
recently by the COVID-19 situation. This necessitated some mid-term revision
of the terms of reference: in particular, some of the more management-re-
lated and operational aspects of the response were not considered, and the
overall timeframe was extended to the end of 2019. The core focus on child
protection and emergency education has remained constant.
The evaluation team was led by James Darcy, an independent consultant,
who was also the team leader for Part One of the evaluation. He was joined
by Francesca Ballarin, an independent specialist in child protection and
education in emergencies, and by Sophie Busi, an independent consultant
who assisted particularly with data analysis. A specialist in education, Rui da
Silva, formed part of the team in 2019. Volker Huls, who was involved with
the Part One team, also supported Part Two remotely with document colla-
tion and data analysis. The team was joined on the inception mission by Jane
Mwangi from the UNICEF Evaluation Office, who also provided support and
oversight to the evaluation process from New York. I would like to convey
my sincere appreciation to James and the rest of the team for the evalu-
ation team for undertaking the two-part evaluation and generating useful
recommendations that will enable UNICEF to enhance its programming for
children of South Sudan.
8 Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the South Sudan Humanitarian Crisis (2016-2019)
I would like to express our thanks to the UNICEF South Sudan, and in par-
ticular Hyun Hee Ban and her team in the social policy, planning, monitoring
and evaluation department, and the Deputy Representative (Andrea Suley)
for generously hosting the evaluation and supporting it over such an ex-
tended period. Their patience throughout has been much appreciated.
Thanks finally to colleagues in the Evaluation Office in New York for enabling
and supporting the whole two-part process, namely, Jane Mwangi for man-
aging the evaluation; Carlotta Tincati and Laura Olsen for technical inputs
and support; and Celeste Lebowitz, Geeta Dey and Dalma Rivero for provid-
ing administrative support throughout out the evaluation process.
Fabio Sabatini
Evaluation Director a.i.
PREFACE 9
ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS
AoR Area of Responsibility
BTL Back To Learning
C4D Communications for Development
CAAFAG Children Associated with Armed Forces and Groups
CBCM Community-Based Complaint Mechanism
CBO Community-Based Organization
CCCs Core Commitments for Children in Emergencies
CEAP Corporate Emergency Activation Procedure
CFS Child-Friendly Space
CLTS Community-Led Total Sanitation
COAR Country Office Annual Report
COVID-19 Novel coronavirus
CP Child Protection
CPD Country Programme Document
CPiE Child Protection in Emergencies
CSO Civil Society Organization
EiE Education in Emergencies
EO Evaluation Office
ESARO Eastern and Southern Africa Regional Office
FAO Food and Agricultural Organization
FO Field Office
FSNMS Food Security and Nutrition Monitoring System
FTR Family Tracing and Reunification
GAM Global Acute Malnutrition
HACT Harmonized Approach to Cash Transfer
HCT Humanitarian Country Team
HNO Humanitarian Needs Overview
10 Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the South Sudan Humanitarian Crisis (2016-2019)
HRP Humanitarian Response Plan
IASC Inter-Agency Standing Committee
ICF Interim Cooperation Framework
ICMN Integrated Community Mobilization Network
IDP Internally Displaced Person
IMO Information Management Officer
IOM International Organization for Migration
IPC Integrated food security Phase Classification system
IRRM Integrated Rapid Response Mechanism
IYCF Infant and Young Child Feeding
KAP Knowledge Attitude and Practices
KII Key Informant Interview
L2 Level 2 emergency
L3 Level 3 emergency
M&E Monitoring and Evaluation
MAM Moderate Acute Malnutrition
MHPSS Mental Health and Psychosocial Support
MRE Mine Risk Education
MRM Monitoring and Reporting Mechanism
NGO Non-Governmental Organization
OCHA United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
ODF Open Defecation Free
OTP Outpatient Therapeutic feeding Program
PCA Programme Cooperation Agreement
PfRR Partnership for Resilience and Recovery
PoC Protection of Civilians
PSS Psychosocial Support
ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS 11
ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS
PTA Parent-Teacher Association
RAM Results Assessment Module
SAM Severe Acute Malnutrition
SMC School Management Committee
SNAP Strategic National Action Plan
SPLM Sudan People’s Liberation Army
SPLM-IO Sudan People’s Liberation Army In Opposition
SPPME Social Policy Planning Monitoring and Evaluation
SSCO South Sudan Country Office
SWfPR Sustainable WASH for Partnership and Resilience
TLS Temporary Learning Space
ToC Theory of Change
TSFP Targeted Supplementary Feeding Programme
TWG Technical Working Group
UASC Unaccompanied and Separated Children
UNESCO United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization
UNFPA United Nations Population Fund
UNHCR United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
UNMISS United Nations Mission in South Sudan
UN-Women United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women
WASH Water, Sanitation and Hygiene
WFP World Food Programme
WGFS Women- and Girls-Friendly Space
WHO World Health Organization
WHS World Humanitarian Summit
12 Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the South Sudan Humanitarian Crisis (2016-2019)
© UNICEF/UN0372909/Naftalin
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
BACKGROUND TO THE EVALUATION take account of that context, the evaluative
component covers the UNICEF programme
1. This evaluation was commissioned by the from early 2016 to the end of 2019. The
UNICEF Evaluation Office at its headquar- evaluation followed a modified version of
ters in New York, in consultation with the the original the terms of reference, revised
South Sudan Country Office (SSCO) and to reflect the passage of time since it was
the Eastern and Southern Africa Regional commissioned. It is based on a review of
Office (ESARO). It constitutes the second documents and relevant literature, inform-
part of a two-part evaluation. Part One con- ant interviews and site visits conducted dur-
sidered the UNICEF Level 3 (L3) response to ing a field missions in late 2018 and early
the crisis in South Sudan in the period 2016- 2019; subsequent extended consultation
2018, focusing on the ‘child survival’ sec- with the relevant sections and other staff
tors (water, sanitation and hygiene, health, in the SSCO and the ESARO office in Nai-
nutrition). This Part Two of the evaluation robi; and feedback obtained from partners
focuses on the emergency-related child and donors through interviews in Juba.
protection and education elements of the
UNICEF programme, and brings the overall
programme analysis up to the end of 2019. SOUTH SUDAN CONTEXT
As with Part One, Part Two of the evaluation
is intended to fulfil both accountability and 3. The period from 2016 marked the re-emer-
learning purposes. It provides an evaluative gence of widespread conflict in South
account of the relevant areas of the UNICEF Sudan, with disastrous consequences for
programme, highlights the main conclu- the security and welfare of the civilian
sions and lessons arising for UNICEF over population. The displacement (internal and
this period, and provides recommendations external) of around one in three South Su-
for the conduct of the future programme. danese has separated families from their
homes, land, livelihoods and community
networks. Around 1.6 million remain inter-
TIMEFRAME, PROCESS AND nally displaced, while 2.2 million are refu-
gees in surrounding countries. Levels of
METHODOLOGY
food insecurity grew to critical levels over
2. The evaluation was originally expected to the evaluation period, at times tipping into
cover the period 2016 to early 2019. How- famine conditions. Economic collapse and
ever, given various interruptions to the pro- price inflation have made it hard for fami-
cess (including most recently those caused lies to meet their basic needs, and fear of
by the COVID-19 pandemic), it was agreed violence has constrained freedom of move-
to extend the analysis to the end of 2019 and ment and action. Many families have been
to include an updated review of the child forced to live for years in camps. Periodic
survival sectors. While some reference is natural disasters, including major flooding
made to the current context in South Sudan in 2019 and 2020, have compounded the
(to late 2020), and the recommendations conflict-related crisis, as more recently has
14 Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the South Sudan Humanitarian Crisis (2016-2019)
the COVID-19 epidemic. Basic government 5. Even before the current crisis, South Sudan
services have remained severely under-re- suffered from a massive educational deficit
sourced and related infrastructure (includ- that pre-dates its independence in 2011. By
ing schools and health facilities) has been 2014 the net enrolment rate stood at just 41
badly damaged by conflict and looting. per cent (35 per cent for girls) and primary
The period following the renewed peace completion rates are amongst the lowest in
process in 2018, leading up to the forma- the world. Most primary school children at-
tion of a coalition government in 2020, tending school do not achieve foundational
held the prospect of greater stability and literacy, numeracy and life skills. The con-
security. Yet this has not materialized, and flict-related crisis post-2016 exacerbated an
access to services continues to be eroded. already very damaging situation. Children
The distinction between ‘emergency’ needs have been affected both directly and indi-
and regular needs is not a clear one in this rectly by the impact of conflict on schools
context, given the combined effects of and other learning spaces (a situation now
short-term instability and of long-term in- compounded by the COVID-19-related
stitutional and developmental deficits on school closures in 2020). Hundreds of thou-
lives, livelihoods and services. sands of displaced children have had to be
taught in temporary learning facilities by
4. Children have been particularly vulnerable volunteer teachers. The quality of education
through this period, facing multiple threats is a matter of major concern both in these
to their security, health and welfare. De- and mainstream (government-run) schools,
spite the intermittent peace process, the with many teachers themselves lacking ba-
safety and security of children in South Su- sic education. Lack of funds to pay teachers
dan deteriorated consistently between the is one of the main constraints here.
start of the civil war in 2013 and the end of
2019. Women and girls have been dispro- 6. The other major threats to children’s
portionately affected by violence and rights well-being relate to nutrition, health and
abuse, and incidents of gender-based vio- water, sanitation and hygiene (WASH), as
lence, including domestic violence, while detailed in Part One of the evaluation.
greatly under-reported, are known to be
widespread. Boys too have been highly 7. Underlying all of this has been the funda-
vulnerable. By the end of 2019, over 19,000 mentally insecure and unstable environ-
children (boys and girls) were thought to ment resulting from conflict and insecurity,
have been associated with armed actors, political instability and economic break-
while many more were unaccompanied, down. That instability severely limited the
separated or missing. The mental health delivery of government services in opposi-
and psychosocial wellbeing of children and tion-held areas during the conflict and has
their families have all suffered as a result, created an extremely challenging operating
with only limited support services available environment for agencies seeking to pro-
to them. Meanwhile, landmines and explo- vide essential services. Securing safe ac-
sive remnants of war continue to kill and cess has been an ongoing challenge, com-
injure civilians, including children. South pounded in 2020 by the COVID-19 situation
Sudan has rightly been labelled a ‘protec- as well as by renewed floods. The political
tion crisis’ over the evaluation period.
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 15
settlement and uneasy peace that accom- dominated by its emergency response to
panies it has not resolved many of the un- the crisis, as reflected in both the 2016-2018
derlying causes of instability, and limited and the 2019-2021 country programme
access has remained a major constraint on documents (CPDs). Although the crisis re-
essential service delivery. Throughout 2020, sponse was re-classified from L3 to Level
local insecurity and conflict remained a re- 2 (L2) in 2018, this related more to the or-
ality for many, and this coupled with lack ganization’s own capacities to manage the
of services has prevented mass return of response in country and region rather than
displaced people and refugees. But more to the severity of the crisis itself. Over the
than any other factor over the past two latter part of the evaluation period, as the
years, the economic collapse triggered by peace process has evolved, there has been
the loss of oil revenue to the government a broadening of the strategy from predomi-
and the inflation that followed increases in nantly responsive towards more preventive
the money supply have had a dramatic im- and resilience-oriented approaches – some-
pact both nationally and at local and house- thing that is reflected in the 2019-2021 CPD.
hold levels. Lack of government funding This has been accompanied by greater ef-
to social services has led to a high level of forts to plan for transition from humanitar-
dependence on United Nations agencies ian to more sustainable developmental ap-
and their partners using international funds proaches, and hence from a ‘substitution’
to provide routine as well as emergency toward a more ‘auxiliary’ role for UNICEF.
services. Most recently, the COVID-19 epi- The protracted nature of the crisis – and the
demic and particularly the measures taken potential for enduring peace and stability
to control it (notably school closures and – seems to demand such a transition. Yet it
the suspension of measles vaccination remains unclear what the end point of that
programmes) have had a major impact on transition may be, or what more sustaina-
children’s well-being and this is likely to ble approaches may be viable in practice.
worsen. Yet for most South Sudanese, at It sometimes appears that UNICEF and oth-
this point, COVID itself is just one among ers are trying to build bridges across a river
many adverse factors with which they have whose far bank they cannot yet see.
to contend. The overall humanitarian situa-
tion continued to deteriorate through 2020, 9. UNICEF has faced major strategic chal-
so that the need for emergency services re- lenges in South Sudan. The protracted and
mains high and growing – while the need for multi-faceted crisis of the past few years
more concerted efforts on prevention and has created acute vulnerabilities and sup-
resilience building is correspondingly great. port needs for millions of children. Yet the
national and local governmental institu-
tions and systems that would normally be
UNICEF ROLE AND STRATEGY IN expected to address those needs and to
protect children have been (largely) weak or
SOUTH SUDAN
absent, and civil society has had only very
8. The development aspirations of the years limited capacity to provide substitutory ser-
following South Sudan’s independence in vices. As a result, direct support to large-
2011 had largely evaporated by 2016. The scale emergency service delivery – mainly
UNICEF programme since 2016 has been through non-governmental partners – has
16 Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the South Sudan Humanitarian Crisis (2016-2019)
of UNICEF must be judged in terms of its
support to building effective and resilient
systems, institutions and capacities for chil-
dren as much as in terms of enabling qual-
ity service delivery. Yet doing so presents
an immense strategic and programmatic
challenge for UNICEF and its partners, and
one which (largely for reasons beyond its
control) it has to date been able to address
only to a limited extent. It is important to
reiterate the sovereign responsibility of the
Government of South Sudan for the safety
and welfare of the population, and its role
as primary duty-bearer for upholding the
rights of children. UNICEF must continue
to reinforce that sense of responsibility
as well as providing support to the insti-
© UNICEF/UNI317920/Chol tutions on which its fulfilment depends.
UNICEF CRISIS RESPONSE – GENERAL
constituted a clear strategic priority for
AND CROSS-CUTTING CONCLUSIONS
UNICEF over the evaluation period. But the
system-strengthening and capacity-build- 11. The evaluation found that the overall
ing agenda that is the necessary comple- UNICEF response to immediate priority
ment to direct service delivery (and crucial needs for children – the main focus of this
to the localization agenda) has only fragile evaluation – has been both appropriate
foundations to build on, both in terms of and largely effective over the evaluation
governmental systems and civil society ca- period. The evaluation found that UNICEF
pacity. Donor support to this agenda, and and its partners had been able to deliver
particularly to government system strength- essential services to a substantial propor-
ening, has been constrained by lack of trust tion of the population in most need, within
and by scepticism about political will and the constraints of the insecure context,
the potential for progress. limited access and significant funding defi-
cits (particularly in 2019). The organization
10. Any assessment of UNICEF work in this deserves great credit for its efforts in this
context has to recognize this dual chal- regard, which have often been crucial to the
lenge: the need to address the immediate well-being and life chances of those it has
and acute needs of millions of children reached. This has been true in the sectors
while helping to build the systems and ca- that were the main focus of this evaluation
pacities needed to do so on a sustainable – education and child protection – as well
basis. That challenge exists both within and as in the ‘child survival’ sectors of WASH,
beyond the humanitarian agenda. In the health and nutrition. It must however be
medium and longer term, the added value recognized that a high proportion of chil-
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 17
dren in need of emergency assistance (well do more to ensure that families can access
over 50 per cent in most sectors) have re- the services they provides in safety and
mained without support. Although UNICEF dignity. More fundamentally, the UNICEF
has done its best to target areas and groups approach could be better grounded in an
of children with the highest priority needs, understanding of the wider security context
this has not always been possible in the and people’s response to that context.
prevailing context.
14. UNICEF has done well to build a portfolio
12. Delivering its own programme has been of civil society partnerships to enable its
the dominant feature of UNICEF work in emergency programme to cover both con-
South Sudan over the evaluation period. Its flict-affected and more stable areas over
role as an advocate for children has been time. It has found a pragmatic balance
less prominent. While it has defined an between international, national and local
advocacy plan and targets, the implemen- implementing partnerships alongside on-
tation of that plan appears lacking. UNICEF going partnerships with government and
should remember that delivering its own United Nations bodies. Although the qual-
programme forms only a part of its respon- ity of services has been variable, this ap-
sibilities, and that its mandate as the lead- proach has substantially paid off in terms
ing international agency for children means of programme delivery and, to a lesser ex-
that it has a responsibility to speak consist- tent, in terms of building local and national
ently on child rights, and in particular to capacity. However, given the high level of
highlight major threats to children’s secu- dependency of smaller agencies on UNICEF
rity and welfare. This responsibility extends financial and technical support, and the vol-
beyond the formal United Nations Monitor- atility of funding flows to South Sudan, this
ing and Reporting Mechanism. While fund- is also a very fragile set of arrangements.
ing of the UNICEF programme is clearly an Gaps or delays in funding such as occurred
important advocacy goal, more consistent in 2019, as well impacting vital services
communication and advocacy beyond that for children, are extremely damaging for
agenda is needed. smaller civil society organizations. Staff
and technical know-how are lost, and the
13. On the application of the ‘centrality of pro- loss of local capacity makes sustainabil-
tection’ principle and the mainstreaming ity and local ownership harder to achieve.
of protection concerns throughout its pro- UNICEF could help reduce this fragility
gramme, UNICEF (in common with many by streamlining and speeding up its part-
other agencies) appears to have made little nership agreement process, changing its
progress. The evaluation found that staff approach to risk management and agreeing
see protection almost exclusively in terms multi-year partnerships wherever possible.
of child protection, but it is important to It could also do more to acknowledge the
locate this within a wider protection frame- primary service delivery role of its partners,
work. Although elements of the ‘do no recognizing its own role as being essentially
harm’ principle were found in much of the an enabling rather than an implementing
UNICEF programme in South Sudan (see one. Beyond being a source of funding for
Part One of the evaluation), the evaluators partners (it is often perceived as a ‘donor’),
conclude that UNICEF and its partners could the UNICEF role in providing technical sup-
18 Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the South Sudan Humanitarian Crisis (2016-2019)
© UNICEF/UNI315535/Ongoro
port and capacity-building to civil society is programme-related data. UNICEF should
essential in its own right and is widely ap- continue to work with government and
preciated by partners. others to increase the availability and relia-
bility of outcome data, notably with regard
15. Maximizing the synergies between the to educational outcomes for girls and boys.
different sectors in which UNICEF works Filling needs assessment and data gaps in
is rightly thought to be essential to an ef- areas like gender-based violence, children
fective response. Yet although UNICEF has associated with armed forces and groups
made efforts to build an integrated pro- (CAAFAG) and other areas of child protec-
gramme, the evaluators concluded that tion should be a matter of renewed effort
the multi-sectoral model of programming and should involve more regular use of
is not yet ‘natural’ within the organization. (sensitively conducted) surveys and focus
Sectors are siloed, not least because of the group discussions. UNICEF must ensure
UNICEF administrative and financial pro- proper monitoring, reporting and infor-
cesses, and multi-sectoral programming mation management for its work on child
is not incentivized. Nor does the partner protection, which has been deficient both
contracting process encourage such inte- from a management and accountability
grated approaches. While the coherence perspective. This has significantly affected
of the UNICEF programme (and of the the evaluability of this area of UNICEF work.
United Nations response as a whole) has
improved over the evaluation period, the
essential interconnections between sec- UNICEF PROGRAMME RESPONSE –
tors are not yet as strong as they should
EDUCATION
be. Given its cross-sector portfolio, UNICEF
should provide leadership in this area. 17. UNICEF did well to expand its education
work over the evaluation period in the face
16. While some progress has been made of evolving needs and new opportunities,
over the evaluation period with regard to although progress has stalled more re-
data-gathering and monitoring, much re- cently (2019/20) – and the COVID-19 crisis,
mains to be done – both on contextual and
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 19
coupled with lack of funding (government despite all efforts, serious questions remain
or donor) for teacher salaries and erosion over the quality of teaching – and therefore
of the value of teacher incentives now about educational outcomes for children.
threatens to reverse the gains made. The Many teachers themselves have only lim-
evaluation found that the UNICEF educa- ited education and limited literacy. Short
tion programme has been grounded in reg- duration training and limited follow-up and
ular assessment and has responded to pri- supervision are in themselves not sufficient
ority needs as far the situation and access to produce the desired change in teach-
has allowed. The response rightly focused ing quality. Crucially, until the payment of
on providing emergency education in the teacher salaries and incentives is put on a
most conflict-affected states, with priority more sustainable footing, progress on this
given to areas in which the number of out of issue is likely to remain severely limited.
school children was highest. The integrated
rapid response mechanism (IRRM) was
used effectively as a last resort in support- UNICEF PROGRAMME RESPONSE –
ing education in areas that were otherwise
CHILD PROTECTION
very hard to reach, although the sustaina-
bility of its interventions remains uncertain. 19. Part One of the evaluation noted that the
In this context, it must be recognized gap between vulnerabilities and the abil-
that the scale of the internationally-funded ity of humanitarian agencies to reduce
programme (i.e. that of UNICEF and other them has been more apparent in relation
cluster members) remains insufficient to to child protection than any other agenda.
cover the emergency education needs: This remains true. The child protection in
UNICEF addressed 30 per cent of the as- emergency response was rightly focused
sessed education needs in 2016, 24 per cent on enabling critical child protection ser-
in 2017, 30 per cent in 2018 and 26 per cent vices: delivering family tracing and reuni-
in 2019. Moreover, inclusion of some of the fication services for unaccompanied and
most vulnerable – including children with separated children, comprehensive case
disabilities, pastoralist children, over-age management services for children victims
students and girls facing early marriage – is of abuse, gender-based violence prevention
addressed only to a limited extent. and response, psychosocial support (PSS),
release and reintegration of CAAFAG, and
18. Overall, the UNICEF emergency education awareness-raising on the risk of landmines
programme has achieved substantial re- and explosive remnants of war.
sults throughout the evaluation period,
within the limitations noted here. This is 20. Within its limits, the UNICEF child protec-
particularly true with regard to access to tion programme was found to be highly
education (enrolment and retention) for relevant to the most critical vulnerabili-
internally displaced persons in protection ties and protection needs of children, and
of civilians sites and hosted in communi- to have made a significant contribution
ties; establishing safe education facilities to reducing children’s exposure to the re-
(temporary learning spaces); provision of lated threats. The capacity development
essential education materials; teacher train- effort toward local partners (through
ing; and community mobilization. However, training and technical guidance) has been
20 Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the South Sudan Humanitarian Crisis (2016-2019)
particularly appropriate and necessary. to have placed additional constraints on
The challenge for the child protection pro- the programme in 2020. WASH in schools
gramme is partly one of scale and consist- remains a priority area for collaboration
ency of coverage. The UNICEF programme and scale-up, particularly given its crucial
has suffered from severe funding shortages links to health and nutrition (including
in the latter part of the evaluation period. school feeding programmes), and its sig-
Some of the elements of the programme in nificance for girls’ attendance at school.
which UNICEF has most obviously added
value – notably the gender-based violence, 23. With regard to health, UNICEF and its part-
CAAFAG and PSS programmes – have been ners have achieved significant vaccination
cut back. This appears to the evaluators to results, but they have struggled to maintain
be a major retrograde step, and one that vaccination coverage in areas affected by
UNICEF should try by all means to reverse. conflict and other humanitarian crises. To-
gether with its WASH work, UNICEF preven-
21. The child protection response could be tive work on vaccination and distribution
strengthened in other ways, particularly of treated bed nets – together with related
through better integrated programming: community mobilization and health promo-
while child protection elements are well in- tion – provides an essential public health
tegrated in the education programme, they contribution. On the curative side, UNICEF
are much less so in other sectors. Beyond has been able to expand the number of
this, UNICEF lacks an overall child protec- child health consultations and its treatment
tion mainstreaming strategy, i.e. a way of of children with severe acute malnutrition
building a child protection perspective into (SAM) remains crucial.
all areas of the programme. It needs to find
a way of doing so, along with a more gen- 24. Despite an apparent improvement over the
eral protection perspective. years since 2010, the nutrition situation re-
mained critical by the end of 2019 – particu-
larly for children under five and pregnant or
breastfeeding women. UNICEF and its part-
UNICEF PROGRAMME RESPONSE –
ners have done well to maintain their treat-
WASH, NUTRITION AND HEALTH
ment programme for children with SAM
over the evaluation period. UNICEF has also
22. In 2019, UNICEF made some progress on significantly expanded provision of coun-
system-strengthening, community en- selling on appropriate infant and young
gagement, and building partnerships for child feeding and helped to maintain high
sustainable WASH. Yet despite the extent levels (69 per cent) of exclusive breastfeed-
of continuing WASH needs, UNICEF results ing – although the quality of counselling ser-
showed a major drop-off in ‘safe water’ vices appears to be a significant constraint
results achievement in 2018 and 2019. This on progress in this area. More broadly, its
appears to be related to lack of available work in partnership with the World Food
funding as much as to access and other Programme, the Food and Agricultural
challenges, and it represents a major set- Organization, the Ministry of Health and a
back. The COVID-19 pandemic is reported range of other partners on nutrition-related
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 21
resilience is an important contribution to bility of all UNICEF sections. UNICEF needs to
the prevention and preparedness agenda. ground its field programme more clearly in an
analysis of the evolving security situation as it
Summary of recommendations bears on the security of children and their fam-
ilies, their decisions and the choices available
25. The evaluation makes a number of recom- to them. More regular perception surveys (con-
mendations. In summary, these are as fol- ducted by UNICEF or others) could provide a
lows: substantial basis for this analysis. In order to
better ensure that families can access its ser-
Recommendation 1: Education vices safely and in dignity, an explicit safety
UNICEF should thoroughly review its strategy review should be part of both the project ap-
and planning on education in the light of the proval and routine monitoring processes for
COVID-19 pandemic. It should work with the the relevant services.
government (and specifically MoGEI) to forge
stronger policy and planning links between Recommendation 4: Partnerships
emergency education interventions and the UNICEF should review its partnership agree-
mainstream education system. It should work ment processes with a view to streamlining
to strengthen inclusion in education for the the process and avoiding damaging gaps in
most vulnerable, and to strengthen inter-sec- the funding pipeline to partners. It should also
toral links between education, nutrition, health change its approach to risk management in its
and WASH. And it should continue to promote implementing partnerships, adopting a more
a localization agenda for EiE, including invest- ‘downstream’ focus involving closer mentor-
ment in CSO capacities and education support ing, oversight and quality control. The time
partnerships with local authorities. of specialist staff in the Juba country office
should be freed up from some of the current
Recommendation 2: Child protection contract-related process to focus on providing
UNICEF child protection work in South Sudan technical support and mentoring to field offices
can be strengthened in a number of ways. and partners. UNICEF should as far as possible
A child protection perspective needs to be increase capacity-building support to local and
mainstreamed across its whole programme, national CSO partners and try to secure pre-
and specific CP elements should be integrated dictable multi-year funding. It should also fos-
into UNICEF work on nutrition, health and ter local collaborative arrangements between
WASH (as they are with education) as part of CSOs and local government.
an integrated multi-sectoral approach. Fund-
ing should be sought as a matter of priority Recommendation 5: Data and monitoring
for continuing work on gender-based violence, UNICEF should continue to work with govern-
PSS and CAAFAG, where UNICEF has shown it ment and others to increase the availability and
can make a unique and effective contribution. reliability of outcome data, notably with regard
Finally, UNICEF should be more prepared to to educational outcomes for girls and boys. Fill-
use its mandate to pursue high-level advocacy ing needs assessment and data gaps in areas
for South Sudanese children. like gender-based violence, CAAFAG and other
areas of child protection should be a matter of
Recommendation 3: Centrality of protection
Application of this principle is the responsi-
22 Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the South Sudan Humanitarian Crisis (2016-2019)
renewed effort and should involve more regu- area of UNICEF work. The SSCO should also
lar use of (sensitively conducted) surveys and strengthen its data quality assurance processes
focus group discussions. UNICEF must ensure to prevent a recurrence. It is suggested that to
proper monitoring, reporting and information achieve improvements in this area, dedicated
management for its work on child protection, support may be required for the child protec-
which has been deficient both from a manage- tion section in the form of an information man-
ment and accountability perspective. Inconsist- agement officer.
encies and gaps in the data and reporting have
significantly affected the evaluability of this
Map of South Sudan
Source: United Nations
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 23
1
INTRODUCTION
© UNICEF/UN0428060/Ryeng
1.1 BACKGROUND TO THE The original terms of reference for Part Two of
EVALUATION the evaluation are included in the Annex A. The
evaluation team’s interpretation of those terms
1.1.1 This second part of the evaluation of of reference was set out in detail in an inception
the UNICEF crisis response in South Sudan report, and the approach, guiding questions
between 2016 and 2019 was commissioned by and methodology are summarized below. The
the UNICEF Evaluation Office (EO) in New York, delays in completion of the evaluation led to a
in discussion with the South Sudan Country re-framing of the terms of reference, extending
Office (SSCO). It forms a supplement to Part the timeframe while changing the focus some-
One of the evaluation, completed in 2018, what. As a result, the ‘centrality of protection’
which covered the UNICEF Level 3 response1 agenda is not treated here in depth, although
from 2016 to the end of 2018 and was focused the evaluation includes analysis of this and
mainly on the child survival aspects (water, other cross-cutting issues.
sanitation and hygiene, health, nutrition) of
that response. This Part Two evaluation extends 1.1.3 The subject matter of this second part
the timeframe to cover the organization’s sub- of the evaluation overlaps to some extent with
sequent L2 crisis response to the end of 2019. other evaluation and learning processes con-
It has a different focus, looking in particular cerning the organization’s crisis-related work in
at the crisis-related child protection and ed- South Sudan. Notably for our purposes, these
ucation components of the response. It also included evaluations of the Back-to-Learning
considers the wider UNICEF programme and initiative; of UNICEF gender-based violence in
reviews progress on the water, sanitation and emergencies work, and of the UNICEF role in
hygiene (WASH), health and nutrition agendas. re-integrating children released from armed
forces into communities as part of the chil-
1.1.2 While the field work for Part Two was dren associated with armed forces and groups
undertaken in 2019, completion of the evalua- (CAAFAG) process.2 The present evaluation
tion was delayed by a number of internal and draws on the findings from those evaluations
external factors, including the global corona- and highlights their key conclusions. With re-
virus (COVID-19) pandemic. In order to update gard to the essential baseline of children’s
the analysis, it was decided to extend the pe- needs and vulnerabilities, it draws in particular
riod covered to the end of 2019. While some ref- on UNICEF reports on the situation of women
erence is made to more recent developments and children carried out in 2015 and updated
(including the impact of COVID-19), and these in 2017, while recognizing that the context for
are taken into account in the recommenda- children has changed since then, in ways that
tions, the analysis is essentially confined to the are only partly understood and documented.
period 2016 to end 2019, with particular empha-
sis on the latter part of that period.
1 Since March 2018, the programme has been re-designated an L2 (regionally-led) corporate response.
2 Mott MacDonald, ‘Evaluation of the Back to Learning initiative in South Sudan, Cambridge, 2019; United Nations Children’s Fund,
‘Multi-country Real-time Evaluation of UNICEF Gender-Based Violence in Emergencies Programmes, South Sudan Country Report’,
UNICEF, New York, 2016; United Nations Children’s Fund, ‘Community-based Reintegration Programme for Children Released from
Armed Forces and Armed Groups in Boma State (former Greater Pibor Administrative Area), 2015-2018’, UNICEF, New York, 2019.
CHAPTER 1: INTRODUCTION 25
1.1.4 The rest of this section gives a summary ity of protection’ principle and how it is applied
of the scope and purpose of this evaluation and by UNICEF in South Sudan; resilience and the
of the methodology adopted, including the key humanitarian-development nexus; programme
guiding questions. In the sections that follow, balance and integration; and questions of oper-
we begin by reviewing below the most salient ational modality, in particular partnerships.
features of the humanitarian crisis in South Su-
dan, in particular as it has affected children, and 1.2.2 As noted in Part One of the evalua-
we consider the evolution of the overall UNICEF tion, the two functions described above each
response to that crisis. We then assess the edu- demand rather different approaches. Account-
cation and child protection responses in detail, ability requires a relatively broad scope that
based on questions of strategy and relevance, covers the UNICEF response as a whole over
effectiveness, quality, connectedness and sus- the review period, judged against certain basic
tainability. This is followed by an updated anal- criteria. Practical learning requires a narrower
ysis (to end 2019) of the WASH, health and nutri- focus on specific sectors and topics of particu-
tion responses and a review of some of the key lar interest or concern, allowing greater depth
cross-cutting issues for the UNICEF programme of analysis. Thus, while Part Two updates the
as a whole. The final section summarizes the whole programme analysis of Part One, it goes
evaluation’s conclusions and makes a number into much greater detail on the education and
of related recommendations. child protection responses, and the recommen-
dations reflect this focus.
1.2 EVALUATION PURPOSE, SCOPE 1.2.3 Part One of the evaluation concluded
that although UNICEF has performed well in
AND INTENDED USE
many aspects of its programme over the eval-
1.2.1 The evaluation is intended to fulfil uation period (given the immense challenges
two functions: involved), the threats to children remain wor-
ryingly high. It suggested that UNICEF needs
to continue to find better ways, with its part-
• A summative accountability function, reflect-
ners, to increase coverage of basic services and
ing the need to account (internally and ex-
to extend its reach and impact in this regard.
ternally) for one of the organization’s largest
It also addressed the challenge of ensuring a
and most life-critical country programmes.
reasonable degree of sustainability of impact.
In Part Two of the evaluation, we consider the
• A formative learning function, reflecting the specific threats to children’s safety, security
need to capture lessons from a programme and well-being and to their access to basic edu-
of this duration and significance, to inform cation; the extent to which UNICEF and its part-
the country programme and UNICEF global ners have been able to address those threats;
programming. and ways in which the relevance, coverage,
quality and effectiveness of the related pro-
Having focused on the ‘child survival’ sectors grammes might be strengthened. It also places
in Part One of the evaluation, this second part greater emphasis on resilience and sustainabil-
focuses primarily on emergency education and ity, issues which the passage of time have only
child protection. In addition, it considers a num- served to make more pressing.
ber of cross-cutting issues, including the ‘central-
26 Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the South Sudan Humanitarian Crisis (2016-2019)
1.2.4 Just as the humanitarian-development on our understanding of the current and future
distinction was often hard (and sometimes un- challenges likely to face UNICEF and the wider
helpful) to draw in relation to the child survival humanitarian system in South Sudan, including
sectors, so it is in relation to education and child those already presented by the COVID-19 pan-
protection. In both cases, the focus of this eval- demic and related measures.
uation is on the emergency-related agenda, but
the evaluation also considers the relationship 1.2.5 It is intended that the evaluation should
between the emergency and development agen- be of use and interest to a range of stakeholders.
das, and specifically, the relationship between The primary intended audience is UNICEF staff
service delivery, capacity-building and system in South Sudan, as well as staff in the Eastern
strengthening. Although the evaluation reviews and Southern Africa Regional Office (ESARO)
the UNICEF response from January 2016 to the and headquarters in New York. It is hoped that
end of 2019, particular emphasis is given to the it will also be of interest to UNICEF partners in
more recent part of that period, including the South Sudan, governmental and non-govern-
question of whether lessons learned over the mental, to UNICEF donors and members of its
course of the programme (which spans two Executive Board, and ultimately to those com-
country programme documents) have been ap- munities that UNICEF seeks to assist in South
plied in practice. Recommendations are based Sudan.
© UNICEF/UN0360021/Naftalin
CHAPTER 1: INTRODUCTION 27
1.3 EVALUATION PROCESS, 1.3.3 Following the approach outlined above,
APPROACH AND METHODOLOGY3 the primary methods used in the evaluation
were key informant interviews (KIIs), both with
UNICEF staff and those from other organiza-
1.3.1 Part Two of this evaluation has had tions, and documentary review, using mainly
four main phases: (i) an inception and initial UNICEF materials. These were supplemented
fact-finding phase, including preliminary visit by programme site visits, direct observation
to the SSCO in November 2018; (ii) a fact-find- and consultation with affected communities
ing mission to the country in March 2019; (iii) and local partners. The selection of sites and
follow-up remote interviews and consultation key informants was based on the principle of
on early draft sections of the report, principally obtaining a reasonably representative sample
with the SSCO and ESARO (April to September of intervention types and contexts, together
2019); and (iv) analysis, write up and presenta- with a broad range of stakeholders. These
tion of findings, conclusions and recommenda- choices were agreed after extended consulta-
tions. In the event, the last phase was halted tion with the SSCO. A short online survey was
in September 2019 for a range of internal and also conducted with two stakeholder groups:
external reasons. The evaluation process had in-country partners and UNICEF country staff.
been intended to resume in Spring 2020, but However, too few responses were received to
this proved impossible due to the COVID-19 allow detailed analysis, although some com-
outbreak. Work on the evaluation was not fully ments received have been used to help sub-
resumed until September 2020 and has been stantiate other sources of evidence.
carried out (with interruptions) through the lat-
ter part of 2020. Guiding questions
1.3.2 The approach of the evaluation has 1.3.5 The overall guiding question for the
been consultative, looking to identify lessons evaluation is: How well has UNICEF responded
and ways forward in collaboration with the staff to the short-to medium-term threats to chil-
involved in the response while maintaining in- dren’s well-being and development in South
dependence of judgement. The evaluation has Sudan in the period January 2016- December
been conducted in accordance with the United 2019? This question is addressed with particu-
Nations Evaluation Group Ethical Guidelines lar reference to child protection and education.
for Evaluation.4 We note here in particular the The main supplementary questions are shown
provisions concerning obligations to partici- in Box 1 below. Our main concern is with short-
pants, and respect for dignity and diversity. As term threats to children’s security, safety and
a general rule, views expressed by informants well-being, i.e. their freedom from violence and
to the evaluation team have not been attributed fear, from coercion and deliberate deprivation,
to the individuals or organizations concerned, and with their ability to access at least basic
other than to distinguish views expressed by in- (primary level) education or life skills training
ternal (UNICEF) sources from those expressed as appropriate.
by external sources.
3 A full methodology for the evaluation can be found in the inception report.
4 March 2008. Clearance for the proposed protocols and questions for the field component (partner interviews and community-level
focus group discussions) was obtained through the UNICEF ethical review process.
28 Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the South Sudan Humanitarian Crisis (2016-2019)
The main focus throughout is on those threats to them, rather than with development deficits.
that derive primarily from conflict and inse- The evaluation does, however, consider the
curity in South Sudan, and from the related relationship between the shorter-term human-
deficits in basic government services. In other itarian response and the longer-term develop-
words, we are primarily concerned with emer- ment agenda, including questions of synergy,
gency-related threats and the UNICEF response consistency and convergence.
Box 1 Summary of guiding questions for the evaluation
A. Programme relevance and appropriateness to context and needs
A1. What have been the main threats to children’s security, well-being and development?
A2. What has been the scale, coverage and reach of the UNICEF programme relative
to needs?
A3. Were the forms of intervention chosen by UNICEF the rights ones? How well did
they adapt?
A4. Were targets set proportionate to need, in light of other capacities, funding and
resourcing issues?
B. Strategy and programme design
B1. What sectoral strategies exist, how clear are they and how strong is their logic?
B2. How well designed are the corresponding interventions? Involvement of partners
and communities?
B3. How well integrated have the various programme components been? Coherence
of programme?
B4. Has UNICEF found the right balance in its programme between camp, static, outreach
approaches?
C: Programme performance: results and effectiveness
C1. To what extent has UNICEF achieved its targets in each sector?
C2. How effective have UNICEF interventions been, measured against stated objectives?
C3. What have been the outcomes from UNICEF and partner interventions?
D. Programme quality: compliance with CCCs and other standards/principles
D1. To what extent did UNICEF deliver against its CCCs?
D2. How accountable have UNICEF and its partners been to affected populations?
Community engagement?
D3. Has the response been consistent with core principles of humanitarian action?
CHAPTER 1: INTRODUCTION 29
Box 1
D4. Has the UNICEF response been equitable? Have gender and human rights issues
been addressed?
D5. Compliance with external sector-specific and general standards?
E. Performance on cross-cutting agendas
E1. How well has UNICEF mainstreamed protection (applying the ‘centrality of
protection’ principle)?
E2. To what extent has UNICEF contributed to resilience of individuals, communities
and systems?
E3. How far has UNICEF met its WHS commitments? Other organizational commitments?
E4. How effective has the communications and advocacy aspect of the response been?
F: Data quality, needs analysis, programme monitoring, reporting
F1. How strong has been the situational and needs analysis underpinning the
UNICEF programme?
F2. How well has UNICEF monitored the delivery, quality and effectiveness of
its programme?
F3. How well has UNICEF managed information and reported on its programme?
G: Operational modalities: C4D, partnerships, IRRM
G1. How well has the C4D function worked to ensure appropriateness, effectiveness,
accountability?
G2. How well have UNICEF implementing partnerships worked?
G3. How effective has UNICEF direct service delivery (CPiE, EiE) been through the
IRRM mechanism?
H: Coordination and collaboration with others
H1. How well has UNICEF performed its roles as cluster co-lead and AOR focal point?
H2. How well has UNICEF collaborated with others on these agendas (CPiE, EiE, GBV)?
I: Efficiency, timeliness, resourcing and programme support
I1. How timely has the delivery of UNICEF programme been?
I2. How well has the supply and logistics function supported the programme?
I3. How well have resource mobilisation, human resources and other support
functions worked?
I4: How efficient has the programme been?
30 Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the South Sudan Humanitarian Crisis (2016-2019)
1.3.6. The context for asking these questions Yambio (Western Equatoria) PoC and surround-
is crucial to understanding the significance ing area; Pibor (Jonglei) town; and Wau (West-
of the related emergency interventions by ern Bahr el Ghazal) town and surrounding
UNICEF and its partners. There are two main area. Consultations were held in each location
reasons for this. The first is that the scale of with UNICEF staff, partners, other international
acute needs and vulnerabilities is enormous, agency staff (United Nations and non-govern-
and in many cases these vulnerabilities relate mental organization), as well as with teachers,
not just to the effects of conflict and insecurity, local government officials and staff at the rele-
to economic collapse or human displacement, vant education and child protection (CP) facil-
but to long-standing factors (including chronic ities. During these visits, a limited number of
lack of investment in key services, structural ca- focus group discussions were held with local
pacity deficits and ingrained cultural practices) communities (including children), based on an
that humanitarian response cannot by itself be approved protocol.
expected to address.5
1.3.8 In addition to these field-level consul-
The second reason is that the real-world chal- tations, key informant interviews were con-
lenges to effective response have been so great ducted with individuals within and outside
that expectations of ‘effectiveness’ in each sec- UNICEF judged to be best placed to help an-
tor have to be qualified. The scale of vulnera- swer the guiding questions above, together
bilities is such that the humanitarian response with the subsidiary questions set out in the
has often been able to address only the most evaluation matrix in Annex B. The guiding
immediate needs, and the barriers to response questions provided a framework around which
– including secure access and resource con- interviews could be conducted, rather than a
straints – have been such that it has not always questionnaire to be followed for all interviews.
been possible to meet even the highest priority In total, around 85 interviews were held, involv-
needs. The UNICEF response has to be judged ing around 140 informants. A list of informants
accordingly. How well has it prioritized its inter- is included in Annex C.
ventions? Has it played a role in South Sudan
that both fulfils its organizational mandate and The majority of the informants were UNICEF
provides real added value to the collective re- staff and partners involved in the relevant parts
sponse? of South Sudan response, including staff and
partners at both Juba and field levels, staff in
Data gathering and analysis methods ESARO, and at UNICEF headquarters in New
York. Implementing partner organizations, both
1.3.7 Direct observations and on-site consul- national and international (i.e. those with which
tations were held in a number of programme UNICEF has concluded programme coopera-
locations around the country. These included tion agreements) were interviewed, together
the Juba protection of civilians (PoC) site; Ben- with staff from other United Nations bodies,
tiu (Unity state) PoC and surrounding area; including the United Nations Mission in South
5 The link to development and resilience-building is apparent and raises issues that we consider further in Section 6.
CHAPTER 1: INTRODUCTION 31
© UNICEF/UNI375694/Ryeng
Sudan (UNMISS). The relevant ministries and own right and as a basis for triangulating in-
government departments were also consulted, formation gained through key informant inter-
predominantly at the Ministry of General Edu- views.
cation and Instruction and the Ministry of Gen-
der, Child and Social Welfare. The evaluation Limitations on evaluability
team also met in Juba with major donors to
UNICEF education and CP work. 1.3.11 A number of factors have limited the
evaluability of some of the evaluation ques-
1.3.9 Two short web-based surveys were also tions listed above. Some of these relate to
conducted in 2019, directed at UNICEF partners gaps in the available data, either from UNICEF
and UNICEF staff. The latter included relevant itself or from other sources; where these gaps
staff in field offices who because of time con- occurred, this has been noted in the text. The
straints were only reached to a limited extent overall shortage of outcome data is perhaps
through direct consultations. These were in- the greatest limitation in this regard, and this
tended to complement the field- and Juba-level limits the evaluability of the ‘effectiveness’ cri-
direct consultations. Though the response rate terion (EQ C2 and particularly C3). This is true
was relatively low, the responses have helped even in the sector (education) where data avail-
inform the evaluation’s analysis and served as ability has otherwise been a relative strength.
a useful complement to the KIIs. It generally reflects weaknesses in national
systems that are largely beyond UNICEF con-
1.3.10 Analysis of key documents and data trol, although it suggests an important future
formed a core part of the evaluation.6 These agenda of data system strengthening in which
were used both as information sources in their UNICEF can play an important support role.
6 Documents and data sources included: Overview and general analysis documents from UNICEF and external sources; UNICEF
country programme documents and related files; needs assessments – joint (HNO) and UNICEF-specific; response plans (HRP,
cluster plans as well as UNICEF-specific plans); UNICEF appeals and sitreps; UNICEF programming documents, including work plans,
sector strategies, and related documents; implementation data extracted from the UNICEF results assessment module (RAM); and
relevant studies and evaluations.
32 Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the South Sudan Humanitarian Crisis (2016-2019)
Other data limitations – such as those relating • B4 concerning the balance in the UNICEF
to programme delivery and results against tar- programme between different operational
gets – are more directly within UNICEF control, modalities (camp, static, outreach ap-
though they also depend on consistent and proaches). Insufficient data were available
accurate reporting from partner organizations. to address this question.
Notably, gaps and inconsistencies in the data
• C3 concerning the outcomes from UNICEF
records for CP have significantly affected the
and partner interventions. As noted above,
evaluability of this component of the UNICEF
very limited outcome data were available
programme, and appear to have led to some-
across the relevant parts of programme.
times inaccurate reporting of results.
• D3/4 concerning principles, human rights
1.3.12 As noted above, multiple delays and and equity. While issues of principle have
obstacles to progress on the evaluation were been addressed implicitly, they have not
encountered, and as a result the original terms always been explicitly framed in these
of reference were somewhat modified. This terms – reflecting how these terms are
included and extension of the timeframe cov- used in UNICEF South Sudan. For exam-
ered to the end of 2019, and a review of find- ple, issues of gender and disability have
ings and recommendations in the light of the been addressed but are not always framed
subsequent COVID-19 pandemic and related in terms of rights and equity.
control measures. It also involved a re-focus
• E3 concerning the extent to which UNICEF
on the strategic and programmatic issues aris-
met its World Humanitarian Summit (WHS)
ing rather than operational and management
commitments. Again, this has largely been
issues. One result was that much of the data
addressed implicitly rather than explicitly,
originally gathered in late 2018 and early 2019
chiefly for reasons of space.
had to be refreshed and updated to the end of
• J1-4 concerning efficiency, timeliness, re-
2019.
sourcing and programme support. These
questions have only been partially ad-
Partly as a result of the delays and modifica-
dressed in the evaluation. Delays in the
tions to the process noted above, some par-
evaluation process led to loss of available
ticular evaluation questions listed above could
time for addressing this component, and
only be partially answered, or in some cases
those delays also meant that much of the
could not be answered, in the course of the
available operational data were signifi-
evaluation. Those questions are as follows:
cantly out of date by the time the evalua-
tion was completed.
CHAPTER 1: INTRODUCTION 33
2
CONTEXT:
THE SOUTH SUDAN CRISIS7
AND THE UNICEF RESPONSE
© UNICEF/UN0256300/Ryeng
2.1 THE SOUTH SUDAN CRISIS position parties engaging in ethnically-targeted
killing, rape, torture and forced displacement.
As a 2018 report from the United Nations Com-
2.1.1 UNICEF has worked in South Sudan mission on Human Rights in South Sudan made
since the country gained independence in clear,8 these acts constitute war crimes and
2011, and for many years prior to that in what crimes against humanity. The role of the United
was then the southern part of Sudan. UNICEF Nations Chapter VII-mandated protection force
played a leading role in Operation Lifeline Su- (UNMISS) has in practice been largely confined
dan during the second Sudanese Civil War to securing the various PoC sites across South
(1983-2005) and in the negotiation with the Sudan, although UNMISS has played an impor-
Sudanese government and Sudan People’s Lib- tant role in protecting aid deliveries beyond the
eration Movement (SPLM) of the Ground Rules camps.
for delivery of humanitarian assistance to all
communities in need. Following the signing of Compounding the national-level armed conflict
the Comprehensive Peace Agreement in 2005, has been inter-communal violence and looting,
greater security and a return of many of those often centred on competition for land and re-
displaced in the war saw a gradual reduction in sources (including cattle). This more localized
the need for humanitarian assistance. When the violence continues to the present time and con-
South Sudanese people voted overwhelmingly stitutes a major destabilizing factor in the lives
for independence in 2011, the new country of of ordinary South Sudanese families.
South Sudan was created in a mood of great
optimism – matched by a very large investment 2.1.3 Mass displacement has been one of the
of international funds. defining features of the conflict over the evalua-
tion period. Despite the peace agreement signed
2.1.2 The optimism did not last. In Decem- in 2015, violence erupted again in July 2016 in
ber 2013, a political power struggle broke out Juba and spread across the Equatorias and to
between President Kiir and his former deputy Unity state. The pace and scale of displacement
Riek Machar, following which a civil war broke subsequently escalated. In total around 4 mil-
out that continues to the present. While princi- lion people were displaced from their homes,
pally a conflict between the SPLM government or about one third of the entire population. Of
and Machar’s SPLM-in Opposition (IO), fighting those, over half fled to neighbouring countries
between several factions on multiple ‘fronts’ as refugees. Although around one million of
across the country makes the course of the con- those displaced are reported to have returned
flict hard to read. The conflict has had a strong to their home areas since 2017 – including ref-
ethnic dimension, fuelled by long-standing ten- ugees unable to access basic services in neigh-
sions between Dinka and Nuer tribal groups in bouring countries – fear of violence and insta-
particular, and politicians have been quick to bility, loss of property and livelihoods, and lack
exploit those divisions. But growing insecurity of available services (including education) all
and violence across the country has affected all appear to contribute to people’s reluctance to
communities, with both government and op- return to their home areas.9
7 A fuller description of the context relating specifically to education and child protection is given in Sections 3 and 4 below.
8 See https://reliefweb.int/report/south-sudan/report-commission-human-rights-south-sudan-ahrc37crp2
CHAPTER 2: CONTEXT , THE SOUTH SUDAN CRISIS AND THE UNICEF RESPONSE 35
2.1.4 From a humanitarian perspective, the 2.1.5 The threats to children and their families
protection agenda is paramount in South Sudan. over the evaluation period have derived from
After the re-emergence of conflict in 2016, the both the direct and indirect effects of conflict
security situation for children deteriorated over – as well as from massive under-development
2017, with continued incidents of recruitment and chronic lack of investment in state services
by armed forces and armed groups (despite and institutions.12 South Sudan has been at war
assurances from the parties to the conflict),10 for most of the past sixty years, with no history
abuse, exploitation and other grave violations. of stable governance and little investment in
In 2017, there were 3,220 documented grave vio- infrastructure or systems. The effects of the cur-
lations affecting 77,000 children, including more rent conflict have to be understood against this
than 6,000 verified cases of children recruited backdrop. As primary duty-bearers for provid-
into armed groups and more than 1,200 docu- ing protection and basic services, government
mented cases of sexual violence.11 Despite lim- ministries have had limited capacity and reach.
ited releases of children, many have remained Donors have not been willing to provide de-
associated with armed forces and armed groups velopment assistance in a context of weak and
(CAAFAG). Meanwhile, even larger numbers of unstable governance, high levels of corruption
children have been separated from their fami- and widespread human rights abuse. Opportu-
lies and left unaccompanied and are therefore nities for development have been correspond-
especially vulnerable. ingly few, despite the potential for agricultural
expansion, and the economy of the country
The protection agenda has strong age and gen- has largely collapsed. Vital revenues from oil
der dimensions. As the 2018 human rights re- production have fallen, agricultural production
port notes: “Conflict-related sexual violence is – particularly in the fertile southern states – has
endemic. Rape… and other forms of sexual vio- been severely disrupted, and inflation has rap-
lence, targeting girls, boys, women and men, are idly eroded the value of the South Sudanese
often committed in front of children, humiliate pound. Traditional livelihoods are being lost as
the victims, their families and their communi- a result of insecurity and displacement of farm-
ties and destroy the social fabric, leaving behind ers. The result is that millions of South Suda-
a traumatized people and the seeds of yet more nese have been left destitute and acutely food
violence.” Girls are especially at risk of sexual insecure.
violence, child marriage and exploitation. Al-
though underreported due to fear of retaliation 2.1.6 Acute food insecurity brought large
and social stigma, gender-based violence was parts of the country to the brink of famine over
(and continues to be) widespread. It has been the evaluation period – and indeed pockets of
exacerbated by harmful traditional practices – famine were seen in 2017. In southern Unity,
including early and forced marriage –and lack around 100,000 were reported to be living in
of access to adequate support services. famine conditions.13 Over half of the population
was suffering acute food insecurity by Decem-
9 United Nations, ‘South Sudan Humanitarian Needs Overview, 2020’, UNOCHA, Geneva, 2019.
10 See for example https://www.unicef.org/southsudan/media_21563.html.
11 United Nations, ‘Monitoring and Reporting Mechanism South Sudan Country Report’, United Nations, New York, 2017.
12 South Sudan was ranked third last out of 189 countries in the 2018 Human Development Index.
36 Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the South Sudan Humanitarian Crisis (2016-2019)
ber 2017, an unprecedented situation.14 Levels of ment) were largely confined to the Equatorial
acute malnutrition have been correspondingly region, intra- and inter-communal violence
high: prevalence of global acute malnutrition persisted across much of the rest of the coun-
(GAM) among children increased from 13 per try. Meanwhile, as the humanitarian needs
cent in 2018 to 16 per cent in 2019, exceeding overview (HNO) for 2020 described “Delayed
the global emergency threshold of 15 per cent. cantonment of former fighters, full integration
Given poor sanitation and lack of access to of forces, decisions concerning the number of
clean water sources, low levels of vaccination, states and their boundaries, and unresolved
lack of health services and high exposure to issues between [peace agreement] signato-
disease, the threats to young children’s health ries around security arrangements” as being
have been particularly severe. among the sources of uncertainty concerning
the country’s short-term future.15 This in turn
2.1.7 South Sudan suffers from a major continued to affect displaced people’s decisions
educational deficit that long pre-dates its in- about returning home.
dependence in 2011. Children’s physical secu-
rity and well-being have been directly endan- 2.1.9 In both 2019 and 2020, the effects of
gered by attacks against schools. Even before continuing conflict were compounded for many
COVID-19 forced the closure of schools in 2020, by extensive flooding – a crisis within a crisis
the conflict had forced many schools to close, – which demanded its own response. Food in-
particularly in Unity, Jonglei, Upper Nile and security was the main driver behind the number
Lakes states. of people in need, with nearly 6.4 million people
or 54 per cent of the population classed as being
2.1.8 By the end of 2018, although the gen- acutely food insecure in August 2019, according
eral situation of children and their families to the Integrated Food Security Phase Classi-
remained critical, some opportunities for pro- fication (IPC) analysis.16 In 2020, communities
gress presented themselves. The revived peace were described as being hit by the “triple shock
process, based on the agreement signed by of intensified conflict and sub-national violence,
the main parties to the conflict in September a second consecutive year of major flooding, and
2018, brought hope of sustained cessation of the impacts of COVID-19”.17 More children were
hostilities, reduction in conflict-related violence acutely malnourished than in the past three
and greater access for the provision of basic years, and women and girls continued to face
services. Those hopes were only very partially extreme levels of gender-based violence and
realised. In 2019, while residual areas of conflict psychosocial distress. “People’s coping mecha-
between government and armed opposition nisms weakened as a consequence of the cumu-
groups (non-signatories to the peace agree- lative shocks, leading families to adopt negative
13 United Nations Children’s Fund, ‘UNICEF South Sudan Country Office Annual Report, 2017’, UNICEF, Juba, 2017.
14 United Nations Children’s, Fund, Humanitarian Action for Children 2018, UNICEF, Geneva, 2018, citing the IPC classification for
November 2017.
15 United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, ‘Humanitarian Needs Overview, 2020’, UNOCHA, Juba, 2019.
16 Ibid.
17 United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, ‘Humanitarian Needs Overview, 2021’, UNOCHA, Juba, 2021.
CHAPTER 2: CONTEXT , THE SOUTH SUDAN CRISIS AND THE UNICEF RESPONSE 37
practices such as forced labour and child mar- Interim Cooperation Framework (ICF) with the
riage. The economy continued to spiral down- government replaced the United Nations De-
wards, pushing people to the brink, especially in velopment Assistance Framework in January
urban areas.”18 2016,19 with an emphasis on building resilience
and social services for the most vulnerable. This
new framework was intended to consolidate
2.2 UNICEF AND THE WIDER and build on the peace agreement of 2015, in
anticipation of a full-scale development frame-
INTERNATIONAL RESPONSE
work based on the Sustainable Development
TO THE CRISIS
Goals. The resumption of conflict in 2016 meant
that the ICF too proved largely unworkable.
2.2.1 As described in Part One of the evalu-
ation, the ambitious development agenda de- In effect, the long-term development agenda
fined in the wake of the country’s independence stalled in 2013 and remains in abeyance. Despite
in 2011 had by 2016 been replaced by some- the formation of a new coalition government in
thing much more tentative. The United Nations’ 2020, international donors remain extremely
© UNICEF/UN0372898/Naftalin
18 Ibid. People’s physical and mental well-being, living standards and coping mechanisms were expected to further deteriorate in
2021. Some 8.3 million people in South Sudan are estimated to be in need of humanitarian assistance in 2021, an 800,000 increase
from the 7.5 million people in need in 2020. The increase in needs is largely driven by rising food insecurity.
19 UNICEF had intended its programme to contribute to all four of the original UNDAF outcomes: (a) core governance and civil
service functions are established and operational; (b) chronic food insecurity is reduced and household incomes increase; (c) key
service delivery systems are in place, laying the groundwork for increased demand; and (d) violence is reduced and community
security improves.
38 Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the South Sudan Humanitarian Crisis (2016-2019)
reluctant to provide development assistance. The July 2016 crisis further highlighted the
Humanitarian assistance remains the primary importance of decentralization so that UNICEF
mode of aid engagement, although this too has could remain able to operate across the country
come under increasing pressure in the past two through its ten field offices (FOs).21 Since that
years. While some agencies like UNICEF main- date, the UNICEF network of FOs has proved
tain strong links with government ministries an essential platform for the implementation of
and with local authorities, most of the human- the UNICEF programme and for provision of the
itarian effort by-passes government authorities necessary support and oversight of partners.
altogether.
2.2.4 The subsequent 2019-2021 CPD is es-
2.2.2 The re-orientation of the UNICEF pro- sentially based on a continuation of the same
gramme from development to emergency re- approach. It notes that “a decentralized pres-
sponse at the onset of the current crisis in 2016 ence in South Sudan has enabled UNICEF to es-
was reported to have been a major challenge, tablish long-term relationships with communities
and UNICEF relied heavily on surge deploy- and authorities at the local and national levels”. It
ments in the earlier stages. The response had al- places emphasis on a multisectoral approach,
ready been designated a ‘Level 3’ (L3) response which “facilitates linkages and synergies to tackle
in 2014 under the UNICEF Corporate Emergency the multiple deprivations faced by children in
Activation Procedure (CEAP). That designation South Sudan”, although as discussed in the fol-
remained until June 2018, at which point it was lowing sections, this is an area where UNICEF
deactivated and the response re-designated a has sometimes struggled to turn theory into
Level 2 (L2) response.20 practice. The new CPD states the organization’s
intention to seek “local solutions and commu-
2.2.3 The 2016-2018 country programme doc- nity engagement using innovative approaches to
ument (CPD) anticipated continued instability. access communities”, something the evaluation
As the 2016 country programme management found that it had indeed consistently tried to do.
plan noted, “the 2016-2018 CPD was already Efforts would also be made to “ensure that the
designed to operate in a volatile operating envi- sectors mainstream protection and that the ‘do
ronment” and the related programme budget no harm’ principle is fully respected”, though
review included three elements that reflected this was found to be much less evidenced in
this, namely: (i) a decentralization of UNICEF practice. UNICEF strengths in procurement and
capacities outside of Juba, (ii) the development supply of emergency items is stressed – and
of cross-sectoral interventions linking human- while the evaluation does not evaluate this and
itarian relief, recovery and stabilization, and other operational aspects of the programme in
(iii) the strengthening of a country team with any depth, it found that this was indeed a key
‘versatile capacities’ to switch from humanitar- part of the organization’s actual and perceived
ian response to development work as needed. added value in South Sudan.
20 The explanatory memo from the Executive Director (25 June 2018) said that although the humanitarian situation continued to
deteriorate, “UNICEF’s capacity to respond has been significantly strengthened over the past years and the country office has the
requisite capacity to sustain the response” – although support to South Sudan remained an “organizational priority”.
21 The number of field offices rose to 13 for the 2019-2021 CPD period.
CHAPTER 2: CONTEXT , THE SOUTH SUDAN CRISIS AND THE UNICEF RESPONSE 39
2.2.5 As the 2016-2018 CPD stated, “while
UNICEF will continue to engage in system
strengthening at the local and national levels,
lessons from past crises have shown it is unlikely
that long-term national level policy development
work be possible under the volatile political and
security environment. The country programme
will therefore focus on its humanitarian, recovery
and resilience components, adapting them to the
changing and fragile context”. This it continued
to do throughout the evaluation period, and it
proved to be not only appropriate to the context
but the only viable approach. Nevertheless, as
the following sections show, both the human-
itarian and the recovery/resilience components
have proved very challenging to sustain in prac-
tice. Lack of safe access, lack of adequate fund-
ing, logistical challenges, limited partner capac-
ity and sometimes lack of UNICEF capacity all
compounded the challenge at various stages of
the response.
© UNICEF/UN068350/Hatcher-Moore
40 Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the South Sudan Humanitarian Crisis (2016-2019)
3
UNICEF AND THE
EDUCATION RESPONSE
© UNICEF/UN0263294/Rich
3.1 THE EDUCATION CONTEXT directly endangered by attacks against schools
AND NEEDS ANALYSIS22 (113 documented incidents of military use and
attacks on schools, affecting 36,748 children in
2016, with 30 per cent of primary schools being
3.1.1 South Sudan suffers from a massive ed- attacked in 2017) and indirectly by the closure of
ucational deficit that pre-dates its independence learning spaces, the majority of them in Unity,
in 2011. By 2014 the net enrolment rate stood at Jonglei, Upper Nile and Lakes states. By the
just 41 per cent (35 per cent for girls), falling to end of 2018, the education cluster needs assess-
around 35 per cent in 2015.23 Primary comple- ment found that on average, schools lost three
tion rates are among the lowest in the world at to four weeks of education in the preceding aca-
just 10 per cent. Most primary school children demic year, and over 50 per cent of the assessed
attending school do not achieve foundational schools reported that this interruption was due
literacy, numeracy and life skills, and the quality to insecurity. Some 21 per cent of assessed
of education provided is a major concern across schools were non-functional, with insecurity
all schools. This is closely related to the issue being the major cause of school closure. Of the
of lack of payment, incentives and career de- assessed schools, 15 per cent reported having
velopment prospects for teachers. The conflict experienced an attack on the school, teachers
continued to restrict children’s access to edu- or pupils, and theft or looting by armed forces
cation over the evaluation period: in 2016 the and groups.26
estimated number of children requiring emer-
gency education support was 1,100,000, rising 3.1.3 Schooling for children in South Sudan
to 2,800,000 in 2019.24 Although the percentage is provided through both official and voluntary
of school-aged children (6-17) out of school de- or private channels and includes both formal
clined slightly between 2011 and 2018 (from 64 and non-formal education. In 2017, there was
per cent to 60 per cent), those modest gains are a total of over 6,000 schools countrywide, in-
now seriously challenged by the COVID-19 pan- cluding both government and non-government
demic with an estimated average learning loss schools, of which 4,000 were primary schools.
of at least 0.6 years of schooling per child and In 2016, roughly 60 per cent of schools were
increasing drop-out rate.25 governmental, and 40 per cent were non-gov-
ernmental (run by communities, non-govern-
3.1.2 Children have been affected both di- mental organizations, faith-based groups, or
rectly and indirectly by the impact of conflict for-profit providers). The quality of education
on schools and other learning spaces. Their provided is a major concern across all schools.
physical security and well-being have been As noted above, learning achievement among
22 The main sources for this section are the 2016 Education Cluster Assessment South Sudan, November; UNICEF Country Office
Annual Reports , the 2018 Assessment of Early Grade Learners in Literacy and Numeracy; UNICEF Education Strategy Notes 2016-
2018 ; and UNICEF Education Strategy Notes 2018-2021
23 United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, Country Database, UNESCO, see http://uis.unesco.org/en/
country/ss.
24 United Nations, Humanitarian Response Plan, South Sudan, UNOCHA, Geneva, 2016 & 2019.
25 World Bank “Simulating The Potential Impacts Of Covid-19 School Closures On Schooling And Learning Outcomes: A Set Of
Global Estimates” June 2020 http://pubdocs.worldbank.org/en/798061592482682799/covid-and-education-June17-r6.pdf
26 Education Cluster need assessment survey, September-October 2018. UN OCHA Humanitarian Needs Overview 2019
42 Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the South Sudan Humanitarian Crisis (2016-2019)
primary school-aged children remains low:
at the end of Grade 3, most learners cannot
identify a single written word in their native
languages or English.27 Without basic literacy
skills, it is expected that South Sudanese learn-
ers will struggle to engage with other subjects
on the curriculum and will be at higher risk of
dropping out of school.
3.1.4 The relationship between education
and child protection is particularly strong in
South Sudan, with out-of-school and displaced
children particularly vulnerable to abuse and
exploitation. Adolescent boys and young men
remain particularly vulnerable to participation
in dangerous activities and recruitment into
armed groups. Adolescent girls are at risk of
early and forced marriage. Adolescent girls and
young women also run the risk of gender-based © UNICEF/UN057848/Hatcher-Moore
violence, including sexual abuse and exploita-
tion from armed groups and other members of
society, reflecting the low value placed on the
girl child. In 2020, the closure of schools be- aries, but with the collapse of government oil
cause of COVID-19 has created particular (but as revenue post-2016, salaries of both officials and
yet largely unassessed) vulnerabilities, includ- teachers have not been paid regularly and have
ing teenage pregnancies. lost value due to hyperinflation. This issue of
teachers’ salaries and incentives is one of the
3.1.5 The government budget for education main constraints to progress on the education
in South Sudan was below 4 per cent of the agenda. In addition, two-thirds of teachers are
total government budget for 2011-2017. Actual untrained and there are major shortages of
expenditure often lags far behind approved teaching and learning materials.29 The impact
budgets.28 Since independence, South Sudan on quality of education is evident.
has developed two general education strate-
gic plans to guide the sector. The Government 3.1.6 While the mainstream educational
has not been able to adequately resource these system is so greatly overstretched, under-re-
plans, and funding gaps have been larger than sourced and subject to insecurity, the distinc-
the worst-case scenario anticipated in the plan. tion between ‘emergency’ needs and regular
Sectoral expenditures are concentrated on sal- needs is not a clear one. The mainstream state
27 South Sudan Early Grade Reading and Mathematics Assessment Report – Montrose: September 2016, p. 5.
28 See UNICEF Education Budget Briefs for 2019 and 2020: https://www.unicef.org/southsudan/reports/education-budget-
brief-20192020; https://www.unicef.org/esa/media/4301/file/UNICEF-South-Sudan-2019-Education-Budget-Brief.pdf
29 Universalia, ‘Summative GPE Country Program Evaluation, Republic of South Sudan’, Universalia, Montreal, 2019.
CHAPTER 3: UNICEF AND THE EDUCATION RESPONSE 43
education system, under huge pressure, has (UNESCO) 2018 out-of-school children study
only partially been able to meet the needs of under the Back to Learning (BTL) initiative, the
children. Beyond the medium- to longer-term assessments of early grade learners in literacy
system-strengthening agenda, the crisis has and numeracy in 2017 and 2018, and the 2018
created major direct support needs for children annual education census on school infrastruc-
who would not otherwise be able or willing to ture and management and finances.31
attend school. The education needs of children
in displaced camps (PoC sites) have been met Assessments confirmed the need to focus on:
through creation of temporary learning spaces
• Access to safe education opportunities, es-
(TLS), while access to education for children
pecially for girls
displaced outside camps was provided through
strengthening of mainstream schools in host • Improving basic quality of education
communities. In conflict-affected areas, the
• Providing integrated services at schools
formal education system continued to provide
(particularly health, child protection and
services in theory, but in practice, the education
nutrition)
needs of children in areas outside the Govern-
ment’s control have been supported through
ad hoc support to schools (including through While the UNICEF education response strat-
UNICEF rapid response missions to inaccessi- egy32 clearly tackles the priorities around ac-
ble areas). Taken together, children in these set- cess, safety and quality, integration of services
tings constitute the main ‘education in emer- appears to have remained limited – with the
gencies’ (EiE) caseload. exception of child protection services. More re-
cently, considerable progress in integration of
services through learning spaces is reported to
UNICEF needs analysis and data quality have been made, although this has been inter-
rupted by the COVID-19 control measures.33
3.1.7 The UNICEF education emergency re-
sponse strategy is largely based on continuous
country-wide needs assessments, coordinated
through the education cluster led by UNICEF.30
In addition, UNICEF and its partners regularly
carry out assessments and studies on educa-
tion needs in PoCs and in other (accessible)
at-risk areas. The overall education strategy
was also informed by the United Nations Ed-
ucational, Scientific and Cultural Organization
30 Education cluster assessments 2015, 2016, 2017, 2018; United Nations Children’s Fund and Ministry of General Education and
Instruction, ‘Assessment of Early Grade Learners in Literacy and Numeracy in South Sudan”: Assessments 1 and 2’, UNICEF &
MoGEI, Juba, 2017 and 2018; United Nations Children’s Fund, ‘Exploring the Linkages Between Education Sector Governance,
Inequity, Conflict, and Peacebuilding in South Sudan’, UNICEF, New York, 2016.
31 These are critically important to improving the government’s capacity for policy formulation, as well as monitoring and evaluation.
32 UNICEF education programme strategy notes 2016-2018 and 2019-2021.
33 SSCO feedback on the first draft of this report.
44 Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the South Sudan Humanitarian Crisis (2016-2019)
The wider education agenda: key externally-funded initiatives in
Box 2
South Sudan
Global Partnership for Education
UNICEF South Sudan acts as the managing entity for Global Partnership for Education (GPE)
in South Sudan. Since 2011, the Global Partnership for Education programme has invested
in the recovery and development phases of education system-building. It has supported the
construction of schools, development of national curriculum for both primary and secondary
education, development and procurement of textbooks, teaching and learning materials, and
capacity-building of teachers, school development committees, education managers and
supervisors. GPE aims to strengthen the capacity of the Ministry of General Education and
Instruction at various levels, including in planning, budgeting, leadership and data collection.
Back To Learning Initiative
Back to Learning (BTL) is an initiative of the Government of South Sudan, supported by
UNICEF. The initiative was launched in February 2015 and was designed to bridge the
humanitarian-development divide, aiming to provide 400,000 children with access to
education opportunities (200,000 in conflict-affected and 200,000 in less-affected areas),
whether through the formal or non-formal system. All ten states and GPAA had Back to
Learning committees comprised of members from national and international NGOs and led by
the MoGEI to plan and monitor activities.
EU Emergency Trust Fund for Africa - IMPACT South Sudan
In the context of South Sudan, maintaining equitable access to quality primary education is
especially important in reducing ethnic tension and discrimination, and ultimately in building
the foundations for inclusive growth and development. Through the provision of incentives to
primary school teachers and voluntary teachers nationwide, the fund is intended to increase
teacher attendance and thus improve the delivery of services at school level, ultimately giving
children an opportunity to realize their potential. Specific objectives of the programme are:
(1) increase teachers’ attendance, and (2) the establishment of a teacher human resource
information system. IMPACT South Sudan was managed by the EUD and acted in synergy
with other initiatives (including the BTL on teacher incentives).
CHAPTER 3: UNICEF AND THE EDUCATION RESPONSE 45
3.2 UNICEF ROLE AND STRATEGY the need to build their capacity given that
IN EDUCATION international non-governmental organiza-
tions (NGOs) have limited access and im-
plementation capacity, and that many left
3.2.1 The UNICEF education programme
the country.
from 2016 to 2019 included both humanitarian
and development elements.34 This included a • Strengthening political-economy analy-
range of approaches, spanning EiE, system sis and field monitoring in the context of
strengthening, and peacebuilding/conflict-sen- strengthening harmonized approach to
sitive approaches. These have been combined cash transfer (HACT) implementation.
in different ways in the course of the response
• Delaying and adjusting activities linked
to address the evolving education needs in this
to upstream policies given the ongoing
fragile and unpredictable environment. Box 2
changes at the national level. When feasi-
above shows the main externally-funded frame-
ble, working with subnational levels and
works through which the work of UNICEF and
prioritizing community-based systems, as
its partners have been financed.
opposed to statutory national systems.
The country programme management plan for
the 2016-2018 country programme explains the As noted above, for the education programme,
UNICEF approach as follows: “[UNICEF] will not this approach translated into three main com-
drop development activities, but will use a nu- ponents that were intended to create a coherent
anced approach to maintain development inter- response: national education system strength-
ventions when feasible, depending on the con- ening (including early recovery and resilience
text of field locations”. 35 This approach would programming), emergency education, and a
focus on: crosscutting peacebuilding/conflict-sensitive
education approach. However, despite attempts
• Implementing life-saving interventions
to create coherence between the strands of the
and early recovery when feasible, which
programme, the link between emergency edu-
should be expanded toward stabilization
cation and system strengthening appears weak.
and resilience work as situation and access
improve.
3.2.2 The EiE component is not clearly de-
• Reaching more vulnerable populations fined as such in the programme documents
outside of POC camps. before 2019.36 For the purpose of this evalua-
tion, education in emergency programming is
• Using national partners for implementa-
understood as the set of activities aimed at pro-
tion as much as possible, understanding
34 The 2012-2013 (extended to the end of 2015) CPD emphasized strengthening national education systems in anticipation of a more
stable political situation in the country. The 2016-2018 Country Programme reflected the stalemate in the implementation of the 2015
peace agreements and renewed conflict by adopting a ‘risk-informed and flexible programming’ approach. That meant increased
focus on the EiE component of the programming and diminished relative emphasis on the system strengthening component of the
education response.
35 Including supporting the design of the expected new national development framework to ensure it places social development as a
central component and promotes the rights of children.
36 Country Programme Document 2016-2018; Country Office Annual Reports 2016, 2017, 2018; education strategy notes 2016.
The Country Programme Document, 2019-2021 and education strategy notes 2019 show a clear separation between system
strengthening and emergency outputs.
46 Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the South Sudan Humanitarian Crisis (2016-2019)
viding access to quality and inclusive education 3.3.2 This was corrected in the 2019-2021
opportunities37 in those areas (including oppo- sector strategy, where a more comprehensive
sition-held areas) where the Government has ToC was elaborated. This represented a signif-
been largely unable to provide education over icant departure from the 2016-2018 framework,
the evaluation period, namely Lakes, Unity, with much greater emphasis placed on the hu-
Jonglei, Upper Nile, Central and Eastern Equa- manitarian context and emergency education
toria. Emergency education activities targeted needs. Two outputs contributing to the overall
children inside PoC camps, host communities outcome (see Figure 1 below) were defined, dis-
and communities in hard-to-reach conflict-af- tinguishing between the emergency and more
fected locations. Emergency education services development components of the programme.
have largely been delivered either through However, in the view of the evaluation team,
national and international NGO partners or as these should be understood as sub-outcomes
direct service provision by UNICEF through in- rather than ‘outputs’, since their achievement
tegrated rapid response mechanisms (IRRMs). does not lie within the power of UNICEF and its
partners to ensure. In this sense, the logic of the
programme is still missing an important link be-
3.3 UNICEF EDUCATION IN tween outputs (properly understood) and out-
comes.38
EMERGENCIES STRATEGY:
CLARITY, COHERENCE, LOGIC
3.3.1 As noted above, the UNICEF education
response strategy from 2016 to 2021 contained
humanitarian and development elements that
were combined in different ways to address
the evolving education needs. The operational
dimensions of the three main components –
national system strengthening, emergency
education, peacebuilding/conflict-sensitive ap-
proaches – were not clearly spelled out in the
2016-2018 strategy notes and theory of change
(ToC), nor in the related sector outcome, out-
puts and indicators of the CPD. This created a
disconnect between the needs analysis, ToC
and programmatic objectives. In particular, the
ToC appears to be a results structure more than
a representation of the links between needs,
© UNICEF/UN0256303/Ryeng
causes and the expected results of intervention.
37 Such definition is derived from the analysis of the SSCO programme documents and is in line with the CCCs. The INEE definition of
education in emergencies however is broader.
38 The distinction between sub-outcomes and outputs is important both in performance management and accountability terms.
Failure to recognize the distinction risks blurring the lines between what UNICEF and its partners do and what external outcomes
may (or may not) be enabled by their actions. This appears to reflect a more general problem with the way in which UNICEF
constructs the logic of its programmes: the same confusion between outputs and sub-outcomes was found in a recent evaluation of
the Turkey country programme.
CHAPTER 3: UNICEF AND THE EDUCATION RESPONSE 47
Figure 1 Components of the UNICEF education programme, 2016-2019
Strengthening the National Emergency Education
Education System and Early
Recovery/Resilience programming a. Accelerated learning programmes
with mainstreamed life skills and
peace education, targeting girls, IDPs,
Supporting Ministry of General Education
demobilized CAAFAG, children in
and Instruction on:
pastoralist communities;
a. Strengthening monitoring and data
b. Setting up / rehabilitation of
collection systems (i.e. developing
temporary learning spaces (including
and carrying out national literacy
WASH);
and numeracy assessments;
operationalising education sector c. Provision of emergency teaching and
monitoring –Education Monitoring learning materials;
Information System and study on out- d. Teachers’ incentives and capacity
of-school children; development (i.e. teacher training on
b. Strengthening school supervision and pedagogy, peacebuilding, life skills
inspection; and psychosocial support);
c. Developing national systems to support e. Capacity development of school
early childhood development, including management committees and parent-
coordination mechanisms; teacher associations;
d. Mainstreaming peacebuilding f. Back-to-school campaigns, including
and conflict-sensitive education advocacy for girls’ education;
programming within the formal g. Life skills training for peacebuilding
education sector; and livelihoods opportunities for
e. Modelling school systems – model adolescents and youth.
schools construction/rehabilitation and
management;
f. Basic education package to support the
re-enrolment and retention of children
-especially girls in stable/less conflict-
affected areas.
Support to national and state level coordination mechanisms (education cluster).
Peacebuilding/conflict-sensitive education
48 Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the South Sudan Humanitarian Crisis (2016-2019)
3.3.3 The results assessment module (RAM) sectors is also lacking, especially with nutrition
indicators for the emergency component (Out- and health. Elements of integration exist in the
put 2) of the new strategy better captured the programme implementation (especially with
whole spectrum of the emergency education CP and WASH) but these are not fully articulated
operation – see Table 1 below. The link between and planned for. One example concerns WASH
emergency education and system strengthen- in schools: whereas separate WASH facilities
ing remains weak, however, despite attempts for girls and boys were built in schools and TLS,
to achieve coherence between the two strands their maintenance was not adequately planned
of the programme. The attempt to harmonize for between WASH and education. This is one of
teachers’/volunteers’ conditions of work pro- the factors contributing to girls dropping out of
vides one example of the challenge. An inte- school.
gration strategy between education and other
Table 1 UNICEF outcome, outputs and indicators, 2019-2021
UNICEF Education Programme 2019-2021 Key indicators
Result statements
Outcome a. # of children aged 3-6 in humanitarian
By 2021, 1.1 million children, adolescents and situations enrolled in ECE centres
youth aged 3-18 years, affected by conflict and b. # of children aged 7-18 in humanitarian
other emergencies, have increased and equitable situations enrolled in formal primary or
access to life-saving quality education with alternative education system
improved learning outcomes. c. Primary education completion rate
Output 1 a. # of diagnostic studies and policy reviews
By 2021, government and other national conducted
partners have increased capacity at national and b. # of policies implemented, tracked and
subnational levels for improved implementation, monitored to the beneficiary level for review.
monitoring and inclusive sector planning c. % of targets (equity, efficiency, learning) in the
annual education sector plan achieved
d. % of schools implementing new conflict-
sensitive curriculum.
Output 2 a. # of children provided with safe and protective
By 2021, Children and young people in learning environment.
humanitarian situations have access to b. # of children receiving cost-effective quality
protective, quality basic education services TLMs.
c. # of teacher trained (education in emergency,
pedagogy, life skills, peace building).
d. # of PTA / SMC members trained on school
management and gender
CHAPTER 3: UNICEF AND THE EDUCATION RESPONSE 49
3.3.4 The UNICEF emergency education 3.4.2 Since 2019, as a result of the peace
strategy is consistent with the education clus- agreement and the formal cessation of hostil-
ter strategy (co-led by UNICEF and Save the ities, UNICEF and the education cluster have
Children) and largely consistent with the Core been able to expand the programme from six to
Commitments for Children in Humanitarian all ten states. Despite the considerable increase
Action (CCCs). Partners reported increasing in access, the operational context has contin-
involvement with UNICEF in discussion about ued to be challenging. Political tensions remain
strategy over the evaluation period, though unresolved, and localized inter-communal con-
some felt that strategy was essentially deter- flicts and banditry mean that insecurity is high
mined in advance of consultations.39 However, in many areas. Natural disasters (particularly
while UNICEF became increasingly responsive floods) have continued to hamper access while
to the feedback of partners, the level of commu- causing human displacement and damage to
nity involvement in strategy development and the education system. In general, access con-
planning appeared limited.40 straints, natural disasters and limited resources
have significantly impacted implementation of
the programme.43
3.4 DESIGNING THE RESPONSE:
3.4.3 Since 2016-2017, the rationale for the
COVERAGE, FOCUS AND
organization’s target-setting has been based on
TARGET-SETTING
a progressive reduction in the number of chil-
3.4.1 The emergency education component dren who are out of school44 and retention of
of the education programme focussed on pro- those enrolled. In particular, the RAM targets
viding access to safe and quality emergency show a progressive increase of approximately
education opportunities in the most conflict 200,000 children per year to be reintegrated in
affected states: Lakes, Unity, Bahr-El Ghazal, the school system or provided with emergency
Jonglei, Upper Nile, and Central and Eastern education opportunities. However, the scale of
Equatoria41 and Greater Upper Nile.42 Within the programme appears insufficient to cover
these states, priority was given to areas in the education needs (UNICEF covered 30 per
which the number of out-of-school children cent of the estimated emergency education
was high and access to partners (or service needs in 2016, 24 per cent in 2017, 30 per cent in
provision through IRRM as a last resort) was 2018 and 26 per cent in 2019).
ensured. As a result of access constraints and
the need for prioritization, the emergency ed- 3.4.4 The rationale for UNICEF targets in re-
ucation programme between 2016 and 2018 lation to those of the wider education cluster is
was not entirely based on the level of needs: not fully clear. For example in 2018, the educa-
some areas with high vulnerability and needs tion sector response plan in the humanitarian
remained inaccessible in practice. response plan (HRP) states that for targeting
39 KII Juba with international NGOs.
40 United Nations Children’s Fund, ‘UNICEF Contribution to Education in Humanitarian Situations, Jan 2020: South Sudan Country
Matrix’, UNICEF Juba, 2019.
41 These states were targeted under the BTL initiative.
42 Prioritised in the Education Cluster Strategy 2019-2020.
43 UNICEF Contribution to Education in Humanitarian Situations. Strikingly, in 2019 the funding gap was 69%.
44 Estimated at 55% of the primary school population in 2016.
50 Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the South Sudan Humanitarian Crisis (2016-2019)
and prioritization: “The response will target tween assessed need and targets is particularly
some 50 per cent of the most vulnerable peo- high for 2019.
ple in need of education. The cluster will target
communities where more than 1,500 children 3.4.5 The targeting strategy for equal access
have been displaced or otherwise affected by and inclusion of the most vulnerable is not
the humanitarian crisis for more than six weeks clearly spelled out in strategy documents.46
– with a lower threshold of 1,000 children in While UNICEF rightly targeted the most af-
[displaced]-only communities – and where fected areas with higher numbers of out-of-
there has been no major security incident in school children, inequity of access remains a
the three weeks preceding the planned inter- major issue. This increases the vulnerability of
vention”. Over the years 2017, 2018 and 2019, children and adolescents, thereby contributing
UNICEF set targets of (respectively) 84 per cent, to social exclusion, protection risks, the pro-
61 per cent and 92 per cent of the education pensity for ‘negative coping behaviours’ and
cluster target (corresponding to between 24 exploitation of children and adolescents. Those
per cent and 30 per cent of the total people in most disadvantaged are girls, children with dis-
need for education). Figure 2 shows the needs abilities, socially-excluded children from urban
against targets set. It appears that the overall poor, pastoralist, and internally displaced per-
response has over this period covered a dimin- son (IDP) communities (including returnees),
ishing proportion of the total assessed need – over-age children and adolescents.
amounting to only a quarter of assessed need
by 2019. While the level of response has grown 3.4.6 Limited data on targeting (and imple-
modestly over the period, levels of assessed mentation) through camp/PoC, static and out-
needs have grown dramatically.45 The gap be- reach approaches do not allow conclusions
Figure 2 UNICEF and education cluster targets vs. assessed needs, 2016-2019
3.000.000
2.500.000
2.000.000
1.500.000
1.000.000
500.000
People in need Cluster Target UNICEF Target
(Education) (children+teachers + PTAs)
45 While it is not clear to the evaluators why this is so, it may be that improved access has revealed the true extent of needs.
46 UNICEF Education Strategy Notes 2016 and 2019; CPD 2016-2018 and 2019-2021; UNICEF Contribution to Education in
Humanitarian Situations”.
CHAPTER 3: UNICEF AND THE EDUCATION RESPONSE 51
on the balance between these different pro- regard to access to education (enrolment and
gramme modalities. retention) for IDPs in PoCs and in communities;
establishing safe education facilities (tempo-
rary learning spaces); provision of essential
3.5 EFFECTIVENESS AGAINST education material; teacher training; commu-
nity mobilization and engagement through
STATED OBJECTIVES
school management committees (SMCs) and
3.5.1 As noted above, the results structure parent-teachers associations (PTAs); and link-
from 2016 to 2018 does not enable a clear link ing education with child protection approaches
to be established between emergency educa- and to some extent WASH in schools.
tion interventions and stated results. However,
UNICEF has achieved important gains through- 3.5.2 Table 2 shows the results achieved by
out the evaluation period, in particular with UNICEF and its partners against key indicators
Table 2 UNICEF results against targets in education
Indicators Year UNICEF UNICEF UNICEF %
Target Results achieved
# of children and adolescents 3-18 years 2016 325,000 313,832 97%
provided withaccess to education in
2017 300,000 319,962 107%
emergencies*
2018 500,000 559,450 112%
# of children accessing quality formal or 2019 729,000 618,174 85%
non-formal early learning, pre-primary,
primary or secondary education*
# of teachers and members of parent- 2016 10,000 9,269 93%
teacher association (PTA) and school
2017 10,000 13,007 130%
management committee (SMC) trained*
2018 5,200 7,189 138%
# of teachers trained on education-in- 2019 5,500 6,360 116%
emergencies basic pedagogy and learner-
centred methodologies*
# of temporary learning space (TLS) 2016 883 689 78%
classrooms established **
2017 1,048 556 53%
2018 1,183 460 39%
2019 750 322 43%
* Source: HAC ** Source: RAM
47 For a fuller record of key UNICEF results, see Annex D
52 Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the South Sudan Humanitarian Crisis (2016-2019)
© UNICEF/UN0120050/Makundi
and related targets for emergency education.47 evidence that UNICEF and its partners have
As these figures show, levels of achievement brought large numbers of conflict-affected
have been consistently high, with targets regu- children into schools where they can learn and
larly exceeded. The exception is in the number access other services. Significant improvement
of TLSs established. This was reportedly due to has been achieved in the enrolment of girls (up
the increasing costs of construction materials, from 20 to 40 per cent) supported by specific
together with transportation and access issues incentives for girls’ attendance (cash and food),
related to conflict and climatic factors. In gen- provision of dignity kits, and gender-segre-
eral, the evaluation confirms the findings on gated latrines. As the BTL evaluation reported,
effectiveness from the evaluation of the Back- by 2018 girls were also showing higher primary
to-Learning Initiative48 and the recent South Su- school completion rates than boys. However,
dan case study within the wider evaluation of overall drop-out rates remain high, and strong
the “UNICEF Contribution to Education in Hu- cultural and economic barriers remain. Girls
manitarian Situations”, January 2020.49 These work at home and tend to be married young.
findings are considered by topic in the follow- The presence of female teachers as role mod-
ing paragraphs. els is an important factor in encouraging girls
to remain in schools, although this has in-
Access, enrolment and retention creased only modestly (from 15 to 21 per cent
in primary schools), affected by attractive op-
3.5.4 Despite the extremely challenging envi- portunities that exist elsewhere for educated
ronment, UNICEF has done well to help main- women. Overall, the BTL evaluation found that
tain and extend access to education in the less the teacher incentive scheme had a positive
accessible areas of the country through emer- influence on teacher attendance, discipline and
gency education interventions. There is clear commitment.
48 Mott MacDonald, Evaluation of the Back to Learning Initiative.
49 UNICEF Contribution to Education in Humanitarian Situations.
CHAPTER 3: UNICEF AND THE EDUCATION RESPONSE 53
Box 3 Barriers and incentives to school attendance
South Sudan has the highest rate of out-of-school girls in the world (76 per cent) and marriage
is the most common reason for girls dropping out. A 2019 Oxfam study on early and forced
marriage in Nyal revealed that adolescent girls express a strong desire to continue with their
education. Indeed, in one focus group, adolescent girls said they motivated themselves to
perform well in school to avoid the risk of early marriage, since it could motivate their parents
or relatives to support their further education.
Barriers for children with disabilities also prevail. In 2015, children with disabilities accounted
for only 1.7 per cent (approximately 21,300 pupils) of total primary school enrolment. The three
main barriers preventing children with disabilities from accessing education are long distances
to school (84 per cent), negative attitudes (52 per cent), and lack of teacher experience (42 per
cent). Teasing and bullying were mentioned in 24 per cent of cases.
Sources: Oxfam, ‘Early and Forced Marriage in Nyal, South Sudan’, Oxfam, Juba, 2019; UNICEF and
MoGEI Assessment of Early Grade Learners.
3.5.5 The BTL evaluation found that the ba- to have an impact, especially in schools with
sic education package for schools in IDP camps a high turnover of leaders and teachers. Also,
had been effective in providing the basic phys- by 2019, it was evident that certain recently
ical conditions for learning and teaching, al- built classrooms and WASH facilities had been
though water, secure storage and maintenance poorly maintained and had become unusa-
remained concerns. Different elements of the ble. Similarly, in many instances BTL-supplied
basic package had been delivered to all of the books and education materials were either in-
sampled schools in safer areas, but some of accessible to teachers or poorly managed and
these schools lacked the necessary infrastruc- maintained.
ture for WASH and school feeding. Learning
and teaching texts and materials were provided Teacher training, quality of education and
to schools. The supplies sometimes run out. In
learning outcomes
many cases the resources were not used.
3.5.7 While increasing access to education
3.5.6 The establishment and training of PTAs has been an essential focus for education in
and SMCs was successful according to the emergencies, and in this respect UNICEF has
BTL evaluation. However, the model of one-off extended its reach considerably in otherwise
delivery lacked adequate implementation and inaccessible areas, the quality and durability
maintenance follow-up and support. Evidence of results achieved through this approach is
from the field of school development research often questionable. Education quality depends
shows that short training interventions in on having a suitable classroom, the necessary
school management and classroom practice teaching and learning materials, and hav-
require regular on-site reinforcement in order ing a motivated teacher who has been fully
54 Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the South Sudan Humanitarian Crisis (2016-2019)
trained. These factors are reflected in learning tion, this compromise appears to be more cost
outcomes. effective than renovating every year. Provision
of separate WASH facilities for girls and boys
UNICEF has invested significantly in provision of has had a positive impact on girls’ enrolment
teaching and learning materials and education and retention as well as on the attendance of
supplies (see below) as well as in basic training female teachers (though these are still very
and the payment of incentives to teachers and few). However, poor maintenance had at times
teaching volunteers. Yet despite these efforts, reversed these gains. The ever-increasing costs
questions over quality of teachers and teach- of construction materials – together with trans-
ing remain. Many teachers only have limited portation and access problems – have seriously
education with limited literacy. Short-duration challenged TLS construction throughout the
training and limited follow-up and supervision evaluation period.
are not sufficient to produce the desired change
in teaching methodologies, though they may be Teaching and learning materials
all that is possible in an emergency context. For
example, in inaccessible areas, or where part- 3.5.9 UNICEF and its partners have distrib-
ners were not in place, UNICEF worked through uted educational kits over the evaluation period,
the IRRM mechanism as direct implementers, including dignity kits, school-in-a-box, teacher
but with only seven days in-situ to mobilize and recreational kits. These were unanimously
teachers and learners, provide training and es- considered vital for schools and students to
tablish PTAs. The 2017 baseline assessment of resume learning activities. The content and
literacy and numeracy and the 2018 follow-up50 quality were considered good, although lack
indicated that the foundations for reading, writ- of quantity remains a problem. Reaching re-
ing and understanding in English are extremely mote schools was also reportedly problematic,
weak among the pupils sampled. especially during the rainy season. The move
in 2016 to customize children’s and teachers’
Temporary learning spaces school-in-a-box kits to the South Sudan context
and to procure them locally helped ensure the
3.5.8 UNICEF contributed to the increase sustainability of this approach: building na-
in availability of physical learning structures: tional capacity to procure education supplies
2,027 TLS were constructed between 2016 and in a cost-effective manner, while ensuring the
2019, although this was fewer than planned. items are better customized based on local con-
While initially structures were too temporary sultations, demand and preferences. It also sig-
(e.g. using bamboo fences, tents, mud floors) nificantly reduced the procurement lead time,
and lasted less than a year given the climate from four or five months to one.51
and heavy use, thanks to the advocacy of na-
tional NGOs, semi-permanent materials have In 2017, in line with national language policy,
been used in TLS construction since 2017. Al- teachers’ guides and supplementary materi-
though stakeholders equally questioned the als were developed in five national languages
relevance of fully permanent school construc- (Bari, Dinka, Nuer, Zande and Toposa). This de-
tion given inflated costs and the risk of destruc- cision is controversial: to some, it discriminates
50 UNICEF and MoGEI Assessment of Early Grade Learners.
51 UNICEF assessment of the health and education supply chain in South Sudan, 2017.
CHAPTER 3: UNICEF AND THE EDUCATION RESPONSE 55
against many (as populations are mixed in any in mobilizing PTAs (besides attending PTA train-
location), while to others it is pragmatic given ings) limited the effectiveness of the strategy.
the low English proficiency of many teachers.
3.6.1 The emergency education programme
has largely delivered against the child protec-
Community mobilization and engagement
tion CCCs (summarized in Box 4). The main
3.5.10 The BTL evaluation findings showed challenges to fulfilling the CCCs have been the
that BTL interventions had been effective in limited scale of the programme in relation to
respect of social mobilization, especially re- needs and access constraints. Inter-sectoral co-
garding girls. Community engagement through ordination (both internally and externally with
PTAs and community mobilization campaigns partners) has been variable across the sector.
leads to increased enrolment and retention of As noted elsewhere, it worked well with CP
girls in PoCs and targeted communities. Train- (including child protection messaging, psycho-
ing and mobilization of communities through social support and mine risk education) and
communications for development (C4D) ap- WASH, although maintenance of facilities has
proaches also contributed to the safety and been a problem. Coordination with health and
protection of children on their way to education nutrition, by contrast, appears to have been
facilities, as well as in schools. The safe schools very weak, particularly with regard to school
strategy52 has worked to a limited extent. The feeding programmes.
low level of parental education and challenges
© UNICEF/UN070638/Hatcher-Moore
52 In which schools were declared “zone of peace” in 2017. Parents and communities were supposed to mobilize to maintain schools
as “safe learning spaces” protected from conflict and other risks.
56 Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the South Sudan Humanitarian Crisis (2016-2019)
UNICEF Core Commitments for Children in Humanitarian Action
Box 4
(Education)*
Commitment 1
Effective leadership is established for education cluster/inter-agency coordination (with co-lead
agency), with links to other cluster/sector coordination mechanisms on critical intersectoral
issues.
Commitment 2
Children, including preschool-age children, girls and other excluded children, access quality
education opportunities.
Commitment 3
Safe and secure learning environments that promote the protection and well-being of students
are established. Address all gaps without duplication.
Commitment 4
Psychosocial and health services for children and teachers are integrated in educational
response.
Commitment 5
Adolescents, young children and caregivers access appropriate life skills programmes and
information about the emergency, and those who have missed out on schooling, especially
adolescents, receive information on educational options.
*Summary of CCCs as revised in 2010. A newly-revised version of the CCCs has been produced
in 2020.
The extent of compliance with the CCCs, as ments, life skills). External constraints –
judged by the evaluation team, is shown in the primarily insecurity and lack of access –
table contained in Annex E. In summary, com- have been the main limiting factor here.
pliance was found to be as follows:
► Low compliance with respect to the inte-
► High compliance with respect to Com- gration of health and nutrition with the
mitment 1 (coordination leadership) and education programme (Commitment 4).
the integration of psychosocial support Notably, coordination challenges with
(PSS) in education (Commitment 4) the World Food Programme (WFP) in
establishing criteria for school feeding
► Moderate compliance with respect to
resulted in a small proportion of feeding
Commitments 2, 3 and 5 (access to
programmes mounted in TLCs.
quality education, safe learning environ-
CHAPTER 3: UNICEF AND THE EDUCATION RESPONSE 57
3.6 UNICEF AND THE infographics, assessment reports and updated
EDUCATION CLUSTER meeting minutes. In South Sudan as elsewhere,
UNICEF has had to reconcile its institutional
3.6.1 UNICEF contributed significantly to the dominance in the sector with the need to pro-
education cluster over the evaluation period, vide impartial cluster leadership as well as the
both at national and sub-national/state levels. need to form equitable partnerships. Its strong
Coordination of the national education clus- technical and policy capacities, together with
ter is shared with Save the Children, and this its dominant position in the education response
co-leadership is reported to have been working and as the primary channel of international
well.53 During the evaluation field visits, all the funding for education,55 have sometimes made
respondents from NGOs showed a high degree this difficult. This is as much about perceptions
of satisfaction with the national cluster perfor- as reality – see further section 6.2 on the part-
mance. A recent paper54 confirms this percep- nership dimensions of this.
tion, stating that the cluster “works as a positive
coordinating body between both the national
and sub-national levels, as well as between the
Ministry of General Education and Instruction
(MoGEI), donors, and implementing partners.”
At the sub-national/state level, the co-leadership
is shared with an NGO operating in that state. At
this level, it was observed during field visits that
UNICEF co-leadership was not as strong as at
the national level, leaving NGOs to take on more
of the coordination role. This is a challenge for
these organizations because they face funding
constraints and most of them are almost entirely
dependent on UNICEF programme cooperation
agreements (PCAs) to maintain their operations.
3.6.2 While this evaluation does not cover
the performance of the education cluster itself,
the cluster has reportedly performed its core
functions well. The information management
process within the cluster appears to have been
consistent and effective: the wider humanitar-
ian community has had access to a wide range © UNICEF/UN0215536/Rich
of relevant information, including maps and
53 Interviews with agencies and cluster staff in Juba.
54 Tolani, N. et al., ‘Rapid Education and Risk Analysis: An innovative approach to understanding how sustained violence impacts
learning systems in South Sudan’, NORRAG Special Issue 02, April 2019, NORRAG, Geneva.
55 UNICEF receives around 80% of international funding for education is South Sudan, much of which is used to finance programme
cooperation agreements (PCAs) with partners in the education cluster.
58 Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the South Sudan Humanitarian Crisis (2016-2019)
3.6.3 With regard to coordination and collab- back better’ strategy embedded in the emer-
oration with other sectors, this has seen most gency response strategy – with the involvement
progress, through inter-cluster coordination fa- of MoGEI, donors, partners, communities and
cilitated by the United Nations Office for the Co- children.
ordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) on
the issue of the teacher incentives and salaries. 3.7.2 As far as resilience within the emer-
It appears that the payments made to technical gency education programme is concerned,
staff in other sectors have been much higher UNICEF has worked on two different levels:
than payments made to teachers, and this has
i. Individual resilience of children. UNICEF
created tensions between sectors. This issue is
impact in this regard has largely been
not yet resolved and continues to create chal-
achieved though access to education, in-
lenges for UNICEF partners and programmes,
corporating child protection and PSS pro-
particularly in cases involving the closure of
gramming in education, distribution of
schools or classes.
learning material and dignity kits for girls.
Separate WASH facilities when properly
maintained also contributed to girls’ resil-
3.7 CAPACITY DEVELOPMENT,
ience. Inclusion of the most vulnerable, as
SUSTAINABILITY, RESILIENCE for example children with disabilities and
AND FUTURE PROSPECTS children in pastoralist communities, over-
age students and girls facing early and
3.7.1 The education programme was planned
forced marriage was poorly addressed.
to include elements of resilience at individual,
community and systems levels. Although the ii. Resilience-related teacher training. This in-
latter falls out of the scope of this evaluation, volved training teachers on child-friendly
the link between the system-strengthening teaching methods, PSS, child protection
and emergency education component appears and peacebuilding, thereby contributing to
weaker than it might.56 While this is largely ex- the professionalization of teachers. How-
plained by the context, including weak MoGEI ever, the short duration of training and
capacity and limited education financing, there limited follow-up and supervision have
is scope for building a model for education sec- not been sufficient to produce the desired
tor development as recommended by the BTL change in teaching approaches. Crucially,
evaluation.57 The BTL evaluation management in the absence of a sustainable teacher sal-
response plan58 included a clear timeline and ary scheme and public education financ-
actions to this end. While recognizing the impact ing, it will be difficult to retain teachers (es-
of the COVID-19 pandemic on the education sec- pecially females) in the education system.
tor, the evaluators believe that the pandemic The related investment in skills training
may offer an opportunity to develop a ‘build risks being lost.
56 ‘UNICEF Contribution to Education in Humanitarian Situations.
57 Mott MacDonald, Evaluation of the Back to Learning Initiative.
58 UNICEF BTL Evaluation Management Response Plan, June 2019.
CHAPTER 3: UNICEF AND THE EDUCATION RESPONSE 59
3.7.3 As noted above, creation of SMCs and 3.7.4 Without an active education partner or
PTAs has contributed both to strengthening the government authority, education activities are
school system and to mobilizing communities, not sustainable. Under the IRRM model of op-
leading to increased enrolment and retention eration, NGO partners were encouraged to (re-)
of girls in PoCs and targeted communities. But establish a presence in many locations. Where
despite these positive achievements, sustained re-establishing a permanent presence was not
community mobilization was constrained by the possible, UNICEF and partners worked to mo-
low level of parental education and weak com- bilize and train local volunteers, so that learning
munity participation in education planning. This spaces could be handed over to be managed
remains an enduring challenge for access to by the communities themselves. However, sus-
quality education. tained access to education remained essentially
dependent on continued provision of external
UNICEF also invested in building the capacity of resources.59 More recently, increased access to
its national NGO and community-based organ- formerly inaccessible areas has lessened the
ization (CBO) partners, partly in response the reliance on the IRRM modality, and this should
localization agenda. However, more needs to make consistent follow-up visits and re-supply
be done to strengthen the national NGOs and of schools more feasible.
CBOs (including faith-based organisations) to
deliver quality education programming, both in
terms of building their technical capacity and in
helping them address contextual challenges.
© UNICEF/UN056601/Knowles-Coursin
59 Interviews with UNICEF section staff, Juba.
60 Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the South Sudan Humanitarian Crisis (2016-2019)
4
UNICEF AND THE CHILD
PROTECTION RESPONSE
© UNICEF/UNI176409/Holt
4.1 CHILD PROTECTION CONTEXT the already limited support services.63 The full
AND NEEDS ANALYSIS60 magnitude of the problem is unclear. How-
ever, studies indicate that some 65 per cent of
women and girls in South Sudan have experi-
4.1.1 Despite the intermittent peace process, enced physical and/or sexual violence in their
the safety and security of children in South lifetime, and some 51 per cent have suffered
Sudan consistently deteriorated between the intimate partner violence. Some 33 per cent
start of the civil war in 2013 and the end of 2019. of women have experienced sexual violence
Mass violations of child rights continued in the from a non-partner, primarily during attacks
country throughout the evaluation period, es- or raids. The majority of girls and women who
pecially in the in the Greater Upper Nile region, have experienced sexual violence were under
Greater Equatoria and Wau. Although precise the age of 18 when they first experienced such
data are lacking, between December 2013 and violence.64
April 2018, the conflict is estimated to have
caused 382,000 excess deaths, approximately 4.1.3 Since 2013, over 12,700 violations
half from violence.61 The pattern of violence against children have been verified by the
has included widespread sexual violence, tar- country task force on monitoring and report-
geted killings and the destruction of livestock ing, including over 6,200 cases of children who
and property. Since 2014, some 2,700 incidents were associated with armed actors. During the
of grave violations against children have been same period, over 3,300 of the recruited chil-
verified by the United Nations, affecting over dren were released and handed over to UNICEF
81,000 children. The United Nations’ Monitor- for social and economic reintegration. While
ing and Reporting Mechanism (MRM) has re- the actual number of children still associated
ported more than 3,677 incidents of grave vio- with armed actors is unknown, these figures
lations between 201 and the end of 2019.62 highlight the urgent need for advocacy and
support by United Nations agencies and oth-
4.1.2 Women and girls are disproportion- ers to protect children from further harm, and
ately affected by violence and rights abuse, specifically to put in place measures to protect
for reasons related to limited decision-making children in conflict-affected areas from recruit-
power, mobility restrictions, and lack of ac- ment and abuse.
cess to and control over resources. Incidents
of gender-based violence, including sexual 4.1.4 The problem of unaccompanied, sepa-
violence, are under-reported by survivors due rated or missing children (UASC) is on an even
to a number of factors, and there are cultural greater scale. More than 26,000 have been
norms that can be an impediment to address- registered in South Sudan since December
ing gender-based violence, including accessing 2013, more than 8,000 of whom required fam-
60 Besides UNICEF annual reporting, the main sources for this section are the United Nations Humanitarian Needs Overview (HNO)
for 2018 and 2019 and the UNICEF Update on the Situation of Children and Women in South Sudan, August 2017.
61 UNICEF COAR, 2018.
62 United Nations Children’s Fund, ‘The Monitoring and Reporting Mechanism on Grave Violations Against Children’, briefing note,
UNICEF South Sudan, Juba, 2019.
63 Interviews with UNICEF CP section staff, Juba.
64 United Nations Children’s Fund, ‘Gender-based Violence’, briefing note, UNICEF South Sudan, Juba, 2019.
62 Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the South Sudan Humanitarian Crisis (2016-2019)
ily tracing and reunification services. Much of 4.1.6 Landmines and explosive remnants of
this caseload continues to be concentrated in war are killing and injuring civilians, threaten-
Unity, Jonglei and Upper Nile States. Access to ing communities and limiting people’s mobil-
affected children in many areas remains ham- ity. As well as those leftover from decades of
pered by security concerns, and funding gaps conflict, both sides in the recent conflict have
mean that support is mainly being provided to also been re-mining. The exact magnitude of
unaccompanied children and the most vulner- the problem is unknown. As of August 2018, re-
able separated children.65 cords existed of 569 known contaminated areas
across 55 counties in South Sudan, nearly half
4.1.5 The hardships and violence associated of which in are located in Juba, Yei, Magwi, To-
with the conflict have had pervasive effects on rit and Terekeka counties. The contamination in
the mental health and psychosocial well-being South Sudan represents over 42 million square
of children, their families and communities. metres and affects roads, arable land, schools,
UNICEF estimates that since 2013 over a million clinics and water points, rendering them un-
children have been affected by psychosocial safe for use.66
distress. Failure to meet critical safety and ba-
sic needs also overstretches caregivers’ coping 4.1.7 The situation for vulnerable children
skills, ultimately affecting the capacity of adults in South Sudan is compounded by the weak
(parents, community members and teachers) state of national and local social services. Gov-
to protect and take care of their children. Many ernment expenditure on the social sectors has
South Sudanese children and adolescents been minimal, and even the modest allocation
are displaced and experiencing profound psy- has been undermined by the reduction in gov-
chological distress, including nightmares and ernment oil revenues and the de-prioritization
suicidal thoughts (seen in girls and boys aged of funding to the social sectors, leaving the sal-
12–17 years), as well as incidents of abuse, aries of critical workers unpaid. The very lim-
neglect, exploitation, child/forced marriage, ited state capacity means that international aid
teenage pregnancy, and recruitment. Parents agencies and civil society deliver most social
and temporary caregivers in PoCs have had services countrywide, both in emergency and
difficulty caring for children appropriately, and non-emergency situations. The social service
girls and boys are struggling to cope due to and case management system in South Sudan
feelings of hopelessness and limited freedom is almost entirely driven by the humanitarian
of movement. A wide range of mental health sector.
problems exists, including problems caused
by conflict-related violence, displacement and UNICEF needs analysis and data quality
multiple losses. Meanwhile, the provision of
mental healthcare services to promote and 4.1.8 Part 1 of the evaluation report stated
protect psychosocial wellbeing and prevent that “accessing reliable contextual data about
and treat mental disorders is well below ac- needs is a problem across the UNICEF pro-
cepted international standards. gramme in South Sudan. An underlying weak-
ness of data in South Sudan is the lack of a recent
65 United Nations Children’s Fund, ‘Country Office Annual Report, South Sudan’, UNICEF, Juba, 2019.
66 Humanitarian Needs Overview 2019.
CHAPTER 4: UNICEF AND THE CHILD PROTECTION IN EMERGENCIES RESPONSE 63
census and national survey data and the poor The UNICEF strategy and approach has also
birth certification system. The last population been informed by various thematic situation
census was undertaken in 2008 and the most re- analyses and evaluations carried out during
cent household and health survey took place in the evaluation period. For gender-based vio-
2010. Without these key denominators, much of lence in particular, the multi-country real-time
the data is unreliable, with the exception of some evaluation of UNICEF gender-based violence
trends analysis.” emergency programmes issued in Septem-
ber 2016 provided the foundation for the gen-
This remained true through 2019 to the present. der-based violence strategy and programmatic
In addition to this overall challenge, population approach,69 including a management response
movements, limited accessibility, variegated plan.70 For CAAFAG, the programme evaluation
social norms and intercommunal dynamics, in 201871 made a number of recommendations
makes it difficult to make accurate estimates for course correction of the programme that are
of child protection and gender-based violence gradually being implemented, although pro-
vulnerabilities across the country. gress has been slow both because of limited
funding in 2019/2020 and because of COVID
4.1.9 Despite the challenge of obtaining re- travel restrictions.
liable CP data, the evaluation finds that the
CP programme has been grounded in a solid 4.1.11 The collective humanitarian needs
understanding of the overall child protection overview process and information sharing
challenges in South Sudan. The Child Protec- within the clusters (protection cluster, child pro-
tion Strategy, 2016-2018 and 2019-2021 is based tection sub-cluster and gender-based violence
on analyses of the situation of women and chil- sub-cluster) have also informed the UNICEF
dren carried out in 2015 and updated in 2017. strategy and approach, including its approach
A baseline assessment of the quality of child with partners. However, information-sharing
protection services67 commissioned by UNICEF within the child protection sub-cluster co-led
in 2015 contributed to shaping the child protec- by UNICEF was mentioned by child protection
tion services, although recommendations from actors as a concern,72 and information on the
this process were not always followed up in a CP website is significantly out of date.
timely way.68
67 Kokonya, Achieng and Helen Johnson, ‘Promising Quality: An independent baseline assessment of child protection services in
South Sudan, UNICEF, Juba, 2015.
68 An example of is the development of a comprehensive case management system that was finally developed only in 2019.
69 United Nations Children’s Fund, ‘Multi-Country Real-Time Evaluation of UNICEF Gender-Based Violence in Emergencies
Programmes: South Sudan Country Report’, Management Response Plan, UNICEF, New York, 2017.
70 UNICEF GBVIE Evaluation Management Response.
71 UNICEF Evaluation of Community-based Reintegration Programme for CAAFAG in Boma State.
72 KII in Juba and survey responses. Partners expressed the concern that while UNICEF puts a lot of emphasis on gathering
programme data on a monthly basis, that information does not appear to inform shared analysis. Partners reported that while they
share their assessments with UNICEF and the CP sub-cluster, these are not circulated nor made available through the CP sub-cluster
website (that website appears not to be used to share information).
64 Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the South Sudan Humanitarian Crisis (2016-2019)
In 2017, UNICEF carried out a partner capacity and non-emergency settings. It has been fo-
assessment in CP, which contributed to shap- cused on delivering critical child protection
ing the type of technical support and capacity services, promoting positive behaviours and
development effort needed by partners. Feed- strengthening policies and systems to build a
back from the partner survey conducted for protective environment for children. Priority is-
this evaluation suggests that UNICEF has been sues have included responses to child rights vi-
responsive to needs on this agenda. olations, including gender-based violence and
child marriage; birth registration and justice for
The UNICEF child protection programme children; family tracing and reunification; and
safe release, care and reintegration of children
4.1.12 Figure 3 above shows the main com- associated with armed groups, alongside ef-
ponents the UNICEF child protection pro- forts to prevent recruitment. Children formerly
gramme in South Sudan. The programme has associated with armed groups and other at-risk
aimed to help reduce the number of children young people are provided with education and
and young people exposed to, or at risk of, vi- life-skills and are trained as community agents
olence, exploitation and abuse in emergency of change. All of this has been done in partner-
Figure 3 Overview of the UNICEF child protection response (2016 to 2019)
Strengthening the Child Protection Child Protection in Emergency
Systems (System-building) (Service delivery/enabling service
delivery)
Supporting Ministry of Gender, Child and
Social Welfare, the Ministry of Health, 1. Comprehensive case management
Ministry of Justice and other ministries
2. Unaccompanied and separated
concerned to:
children: Family Tracing and
1. Develop child protection laws and Reunification (FTR)
regulatory frameworks
3. GBV risk mitigation, prevention and
2. Strengthen delivery systems to improve response
children’s access to justice
4. Mental health and psychosocial
3. Strengthen delivery systems to improve support (PSS) — including EVD
children’s birth registration services. preparedness
5. CAAFAG Release & Reintegration
6. Mine risk education (MRE)
7. Monitoring & reporting mechanism
(MRM)
Support to national and state-level coordination mechanisms (Child Protection Sub-Cluster).
CHAPTER 4: UNICEF AND THE CHILD PROTECTION IN EMERGENCIES RESPONSE 65
ship with other actors, including government, portance of the continued effort to build an en-
other United Nations agencies, national and abling environment, especially when it comes
international NGOs and community groups. to birth registration services.
4.1.13 Under the programme, survivors of In addition to the overarching CP strategy, sep-
gender-based violence are provided with psy- arate strategies were developed for specific
chosocial support and specialised case man- thematic areas: comprehensive case manage-
agement services. The risk of gender-based vio- ment, unaccompanied and separated children,
lence is mitigated by addressing harmful social gender-based violence, children associated
norms, ensuring safe access to services such with armed forces and groups and mine risk
as women- and girls-friendly spaces (WGFS) education. Those strategies are important to
and ensuring measures are in place to ad- explaining programmatic approaches and the
dress the risks identified. Mine risk education links to implementation modalities.
(MRE) has been supported through community
capacity development and the school curricu- 4.2.2 The 2016 and 2018 ToCs both have a
lum. UNICEF continued to monitor and report clear logic in the results chain. Specifically, the
on grave violations of child rights, pursuing logic linking the child protection outcomes and
cross-border collaboration and coordination. outputs (and indicators) in the two programme
cycles is a strong one. It is important to note
that in the 2016-2018 programme cycle, UNICEF
technical support and capacity development
4.2 UNICEF CPIE STRATEGY:
constituted a stand-alone output, reflecting
CLARITY, COHERENCE, LOGIC
the anticipated limited technical capacities of
4.2.1 The child protection programme is UNICEF implementing partners and of the wider
based on a clear overall strategy, summarized child protection systems in South Sudan.74, 75 In
in Table 3 below.73 Theories of change were de- the subsequent programme (2019-2021) this
veloped in 2016 and in 2018. The overall strat- output was incorporated into Output 2.
egy is aligned with that of the CP sub-cluster
and consequently with the broader protection This clearly reflects the added value UNICEF
cluster strategy and the overarching protec- provides through its technical expertise. How-
tion strategy of the humanitarian country ever, as the CP section described to the evalu-
team (HCT). The strategy includes a hybrid ators, capacity development depends on more
humanitarian and development approach with than providing tools and training: it requires
a system strengthening component and an coaching and mentoring of NGO staff who of-
emergency child protection service delivery ten start work with very limited experience in
component. Although this evaluation focuses this field. While it has fulfilled this role to some
on the latter, the evaluation recognizes the im- degree, UNICEF acknowledges that it has not
73 UNICEF Child Protection strategy notes, 2016-2018; CPD, 2019-2021.
74 UNICEF partners in child protection consisted mainly (70%) of national and local NGOs, many of which started their partnership
with UNICEF as CBOs.
75 Kokonya and Johnson, Promising Quality. As noted in the report, “child protection is a people-intensive process and necessitates
an iterative process of recruiting, training and developing project staff, equipping them with the necessary skills to deliver high
quality services”.
66 Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the South Sudan Humanitarian Crisis (2016-2019)
Table 3 UNICEF child protection results structure (2016-2018 vs 2019-2021 CPDs)
2016-2018 Country Programme Document 2019-2021 Country Programme Document
Outcome: South Sudanese children and Outcome: By 2021, 2.4 million South Sudanese
adolescents at risk of or exposed to violence, children and young people at risk of violence,
exploitation and abuse have their risk reduced, exploitation and abuse, in emergency and non-
mitigated and where possible, their safety, emergency settings, use integrated basic social
dignity and health restored by 2018. services
Output 1: System-building: Ministry of Gender, Output 1: System Building: Ministry of Gender,
Child and Social Welfare, the Ministry of Health Child and Social Welfare, the Ministry of Health
and selected state ministries have the laws and and the selected state ministries have laws,
regulatory frameworks and service delivery regulatory frameworks and service delivery
systems in place to adequately improve children’s systems in place to adequately improve children’s
access to justice and birth registration services access to justice and birth registration services.
Output 2: Emergency CP service delivery: Output 2: Child protection services in
Children at risk of, or exposed to violence, emergencies: Key actors are able to provide
exploitation and abuse are increasingly able improved core child protection and GBV services
to access and benefit from higher quality core for children at risk of or exposed to violence,
child protection and gender-based violence in exploitation and abuse in emergency and non-
emergency and non-emergency settings by 2018 emergency settings.
Output 3: CP programme and technical support:
CP programme results effectively implemented
and technical support provided at national and
state levels by CP section.
been able to do enough in this regard, lacking technical and capacity development support
both the (social-work experienced) staffing that UNICEF provides to partners, cluster/AoR
capacity and the funds necessary to fulfil this members and state actors. As a result, techni-
important role. cal support and capacity development achieve-
ments are not systematically reported in coun-
Given the centrality of capacity development try office annual reports (COARs).77 UNICEF
to the UNICEF strategy, the evaluation found needs to develop indicators that would allow
the indicators for this area of work to be inad- them to better gauge progress in this area, in-
equate.76 They do not reflect the multi-faceted cluding both output and outcomes indicators.
76 The only indicator for this output in the result monitoring framework is “% programmatic visits conducted against plan”.
77 Annual reports give examples of achievements in different technical areas of work, but this is not sufficient to build the full picture
of UNICEF efforts.
CHAPTER 4: UNICEF AND THE CHILD PROTECTION IN EMERGENCIES RESPONSE 67
4.2.2 UNICEF lacks a child protection main- 4.3 DESIGNING THE RESPONSE:
streaming78 strategy across its sections and COVERAGE, FOCUS AND
sectors of intervention. This has led to an ad
TARGET-SETTING
hoc approach to child protection mainstream-
ing which has not always been seen as a pri-
ority in the implementation of the programme. Coverage and scope
An exception to this is found in the manage-
ment response to the gender-based violence 4.3.1 UNICEF emergency programming on
evaluation, which provided a clear strategic child protection has focused on Unity, Upper
framework for mainstreaming gender-based Nile, Jonglei, Western and Northern Bahr el
violence concerns in other sectors – including Ghazal, and Western, Central and Eastern Equa-
appointing gender-based violence focal points toria. This is in line with the evolving protection
within the UNICEF sections and a dedicated needs assessed in the HNOs83 and with priori-
gender-based violence specialist to main- ties set within the protection cluster and child
stream gender-based violence issues across protection sub-cluster across the evaluation
the sectors. period.84 The maps below show that in 2018,
UNICEF and its partners were present in all of
Related to this, integration of child protec- the counties with highest level of protection
tion79 in UNICEF sections and sectors is not needs, as well as most of the next tier, although
fully articulated, with the exception of C4D,80 not always with a high level of presence or con-
education and lately nutrition. Elements of sistent access.
integration are occasionally described in the
thematic area strategies, as for example in the
ToC in the CAAFAG strategy,81 MRE strategy
and the in-school PSS strategy. A gender-based
violence-WASH, health and nutrition integra-
tion strategy was also developed and proved
to be a success.82 Whenever a clear integration
strategy exists, UNICEF appears better placed
to demonstrate that wider protection outcomes
could be achieved through the synergies be-
tween various sectors. Examples of this are the
impact at community level of CAAFAG reinte-
gration programmes and that of the WASH and
© UNICEF/UN043944/Holt
gender-based violence integrated programme.
78 Child protection mainstreaming is the process of ensuring that chid protection considerations inform all aspects of humanitarian
action, including promoting meaningful access, safety and dignity in compliance with the ‘do no harm’ principle.
79 For the purpose of this report, ‘integration’ refers to the intentional combination of child protection and GBV services within other
sectors; for example, incorporation of MRE as a subject in the education curriculum.
80 An integration strategy was developed in 2017 (document not available) and in 2018 as part of the 2019-2021 workplan
81 Integrated strategy with WASH, education, livelihoods and social development.
82 UNICEF Multi-country RTE of GBViE, South Sudan.
83 South Sudan Humanitarian Needs Overview 2015, 2016, 2017, 2018.
84 South Sudan Humanitarian Response Plan 2016, 2017, 2018, 2019.
68 Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the South Sudan Humanitarian Crisis (2016-2019)
Figure 4 UNICEF focus areas for CP emergency programming
- +
Source: Active Partnership in South Sudan Source: HNO 2016 Protection
(3 September 2018)
Local factors – including the ability to gain se- Target-setting strategy
cure access85 and the presence and capacity of
implementing partners – remain the key driv- 4.3.3 The rationale for UNICEF target-set-
ers for deciding locations and scale of the pro- ting has not been fully clear. In particular, the
gramming.86 rationale for reducing the target in 2017 in the
face of increasing protection needs (and ap-
4.3.2 Although geographical coverage has parent overachievement against target in the
broadly mirrored the areas of most acute need, preceding years) was not clear to the evalua-
the scale of the programme has been insuffi- tors; nor was the rationale for UNICEF target-
cient to cover the large child protection needs. ing in relation to the child protection sub-clus-
It should be noted, however, that this is true ter. In particular, the UNICEF proportion of the
for the entire protection response: in 2018, for target within the cluster fell significantly in
example, the overall United Nations-coordi- 2019 (see Figure 4).
nated protection response reached only 34 per
cent of the people defined as being in need in
2018.87 In 2019, lack of funding was also a major
factor limiting the scope of the programme: the
funding gap in that year was very large (63 per
cent) and lack of funding continues to be a ma-
jor constraint.
85 United Nations Children’s Fund, ‘South Sudan Country Office Annual Report, 2018’, UNICEF, Juba, 2019: “Of the 7 million people in
need of assistance, approximately 1.5 million (including 920,000 children) live in counties with high access constraints”.
86 KII with UNICEF staff, Juba.
87 HRP 2019. On average, the overall protection response targeted only around 50% of defined needs in the period 2017-2019.
CHAPTER 4: UNICEF AND THE CHILD PROTECTION IN EMERGENCIES RESPONSE 69
Figure 5 UNICEF vs CP sub-cluster targeting 2016-2019
800.000
700.000
600.000
500.000
400.000
300.000
200.000
100.000
0
2016* 2017** 2018** 2019**
UNICEF Target Cluster Target
* # of children and adolescents reached with critical child protection services
** # of children reached with PSS
4.3.3 The rationale for targeting through but it remains unclear which part of the popula-
different operational modalities (static, out- tion reached through IRRM/RRM mechanisms
reach, mobile and IRRM/RRM) is also unclear are considered to have been reached by critical
to the evaluation team. Figure 5 below shows CP and gender-based violence services. This
the numbers of people reached through IRRM appears to be a weakness in the way in which
missions over the years 2016 to 2019.88 It seems UNICEF designs and ultimately evaluates the
that not all people reached in this way have impact of its CPiE interventions.
been included in the UNICEF results on CPiE,
Figure 5 People reached through RRM/IRRM missions
# of IRRM/ RRM people reached # of children # women and girls
missions below 15* from 15 to 54**
2016 19 225,000 99,000 56,250
2017 51 781,128 343,696 195,282
2018 50 544,969 239,786 136,242
2019 32 318,868 - -
88 UNICEF and WFP have substantially reduced the use of the IRRM modality over the course of 2019 and 2020 as access to
previously conflict-affected populations has improved and the ability to preposition food stocks has grown. The mechanism
continues to be used in some cases (e.g. to reach those affected by flooding) and remains available for more extensive use should
the need arise (KII Juba).
70 Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the South Sudan Humanitarian Crisis (2016-2019)
4.3.4 A wide consultative process for the a pre-determined strategy for the coming year.
2019-2021 CPD was carried out with partners There was also a widespread perception that
in different locations on the different thematic the UNICEF strategy was based on funding,
areas of the child protection response.89 How- not necessarily on needs. UNICEF itself recog-
ever, several partners noted in interviews for nises the impact of the lack of funding on its
this evaluation that the strategy development programming, a factor that goes some way to
process was ‘top-down’ and that there was lim- explaining the major results shortfall in 2019
ited space to influence what was perceived as (see Table 4).90
Table 4 UNICEF achievement against key CPiE indicators 2016-2019
Child Protection Year UNICEF Target UNICEF Results UNICEF %
Indicators Achieved
# of children 2016 600,000 693,067 116
and adolescents
reached with 2017 647,000 896,720 139
critical CP
2018 510,000 470,519 92
services (as per
the RAM)
2019 587,000 667,515 114
# of children 2016 363,000 311,462 86
reached with
PSS (as per HAC 2017 327,000 266,711 82
and RAM)
2018 250,000 257,482 103
2019 275,000 244,261 89
# of people 2016 120,000 124,023 103
receiving GBV
prevention/ 2017 160,000 197,947 124
response
2018 140,000 190,992 136
services
2019 146,000 90,415 62
Source: HAC & RAM
89 United Nations Children’s Fund, ‘Child Protection Annual Review and Multi-Year Planning For 2019-2021’, meeting minutes, UNICEF,
Juba, 8 October 2018.
90 “Lack of long-term funding commitments remains a challenge in ensuring the sustainability and continuity of programmes”
UNICEF “2018 RAM ‘Output’ Reports” 2018
CHAPTER 4: UNICEF AND THE CHILD PROTECTION IN EMERGENCIES RESPONSE 71
4.4 IMPLEMENTING THE STRATEGY GBV 62 per cent; MRE 91 per cent; CAAFAG 8
per cent).92 Targets and results disaggregated
Delivery against targets by modalities of intervention (static, outreach,
mobile and IRRM) were not available. This
4.4.1 Analysis of the UNICEF results against makes it impossible to evaluate the effective-
the targets shown in Table 4raises significant ness of the different operation modalities.
questions. The drop between 2016 and 2017 can
be explained in terms of the change in indica- 4.4.2 Evidently there is a basic inconsistency
tor used. However, the apparent overachieve- in the way in which results data have been com-
ment against the overarching ‘critical services’ piled by UNICEF for child protection. Figure 6
indicator is hard to explain,91 especially in shows an apparent overachievement against
2016 and 2019 when the CP programme was target across the evaluation period against
underfunded by 61 per cent and 63 per cent, the ‘critical services’ indicator (according to
respectively. In particular, in 2019, the 114 per UNICEF RAM data). This seems to be at odds
cent of achievement does not seem to correlate with the known constraints relating to funding
with the level of achievements in the thematic and access, and is contradicted by the results
components (PSS 89 per cent; UASC 8 per cent; for individual programme components.93
Figure 6 # of child and adolescents reached with critical child protection services
1.000.000 Target
900.000
Results
800.000
700.000
600.000
500.000
400.000
300.000
200.000
100.000
0
2016 2017 2018 2019
91 For PSS and MRE, this overachievement can be explained by their integration with Education programming
92 See Annex B for the complete set of indicators
93 Correspondence with the SSCO suggests that this is due to ‘double counting’ of services provided.
72 Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the South Sudan Humanitarian Crisis (2016-2019)
4.4.3 The funding gap for child protection ment of the South Sudan Strategic National
was particularly large in 2019, which goes some Action Plan to End Child Marriage (SNAP),
way to explaining the results deficits. Funding which are three fundamental pillars to creating
gaps were also recorded in previous years, a protective environment against gender-based
but this picture is complicated by the fact that violence. In 2020, unfortunately, due to the
from 2016-2018, major underspends meant that COVID-19 pandemic and a continued shortage
around 40 per cent of the programme funds of funding, it is to be expected that some of the
were carried over to subsequent years.94 This gains achieved so far will set back. In particular,
raises major questions about the country of- the combined effect of economic hardship and
fice’s ability to programme with the CP funds closure of schools may have increased child
it had available. Although the practical con- protection risks, including early marriage, ex-
straints on programming were significant in ploitation and abuse.
this period, the evaluators were not able to get
a clear explanation of the reasons behind this. 4.4.3 Child protection services were most
effective in PoCs and in situations in which
Effectiveness against stated objectives the engagement with communities, families
and children could be more systematic, al-
4.4.2 Overall, CP programming appears to lowing a balanced programme of prevention
have been reasonably effective – in the sense and response services for child protection and
of achieving its stated objectives – within the gender-based violence. Prevention services
major constraints under which UNICEF and included child-friendly spaces (CFS), WGFS,
partners operated. Particularly, UNICEF has the gender-based violence community care
succeeded in balancing support to child protec- programme, synergies with C4D (e.g. includ-
tion system building, service delivery, capac- ing gender-based violence messaging in the
ity development of partners and changing of C4D community mobilization programme),
social norms (especially on gender-based vio- mainstreaming of CP in education and gen-
lence). This effort in system and capacity-build- der-based violence risk mitigation efforts. Re-
ing has not yet fully borne fruit, although there sponse services included case management,
are some encouraging achievements to date, family tracing and reunification (FTR) services,
notably on gender-based violence. Indeed, the gender-based violence response services (in-
gender-based violence programme in South cluding victim assistance for victims of sexual
Sudan is considered a model for good practice exploitation and abuse), PSS, CAAFAG reinte-
globally and is used as example in the UNICEF gration services, and MRE.
global gender-based violence in emergencies
helpdesk.95 Here positive achievements on 4.4.4 Thematic areas show different degrees
social norms change through the community of effectiveness.96 Family tracing and reunifica-
care programme, capacity development of civil tion of UASC proved to be highly effective at
society (e.g. Voice of Peace) and the develop- the beginning of the programme, especially in
94 Funds carried forward in 2017 and 2018 were around $10m annually
95 Multi-country Real-Time Evaluation of UNICEF GBV in Emergency Programme – 2017; UNICEF GBV Evaluation Management
Response 2018; Ministry of Gender, Child and Social Welfare; End Child Marriage In South Sudan: Strategic National Action Plan
(Snap) 2017-2030; UNICEF GBViE HELPDESK Systems Strengthening and GBViE Programming 2018
96 Annex F shows the level of effectiveness by thematic area in terms of outputs delivered.
CHAPTER 4: UNICEF AND THE CHILD PROTECTION IN EMERGENCIES RESPONSE 73
reaching the most vulnerable children. Simi- for this evaluation mentioned capacity devel-
larly, CAAFAG reintegration achieved impor- opment and technical assistance as the most
tant results, although few girls were reached by valued component of their partnership with
the services and more needs to be done on in- UNICEF. Partners also very much appreciated
tegrating mental health support. The effective- the flexibility and support of UNICEF child pro-
ness of the outstanding gender-based violence tection staff at field level in coaching on techni-
programme has been constrained by the lim- cal issues and assisting with the implementa-
ited coverage, again related to lack of funding. tion of the programming.99
Delays in setting up a comprehensive case The reduction of partnerships in 2019, due to
management system made this component lack of funding, led to important loss of tech-
fully implemented in 2019 only. The psycho- nical expertise and strategic partnerships (e.g.
social support component of the programme in gender-based violence) and limited UNICEF
involves a number of different elements in- staff capacity to support implementation. Al-
cluding awareness-raising, establishment of though technical support and capacity devel-
community-based child protection committees opment are a central component of UNICEF CP
and help desks in schools. The implementation programming, efforts in this area are poorly
of PSS activities has initially suffered from the reported and systematized.
very weak technical capacities of partner staff.
This resulted in challenges to going beyond 4.4.6 UNICEF has played a leading role in
recreational activities and implementing the developing tools and guidance for specific
higher-level mental health interventions nec- thematic areas,100 and in coaching and training
essary to support victims of gender-based vio- partners and CP and gender-based violence
lence or CAAFAG children. sub-cluster members. Such efforts are essen-
tial to ensuring the quality of partner inter-
Technical support and capacity ventions. Notable in this regard has been the
intensive effort of training and guidance on
development
gender-based violence. Unfortunately, similar
4.4.5 UNICEF technical support and capac- efforts in other thematic areas are not tracked
ity development interventions through train- (e.g. FTR, MRE, PSS, prevention of sexual ex-
ing and coaching are highly appreciated by ploitation and abuse and CP basics). The evalu-
government,98 especially at state level, and ators believe that this gap in programme moni-
by implementing partners, especially at field toring does not allow UNICEF to capture its key
level. Some 80 per cent of the national NGOs added value in the response.
responding to the partner survey conducted
98 Field visit to Pibor and KII.
99 KII in Bentiu, Pibor and Yambio.
100 Annex G provides an overview of the thematic guidance and standard methodological approaches developed in the course of the
response. These are also critical elements of quality.
74 Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the South Sudan Humanitarian Crisis (2016-2019)
Programme quality and the CCCs prevention and response services and FTR
demonstrated high levels of quality and com-
4.4.7 The CP programme has largely deliv- pliance with the CCCs and minimum standards
ered against the CP CCCs. All thematic areas for CP in humanitarian action from the initial
show progress toward improving the quality stages of the response. Comprehensive case
of services through provision of thematic guid- management and psychosocial support com-
ance and standard methodological approaches, ponents were initially delayed but were almost
even if some areas are more advanced than fully in place in 2019.
others. For example, gender-based violence
UNICEF Core Commitments for Children in Humanitarian Action
Box 5
(Child Protection)*
Commitment 1
Effective leadership is established for both the child protection and gender-based violence
cluster areas of responsibility, with links to other cluster/sector coordination mechanisms
on critical inter-sectoral issues. Support is provided for the establishment of a MHPSS
coordination mechanism.
Commitment 2
Monitoring and reporting of grave violations and other serious protection concerns regarding
children and women are undertaken and systematically trigger response (including advocacy).
Commitment 3
Key child protection mechanisms are strengthened in emergency-affected areas.
Commitment 4
Separation of children from families is prevented and addressed, and family-based care is
promoted.
Commitment 5
Violence, exploitation and abuse of children and women, including GBV, are prevented and
addressed.
Commitment 6
Psychosocial support is provided to children and their caregivers.
Commitment 7
Child recruitment and use, as well as illegal and arbitrary detention, are addressed and
prevented for conflict-affected children.
Commitment 8
The use of landmines and other indiscriminate or illicit weapons by state and non-state actors
is prevented, and their impact is addressed.
* CCCs as revised in 2010.
CHAPTER 4: UNICEF AND THE CHILD PROTECTION IN EMERGENCIES RESPONSE 75
Annex E contains full findings on the compli- CFS and the CAAFAG reintegration programme,
ance of the Child Protection programme with and women and girls’ participation in WGFS101
the CCCs. These can be summarized as follows: has been much more limited. Good practices
were found in Wau, Malakal and Leer, where
international implementing partners integrated
► High compliance with respect to Com-
community feedback mechanisms through
mitments 4, 5 and 7 (separated children,
protection desks, weekly feedback forums and
violence against children/ gender-based
suggestion boxes. Community-based com-
violence, child recruitment), although
plaint mechanisms (CBCMs) for the prevention
more recent cuts to the programme re-
of sexual exploitation and abuse in Malakal and
duce the extent of compliance
PoC sites in Juba provided channels for report-
► Medium compliance with respect to ing abuses.
Commitments 1, 3, 6 and 8 (coordination
leadership, child protection mechanisms,
Mainstreaming of child protection and
PSS, landmines)
gender-based violence
Lack of time and available evidence meant 4.4.9 Mainstreaming of CP in the education
that the evaluation was not able fully to gauge sector is advanced in a context in which at-
compliance with Commitment 2 (MRM). But tacks on schools, students, teachers and other
it notes that UNICEF makes a number of con- education personnel became normal. Key
tributions to the MRM mechanism, which has elements of protection and risk analysis are
been in place since 2007 and is hosted by included in the education needs assessment,
UNMISS child protection. Over the evaluation and the response made a consistent effort to
period, this has included contributions on data protect children from possible attack, including
and reporting, joint UNMISS-UNICEF advocacy gender-based violence. One example is the in-
with the parties to conflict (thereby reportedly clusion of MRE in the curriculum.
helping secure a number of CAAFAG releases)
and a signed action plan with one of the par- There is room for improvement, however. Pro-
ties to the conflict. UNICEF also contributed to tection of educational institutions and education
numerous MRM capacity-building trainings for personnel from possible attack and inclusion of
humanitarian actors in 2018 and early 2019. disaster risk reduction measures – particularly
relevant for areas affected by floods in the rainy
4.4.8 Participation of girls and boys, fam- season – could be further strengthened. The ed-
ilies and communities in the programming ucation response also tackled the provision of
has not always been ensured throughout psychosocial support in schools, protection of
the programme. While the community care children in schools though the child help desk
programme and child protection prevention and a code of conduct for teachers and other
through the C4D integrated community mobi- education personnel, inclusion of child protec-
lization network (ICMN) offer examples of good tion elements in teacher training (e.g. non-vi-
practices, child participation and feedback on olent classroom management), and creation
101 Despite efforts to ensure participation of women and children in establishing CFS locations and multiple safety audits.
76 Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the South Sudan Humanitarian Crisis (2016-2019)
child protection mainstreaming efforts in these
sectors may potentially result in a serious harm
to children. This aspect of the programme has
to be tackled as a matter of urgency.104 By con-
trast, mainstreaming of gender-based violence
in health, WASH, nutrition and education has
been consistent throughout the response.105
Appointing dedicated gender-based violence
focal points within UNICEF sections and dedi-
cated gender-based violence staff and consult-
ants to integrate gender-based violence con-
cerns across the sectors was crucial to ensuring
that gender-based violence considerations
were taken into account from programme de-
velopment to implementation and monitoring.
Section staff were trained on the Interagency
© UNICEF/UN025204/Irwin Standing Committee (IASC) Guidelines on In-
tegrating Gender-based Violence Interventions
in Humanitarian Action and the gender-based
violence pocket guide for effective referrals and
and training of PTAs. However, the education dedicated tools were developed,106 including
monitoring system does not yet include funda- for IRRM. In 2019, a gender-based violence risk
mental child protection indicators102 that would mitigation action plan was launched to incor-
help fully mainstream child protection.103 porate gender-based violence funding into sec-
torial proposals to donors. This fully reflects the
4.4.10 Overall, the evaluation could not find UNICEF corporate commitment to prevention
evidence of mainstreaming of CP in health, of and response to gender-based violence and
WASH or nutrition (before 2019). Insufficient prevention of sexual exploitation and abuse.
102 As suggested in the INEE and CPMS standards these could be:
OUTCOME INDICATORS: Percentage of assessed formal and informal learning environments that are considered safe for boys and
girls of different ages; Percentage of boys and girls of different ages (including children with disabilities) able to access schools and
other learning opportunities;
OUTPUT INDICATORS: Percentage of active-duty educators trained on child protection threats and strategies to tackle threats;
Percentage of surveyed active-duty education staff who have signed the adopted code of conduct; Percentage of formal and
informal education environments that are regularly monitored with the aim of deciding whether both girls and boys are protected
from abuse, neglect, exploitation and violence in that environment; Percentage of educational facilities identified as unsafe that were
moved to a safe area; Number of children identified as at risk and referred to CP case management by education staff each month;
Number of formal and informal education facilities, students, teachers and other education personnel that have been attacked during
the past month; Barriers to enrolment and retention, such as lack of documents or other requirements, removed for boys and girls
of all ages.
103 See Annex H for a review of CP mainstreaming in education.
104 It was suggested to the evaluation team in feedback from the SSCO that this may in part be a matter of trying to ensure that
budget provision is made for including CP dimensions in other programme (as nutrition has done quite successfully).
105 United Nations Children’s Fund, ‘GBV Risk Mitigation Programmatic Highlights 2017’, UNICEF, Juba, 2017.
106 United Nations Children’s Fund, ‘RRM GBV Guidelines for Non-GBV Specialists’, UNICEF, Juba.
CHAPTER 4: UNICEF AND THE CHILD PROTECTION IN EMERGENCIES RESPONSE 77
4.5 COORDINATING THE CP health and psychosocial support (MHPSS)
RESPONSE: UNICEF, THE technical working group (TWG) and leads the
PROTECTION CLUSTER AND PSS TWG within the CP sub-cluster. Relations
between the PSS working group within the
CP SUB-CLUSTER
CP sub-cluster and the MHPSS working group
within the health cluster have not always been
Child protection sub-cluster smooth. This led to the creation of the MHPSS
coordination group chaired by IOM with actors
4.5.1 UNICEF has contributed significantly from health, education and child protection. In
to CP coordination mechanisms both at central 2019, efforts have been made to strengthen the
and state levels. This included providing techni- collaboration between the MHPSS TWG and the
cal expertise to lead technical working groups CP sub-cluster, including harmonization of PSS
on thematic areas, developing standards and indicators. Prior to that, the evaluation found
guidance, and supporting technical capacity limited evidence of guidelines, standards and
development of cluster members. other technical support provided by UNICEF on
MHPSS. MHPSS strategies are not developed
4.5.2 The sub-cluster, while it meets the min- and situation analysis is very limited. As noted
imum staffing requirements for clusters, is in above, data are hard to access and appear not
reality critically understaffed107 compared to the to be systematically analysed or disseminated.
coordination needs in the country, especially at
state level. The information management sys- Gender-based violence
tem and (more generally) data analysis and
information-sharing were found to be weak.108 4.5.4 Despite globally withdrawing from the
This is a major gap that needs to be urgently role of co-leader of the gender-based violence
addressed.109 sub-cluster in 2017, UNICEF South Sudan played
an important role in leading gender-based vio-
Limited evidence was found of mainstreaming lence risk mitigation efforts across the cluster
child protection in other sectors, including in- system and particularly in UNICEF-led clusters.
ter-cluster trainings, developing and dissemi- It did this through trainings, training of trainers
nating tools for child protection mainstreaming and the development of guidance and tools to
in other sectors, collecting and disseminating almost 3,000 clusters members, aid workers,
lessons and best practices. partners, and volunteers. UNICEF also contin-
ues to lead the gender-based violence sub-clus-
Mental health and psychosocial support ter working group in Upper Nile State (Malakal).
4.5.3 UNICEF co-leads with the International UNICEF has also developed and formalized
Organization for Migration (IOM) the mental minimum packages for gender-based violence
107 The sub-cluster is lead by two full time coordinators (UNICEF and Save the Children) and one part-time IMS specialist based in
Juba.
108 https://www.humanitarianresponse.info/en/operations/south-sudan/child-protection consulted on 22nd of April 2019
109 The evaluators recognize the fact that the CP sub-cluster in South Sudan is co-led with Save the Children. The above considerations
particularly focus on the role that UNICEF played in the sub-cluster and are not meant as an evaluation of the performance of the sub-
cluster as such.
78 Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the South Sudan Humanitarian Crisis (2016-2019)
risk mitigation in WASH and supported the of the task force terms of reference, standard
development of cluster-specific action plans operating procedures and system-wide strat-
to mitigate gender-based violence in 2017 egy. UNICEF also takes part in the inter-agency
and 2018.110 Between 2017 and 2018, UNICEF CBCMs, and supports the implementation of
conducted 29 gender-based violence ‘safety CBCMs in Malakal and Juba PoCs.
audits’111 to inform the HNO, HRP and other
planning and advocacy efforts. UNICEF also
provided financial and technical support to 4.6 CAPACITY DEVELOPMENT,
gender-based violence coordination and to the
SUSTAINABILITY AND
implementation of the real-time accountability
FUTURE PROSPECTS
partnership on gender-based violence in emer-
gencies, the United Nations Joint Programme 4.6.1 UNICEF in South Sudan has largely suc-
on gender-based violence, the joint commu- ceeded in the difficult task of balancing support
nique to end conflict-related sexual violence, to child protection system building, capacity
and protection from sexual exploitation and development of partners, support to delivery
abuse to enhance this work. of critical child protection services, and efforts
to change social norms. This effort has not yet
4.5.6 UNICEF has been an active member of fully borne fruit, but encouraging achievements
the inter-agency task force on the prevention to date indicate some progress.
of sexual exploitation and abuse co-chaired
by the United Nations Population Fund (UN- 4.6.2 As noted above, government systems
FPA) and the United Nations Entity for Gender for child protection are weak and under-re-
Equality and the Empowerment of Women (UN- sourced. In particular, the necessary social
Women), and contributed to the development workforce is lacking and strengthening this –
© UNICEF/UN043952/Holt
110 United Nations Children’s Fund, ‘GBV Programme Brief, March 2018’, UNICEF, Juba.
111 Ibid.
CHAPTER 4: UNICEF AND THE CHILD PROTECTION IN EMERGENCIES RESPONSE 79
especially given low government expenditure consistently reported difficulties in including
in this area – represents a major challenge. multi-sectorial objectives in their programmes.
UNICEF is therefore faced with the task of con- Multi-sectoral programming often appears
tinued professionalization of the existing social to involve partners developing different pro-
workforce supplied by NGOs and CBOs, while gramme cooperation agreements (PCAs) with
at the same time supporting the government different UNICEF sections. This poses chal-
child protection system to build a more ade- lenges for implementation, with PCAs starting
quate social workforce. A strategy for this dual at different time depending on the efficiency
approach has been lately developed and will be of the sections in reviewing and finalizing the
implemented in 2021. agreements, and the timeliness of the PCA re-
viewing committee.113 More importantly, this
4.6.3 As noted under 4.4.5, UNICEF has con- way of functioning creates a disconnected pic-
tributed significantly to strengthening local ture in which UNICEF itself is not able to gauge
capacities in child protection. Yet despite these the impact and multiplier effects of multi-sec-
efforts, child protection capacities in countries toral programming on the protection of girls
remain low and additional effort are needed and boys, families and communities.
to make sure that national NGOs and CBOs
gain sufficient child protection in emergency 4.6.5 As discussed above, a positive ex-
capacities. ception to this can be found in UNICEF gen-
der-based violence programming in South Su-
4.6.4 According to an internal document dan. In other areas, cross-sectoral integration
from 2014 entitled “Mainstreaming Resilience needs further effort. For example, in PSS the
into Sector Programming”, “strengthening potential for CFSs to function as multi-sectorial
resilience means addressing complex and in- hubs has not been realized in practice and key
teractive sets of risks. The structural causes of informants also suggested a disconnect with
vulnerability cannot be overcome without a other sectors.114 Although the CAAFAG pro-
multisectoral, integrated and coordinated pro- gramme integrates health and WASH, and the
gramme approach. Child protection is an entry link between CP and education programmes
point for integrated programming in humani- is relatively strong, there is an overall a sense
tarian response through the establishment of that the multi-sectorial integrated model of pro-
child friendly spaces and other ‘community gramming is not ‘natural’ within the organiza-
safe spaces’ that can act as a hub for safe ac- tion. Sectors are siloed, not least because of the
cess to cross-sectoral service delivery”.112 UNICEF administrative and financial processes,
and multi-sectorial programming, although en-
Integrated programming however appears couraged as a matter of policy, is not incentiv-
hard to achieve in practice. Partners have ized in practice.
112 United Nations Children’s Fund, ‘Mainstreaming Resilience into Sector Programming’, internal working document, UNICEF, New
York, 2014.
113 The PCA review process has reportedly sped up considerably since 2019, and the SSCO now does well in relation to the UNICEF
global benchmark.
114 Child protection partners in Juba mentioned an apparent gap in the nutrition services for children who are orphans at birth or
abandoned before 6 months. These children are obviously amongst the more vulnerable. Despite that UNICEF was not able to
address this gap through a joint child protection and nutrition programming.
80 Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the South Sudan Humanitarian Crisis (2016-2019)
5
UNICEF AND THE WASH, HEALTH
AND NUTRITION RESPONSES
© UNICEF/UNI176404/Holt
5.1 BACKGROUND within 30 minutes), while a further 28 per cent
have access to limited services. An estimated
35 per cent of water sources are non-functional
5.1.1 Part One of the evaluation, conducted increasing the risk of water-borne diseases.
in 2018, focused on the organization’s crisis-re- Only 10 per cent of the population has access to
lated response in the ‘child survival’ sectors of improved sanitation, while 61 per cent practice
WASH, health and nutrition. In this section, we open defecation.
provide an updated analysis for these sectors
to the end of 2019, with some reference to the These are the same figures as were available
more recent situation. This is a limited analysis: in 2018 (and cited in the Part One evaluation),
it does not cover the whole of UNICEF work in which were taken from a 2015 joint monitoring
each sector, and it is based largely on a reading programme by UNICEF and the World Health
of UNICEF-reported results rather than inter- Organization (WHO) and subsequent knowl-
views or other sources. However, in each case edge, attitude and practices (KAP) surveys
the evaluation team consulted with the rele- conducted in Juba in 2016-2017. This suggests
vant section in the SSCO to help validate the that no more recent data were available by the
account given and to highlight key points. end of 2019. Part One of the evaluation (section
4.1.1) noted that “data on water and sanita-
5.1.2 The analysis below is focused on key tion in South Sudan are out-dated and seen as
areas of intervention in each sector. For WASH, unreliable” and it seems this is still the case –
this includes provision of access to safe water indeed with the passage of time, the data are
and to sanitation facilities, as well as provision even more out of date.
of information critical to preventing disease
outbreaks. For health, it includes measles 5.2.2 Although some limited progress has
vaccination coverage, distribution of treated been made on water supply, this has slowed
(anti-malarial) bed-nets, and health consulta- considerably over the past two years. The con-
tions with children under the age of five. For text remains essentially as described in Part
nutrition, it includes treatment of severe acute One, which noted that this comparatively low
malnutrition (SAM) in children under five, and coverage (of improved water supply and san-
counselling of pregnant and lactating women itation) leaves South Sudan’s population par-
on infant and young child feeding (IYCF). For a ticularly vulnerable to waterborne diseases and
fuller analysis of UNICEF work in each of these other water and sanitation-related threats, in-
sectors, see Part One of the evaluation. cluding the documented effects on child nutri-
tion.115 Annual outbreaks of cholera have been
documented since 2005, with a particularly se-
5.2 THE WASH RESPONSE vere outbreak in 2016-2017.
Part One evaluation findings
Context
5.2.1 The COAR for 2019 notes that only half 5.2.3 The earlier evaluation noted that avail-
the population of South Sudan has access to able data pointed to a widely under-developed
a basic water service (i.e. an improved source sector with significant structural deficits. Large-
115 In recognition of this, a joint strategy for WASH and Nutrition was produced by the Clusters in early 2018
82 Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the South Sudan Humanitarian Crisis (2016-2019)
perhaps over-ambitious given the struc-
tural and developmental deficits. New
approaches to community engagement
appeared to be needed.
► The quality of work delivered by UNICEF
WASH partners was of some concern.
UNICEF needs to invest more in technical
oversight and quality assurance.
► Engagement with REACH on WASH base-
line assessments is essential and should
be prioritized.
The related recommendations included:
• Integration of ‘humanitarian’ and ‘develop-
ment’ programming for WASH infrastruc-
ture, ensuring minimum standards of im-
plementation throughout.
• Ensuring sustainability of WASH facilities:
construction quality, operations and main-
© UNICEF/UN070396/Hatcher-Moore tenance.
• Transition from hygiene campaigns to ‘hy-
giene change’ where possible, and apply-
ing a more ‘invested’ means of delivery,
scale development programmes in the sector,
e.g. community embedded social mobiliz-
begun at the time of independence in 2011,
ers and hygiene promoters.
were effectively curtailed by the outbreak of
• Joint community worker approaches with
conflict in 2013 and had steadily shrunk since
other sections for cross-sector behav-
that time, being replaced by humanitarian
iour-change.
(emergency) WASH responses. Part One noted
the overlap of these two agendas (development • Strengthening engineering supervision,
and humanitarian) in terms of infrastructure holding partners to account on quality.
and stressed the need for a common inven-
• Requiring partners to systematically doc-
tory of WASH infrastructure. But it also noted
ument all relevant water source data and
that the two agendas were not well connected
make data available at all levels. Advocate
in practice. The 2019-2021 UNICEF strategy for
through the WASH cluster for others to do
WASH showed ‘positive evolution’ to a more
the same, and for a central database to be
integrated approach to the humanitarian-de-
established for this purpose.
velopment nexus in South Sudan.
• Require partners to strengthen operations
5.2.4 Overall, Part One found that: and maintenance by training water com-
mittees on (a) the value and use of water
► UNICEF achieved its targets on access to
source data; (b) design and use of basic
water (2016-2018) but fell short of its tar-
management plans.
gets on access to sanitation. These were
CHAPTER 5: THE WASH RESPONSE 83
Table 5 UNICEF WASH results against targets 2016-2019
Indicators Year UNICEF Target UNICEF Results UNICEF %
Achieved
# of people provided with 2016 610,000 742,221 122
access to safe water as
per agreed standards (7-15 2017 800,000 811,462 101
litres per person per day)
2018 800,000 520,221 65
2019 800,000 496,574 62
# of people provided 2016 365,000 252,764 69
access to appropriate
sanitation facilities* 2017 400,000 242,411 61
(* indicator changed in
2018 300,000 158,274 53
2018)
2019 300,000 202,208 67
People received 2018 4,200,000 4,200,000 100
critical WASH - related
information to prevent disease 300,000 185,350 62
outbreaks
Source: HAC
UNICEF progress to end 2019
Despite the continuing extent of WASH needs
5.2.5 As the COAR for 2019 noted, “chal- and related vulnerabilities, the results shown in
lenges in the water sector remain critical due to Table 5 above show a major drop-off in ‘safe
poor maintenance of the limited facilities, frag- water’ results achievement between 2016-2017
mented and weak government institutions, and a and 2018-2019. This appears to be related to
lack of adequate funding”. Safe water had been lack of available funding116 as much as to access
provided through rehabilitation of major town and other challenges – and it represents a ma-
water supply systems, construction of new jor setback in tackling one of the major areas of
water facilities, rehabilitation of malfunctional vulnerability for South Sudanese children and
boreholes, and establishing surface water treat- their families. Meanwhile, the capacity of rural
ment systems in PoC and IDP camp settings. water departments at state level has remained
UNICEF also explored affordable technologies low in terms of finance and human resources,
for provision of safe water such as manual drill- with heavy reliance on NGOs and donors.
ing, particularly in Northern Bahr el Ghazal and
Warrap State.
116 In 2018, the funding gap was 50%; in 2019, this rose to 71%.
84 Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the South Sudan Humanitarian Crisis (2016-2019)
5.2.6 Data are lacking on sanitation facili- digm shift of prevention first, through a mul-
ties progress for these years, and there was a tisectoral approach. This includes scaling up
change in the indicator used to gauge progress and integrating WASH services, improving
on the sanitation agenda, from creation of food security interventions, and strengthening
sanitation facilities to WASH messaging. With community engagement and health service
regard to messaging, even though the target delivery”. Within the UNICEF programme, the
was dramatically reduced in 2019, achievement 2019 COAR reported progress on integration
against target also fell. This can only partly be of the WASH programme with other sectors,
explained in terms of funding availability, but including CP, education and nutrition, includ-
the evaluation team was unable to obtain a ing the mainstreaming of gender approaches.
fuller explanation for this drop. Examples included integration of WASH and
nutrition interventions tailored specifically to
5.2.7 In 2019, UNICEF made some progress reduce stunting in young children in high-prev-
on the system-strengthening aspects of the alence states and integration of gender-based
WASH agenda, and on better integrating its violence risk mitigation into health, WASH and
WASH response with other aspects of its work. nutrition cluster activities.
With UNICEF support, the Ministry of Water Re-
sources and Irrigation continued the scale up 5.2.9 UNICEF has made significant efforts to
of work on open defecation-free (ODF) commu- achieve a balance in its WASH interventions
nities through community-led total sanitation between humanitarian response and building
(CLTS). According to the COAR 2019, over 100 community resilience. It has engaged in the
villages used CLTS, of which 64 achieved ODF Partnership for Resilience and Recovery (PfRR),
certification, meeting the 2019 target. which “coordinates and integrates comple-
mentary humanitarian and development as-
Some progress is also reported on other agen- sistance activities and allows donors, United
das highlighted in Part One. Capacity to mon- Nations entities, and NGOs to adjust as com-
itor and undertake quality assurance of con- munities increase resilience over time” (COAR
struction works has been increased through 2019). Within this, the programme “Sustainable
recruitment of engineering expertise. Capacity WASH for Partnership and Resilience” (SWfPR)
to document data on water sources “is cur- has been initiated in four hubs of stability (Yam-
rently been strengthened”.117 bio, Torit, Rumbek, Bor).118
5.2.8 The 2019 COAR described how all The approach common to both the SWfPR and
UNICEF programmes supported communities PfRR is a focus on resilience and risk manage-
with social and behaviour change, “which en- ment, including climate-sensitive infrastructure
ables programme interventions to be more ef- and conflict sensitivity in programming. The
fective and impactful, especially for the most SWfPR focuses particularly on the transition
marginalized”. UNICEF in collaboration with from humanitarian response to more sustain-
civil society organizations (CSOs) and United able approaches through the development of
Nations agencies was “initiating a new para- the supply chain for household sanitation and
117 Correspondence with SSCO WASH section, November 2020.
118 The SWfRP is funded by the Government of Netherlands, which is also part of the PfRR programme.
CHAPTER 5: THE WASH RESPONSE 85
new technologies (solar) and ways of financing
water supply (vouchers, cost recovery in urban
areas) are being explored.120 WASH in schools
is a priority area for collaboration and scale up.
But despite dedicated funding for this purpose
from the African Development Bank and from
Germany, lack of funding overall remains a se-
vere constraint.
© UNICEF/UNI181540/McKeever 5.3 THE HEALTH RESPONSE
Context
water treatment products, as well as capaci- 5.3.1 Part One noted that South Sudan had
ty-building of local water committees and of some of the worst health indicators in the
government partners and. One particular ex- world. “High levels of vulnerability are com-
ample of this ‘transitional’ approach is the Juba pounded by multiple factors: conflict and dis-
Water Scheme that will serve both the former placement, multiple causes of morbidity, weak
PoC (now IDP) camp as well as vulnerable com- or absent health services, poor nutrition, inad-
munities in Juba with piped water, and provide equate water supply and sanitation, and the
benefit even after the lifetime of the camp. more general effects of poverty”. To this should
be added factors like the low levels of vacci-
5.2.10 At the time of writing, the COVID-19 nation coverage. By way of illustration, only 43
epidemic is reported to have placed additional per cent coverage was reported to have been
constraints on the programme in 2020.119 In achieved for the crucial PENTA 3 vaccination.121
particular, it has affected community-based
interventions such CLTS in which people are The 2018 COAR described how destruction of
brought together and disrupted supply of es- health facilities and disruption of services had
sential treatment chemicals, posing a potential made it impossible to provide continuous basic
risk to continuity of (already limited) urban wa- primary healthcare in many locations, as well
ter supplies. Floods continue to recur regularly, as to carry out routine expanded programmes
particularly in Jonglei, resulting in areas be- of immunization and vaccination campaigns.
coming inaccessible and potentially reversing In the context of treatment for SAM, the COAR
previous WASH gains. for 2019 reported significant improvement in
health system capacity, with the “number of
Given the current socio-economic situation, health facility and community service delivery
the emphasis is now on sustainability. Collab- points almost doubling (591 in 2018; 1,145 in
orative approaches are being prioritized, and 2019) and a significant increase in the number
of trained frontline healthcare providers (2,831
119 Correspondence with SSCO WASH section (November 2020).
120 Ibid.
121 Humanitarian Needs Overview 2020.
86 Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the South Sudan Humanitarian Crisis (2016-2019)
in 2018; 4,189 in 2019)”. The health care system the scarcity of available data and the challenge
nevertheless remains extremely patchy and of estimating impact due to the protracted con-
overstretched. Ultimately this is a function of flict.122 Maternal mortality rates are among the
chronic lack of investment and related capacity highest in the world and are reported to have
deficits in the governmental health systems as increased between 2014 and 2017 from 789 to
much as it is of years of conflict and instability. 1,150 per 100,000 live births – double the aver-
age for sub-Saharan Africa.123
5.3.2 For children under five, and particularly
infants, the greatest health risks over the evalu- Conclusions and recommendations
ation period were posed by malaria, diarrhoea
from Part One
and pneumonia, the main causes of under-five
mortality. The 2018 evaluation noted that levels 5.3.5 Conclusions on health included the
of immunization in South Sudan were still dan- following:
gerously low despite some recorded progress.
► Given the low coverage of routine im-
munization, increasing coverage was a
5.3.3 The distinction between ‘emergency’
priority. A more regular mobile outreach
and ‘development’ interventions is not a clear
solution was needed (e.g. the proposed
one in this context. The more useful distinction
integrated outreach initiative).
is between responsive and planned interven-
tions, both of which may be crucial to chil- ► Only a small proportion of adolescent
dren’s health in the short term. A key example girls were accessing antenatal care.
of this is in the relationship between routine UNICEF should explore ways to increase
immunization programmes and vaccination this proportion.
campaigns in response to disease outbreaks.
► The delivery of health promotion at com-
The years 2018 and 2019 saw unprecedented
munity level needed to be expanded. The
levels of measles outbreaks, requiring major
potential expansion of coverage by the
targeted vaccination campaigns, but the out-
proposed consolidation of community
breaks themselves were related to low levels
nutrition, health and WASH volunteers
of routine immunization. Compounding the
would go some way to addressing this.
health threats in 2019 was the major outbreak
► The prevention (as well as treatment) of
of Ebola in neighbouring Democratic Republic
malaria should be a priority for UNICEF.
of Congo, for which a major prevention and
In particular, UNICEF should explore all
preparedness campaign was mounted in South
available means for increased distribu-
Sudan.
tion of treated bed-nets.
5.3.4 Reliable data on child mortality are ► Acute malnutrition treatment activities
hard to come by. In 2018, the United Nations in- should be integrated into the new mobile
ter-agency group for child mortality estimation health outreach initiative in order to in-
“decided to hold these estimates constant since crease nutrition coverage.
the start of the country’s crisis in 2013” given
122 2018 COAR.
123 2019 COAR.
CHAPTER 5: THE WASH RESPONSE 87
© UNICEF/UN025817/Irwin
UNICEF progress to end 2019 5.3.7 In the circumstances, UNICEF and its
partners have done well to achieve the levels
5.3.6 Although measles has posed an in- of measles vaccination that they have, but the
creasing health threat to children over the challenge remains to achieve sufficient cover-
evaluation period, UNICEF and others have age through routine vaccination programmes
struggled to maintain vaccination coverage in (coverage of which remains very low) as well as
areas affected by conflict and other humanitar- through campaigns in response to outbreaks.
ian crises, largely for the context-related rea-
sons outlined above. The results against target 5.3.8 Beyond vaccination and other preven-
figures in Table 6 below show both the extent tive measures, UNICEF and its partners played
of the achievement and the challenge. Targets a significant role in curative interventions. It
for measles vaccination coverage grew over slightly exceeded its target in 2019 for curative
the period 2016-2018, but while the target was consultations for children under five, and sig-
greatly exceeded in 2017, only around half of nificantly improved coverage of treatment of
the 2018 target was achieved. In 2019 the target children with SAM.125 These results were report-
set was much lower, less than one third of the edly possible due to the increase noted above
previous year. While almost double the target in the number of health facility and community
was achieved in 2019, the overall picture ap- service delivery points, together with greater
pears to be one in which vaccination coverage numbers of trained healthcare providers.126 In
has fallen substantially since 2017 and subse- addition to this, 32 integrated rapid response
quently levelled off at a time of increasing vul- missions reached 318,868 people, including
nerability.124
124 This fall is reported to be due in large part to widespread insecurity and looting – especially in Jonglei, Upper Nile and Unity states
– and the related loss of both access and of assets (fridges etc.) critical to the EPI programme (communication with SSCO health
section staff).
125 This rose from 77 per cent in 2018 to 91 per cent in 2019, reaching 237,123 children (123,722 girls) in 2019.
126 The COAR also notes that “Prepositioning of nutrition supplies in the dry season provided continuity of life-saving treatment for
children with SAM and was critical [given] increased admissions in 2019”.
88 Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the South Sudan Humanitarian Crisis (2016-2019)
63,750 children under five, in hard-to-reach ar- had also played a significant role in preventing
eas. During these missions, UNICEF identified the wider spread of cholera in 2017, through tar-
and treated acute malnutrition in under-fives geted WASH interventions and support to oral
with Vitamin A supplementation, administra- vaccination campaigns. In 2019, severe flood-
tion of de-worming tablets, and malaria testing ing caused the displacement of communities
and treatment. and had a major effect on the delivery of health
services and the implementation of the project
5.3.9 Overall, Part One found that UNICEF activities. Health facilities were destroyed, es-
had played a central role in immunization and sential drugs and supplies including cold chain
cold chain provision, as well as maintaining the equipment were submerged in water. Loss,
core pipeline for supplies. With its partners, it damage and limited access due to insecurity
Table 6 UNICEF health results against targets 2016 to end 2019
Indicators Year UNICEF Target UNICEF Results UNICEF %
Achieved
# of children aged six 2016 1,171,904 609,855 52
months to 15 years
in conflict areas / 2017 1,232,000 1,812,693 147
humanitarian situations
2018 1,514,734 814,890 54
areas vaccinated against
measles
2019 475,000 919,160 194
# of children under five 2016 400,000 235,374 59
years, pregnant women
and other vulnerable 2017 450,000 255,100 57
people receiving a long-
2018 250,000 374,845 150
lasting insecticide treated
net (LLITN) (for 2018:
2019 200,000 186,744 93
number of bed nets
distributed)
# of preventive and 2016 600,000 557,588 93
curative consultations
provided to children under 2017 476,250 899,015 189
five years at facilities or
2018 700,000 1,161,446 166
through community-based
care
2019 910,000 779,623 86
Source: HAC
CHAPTER 5: THE WASH RESPONSE 89
has been a persistent theme throughout the Access challenges have made referrals from
evaluation period, and continued insecurity primary to higher levels of care (including for
in some areas due to intercommunal clashes obstetric emergencies) very challenging. Lack
(notably in Pibor, Boma and Maiwut counties) of ambulances or speed boats have made
has continued to have a major disruptive effect emergency referrals dependent on the ability
through 2019.127 Lack of funds for some inter- of families and communities to get critically ill
ventions (notably malaria prevention) has been patients to the nearest primary health centre
a further constraint on the programme.128 or hospital, e.g. using canoes or in some cases
carrying the patient on their back and walking
5.3.10 Although the indicators in Table 6 are for hours. Available funds in the UNICEF pro-
concerned with service delivery by UNICEF and grammes have not allowed for procurement of
its partners, the added value of UNICEF must vehicles, speedboats and communication sys-
also be judged in relation to health system tems to support referrals.131
strengthening. UNICEF has helped train health
workers (e.g. in rapid diagnostic testing of chil- 5.3.12 Ongoing efforts by UNICEF and partners
dren for malaria) and with WHO it supported to reduce the levels of adolescent pregnancy
the Ministry of Health with Ebola preparedness (usually related to early marriage) have been
and operational readiness activities in 2019.129 accompanied by increased efforts to increase
Yet while some modest progress was made in adolescent girls’ access to antenatal care. This
system strengthening, weak human resource has included awareness raising through health
capacity at health facility level continues to be facilities and community-based forums, as well
one of the biggest challenges in the provision as recruitment and training of skilled birth at-
of health services. Absence of qualified mid- tendants, although the latter effort is inevitably
wives, nurses, anaesthetists, and laboratory affected by the general human resource con-
scientists and the unwillingness of the scarce straints noted above.
qualified health workers to work in remote lo-
cations at the Ministry of Health-harmonized 5.3.13 A standardized package of health pro-
incentive scale has severely hindered the pro- motion activities has been rolled put since 2019
vision of health services and has resulted in a through community health workers, hygiene
less than optimum quality of services.130 These promoters for WASH, community nutrition
are structural problems requiring sustained in- volunteers and a strengthened integrated com-
vestment as well as political stability. munity mobilization network for C4D across
the country. The ICMN has proved important
5.3.11 These human resource deficits are in addressing new threats like Ebola, measles
compounded by inadequate referral capacity. outbreaks and latterly COVID-19, as well as
127 Correspondence with SSCO health section staff.
128 UNICEF has most recently worked with the Government to launch (in December 2020) a four-year strategic plan to combat
malaria. This will form part of the new country programme starting in 2021, supported in part by the Global Fund.
129 This included support to training of rapid response team members, providing isolation and screening facilities, printing and
distribution of guidance material, as well as EVD vaccination of targeted health workers. Through partners, UNICEF provided infection
prevention and control WASH supplies in 70 of 110 health facilities across EVD high risk locations and reached around 1 million people
reached through hygiene promotion and EVD messaging.
130 Correspondence with SSCO health section staff.
131 Ibid.
90 Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the South Sudan Humanitarian Crisis (2016-2019)
providing consistent messaging on chronic of global acute malnutrition (GAM) among chil-
threats to children’s health (notably malaria) dren (from 23 per cent in 2010 to 13 per cent
and the importance of routine immunization,132 in 2018). The same held for child stunting (from
bed nets and other preventive measures. Pre- 31 per cent in 2010 to 17 per cent in 2018).133
vention and treatment of acute malnutrition is Despite this relative improvement, the nutri-
also integrated into health programmes both tional situation remained critical by the end of
at static health facilities and as part of mobile 2019 – particularly for children under five and
health outreach activities. pregnant or breastfeeding women. In 2019, the
GAM figure was 11.6 per cent, while SAM was
2.3 per cent).134
5.4 THE NUTRITION RESPONSE
Conclusions and recommendations
Context from Part One
5.4.1 The nutritional situation of children in 5.4.3 Reviewing the period from early 2016
South Sudan and the UNICEF response was to mid-2018, Part One found that UNICEF had
discussed in detail in Part One. While in many risen well to the challenge of providing vital
ways the situation of children has deteriorated nutrition services in the midst of the ongoing
since the time of independence in 2011, the nu- conflict. Where targets were not achieved, this
tritional indicators for children and their moth- could largely be explained by the outbreak of
ers appeared to have substantially improved by conflict. The HAC results presented below sug-
2018 – although this was from a very low base gest that UNICEF continued to build on this
indeed. The 2018 COAR reported that, despite success and was able to significantly extend
increasing levels of food insecurity, the overall the reach of its nutrition services in 2019 com-
situation of acute malnutrition had “improved pared to the previous year.
slightly in 2018, with no county reporting ex-
treme critical levels”. Between 2015 and 2018, 5.4.4 Part One did identify some areas for im-
UNICEF supported an increase in coverage of provement. These included the need for:
quality care for severely malnourished children
• More ambitious target-setting in IYCF
from 60 to 77 per cent, contributing to reducing
programmes.135
prevalence of SAM among children aged 0-59
months from 9.9 per cent in 2010 to 2.3 per cent • An increased effort to prevent moderate
in 2019. cases of malnutrition (MAM cases) becom-
ing acute cases.
5.4.2 Over the longer timeframe of 2010 to
• Inclusion of adolescent and school-age
2018, the 2019 COAR noted that the food secu-
children (particularly girls) in nutrition pro-
rity and nutrition monitoring system (FSNMS)
grammes.
had revealed significantly reduced prevalence
132 In 2020, the uptake of vaccination services is reported to be improving after declining over recent years of conflict.
133 2019 COAR.
134 Figures from the July 2019 Food Security and Nutrition Monitoring System report.
135 This is particularly important with regard to complementary feeding, for which the related indicators are very low (Minimum
Acceptable Diet score of less than 5%).
CHAPTER 5: THE WASH RESPONSE 91
• The development of approaches to address ning underpinned partnership agreements
chronic malnutrition. with 40 CSOs for scaled up delivery of nutrition
services, including quarterly assessment and
The evaluation noted that many of these agen- star rating of nutrition facilities – described in
das required concerted effort across agencies, the COAR as a “significant innovation” that en-
particularly between WFP and UNICEF. Collab- couraged continuous quality improvement.
oration with WFP and the Food and Agricul- 5.4.6 In 2019, coverage of treatment of chil-
tural Organization (FAO) had been strong and dren with SAM was reported to have signif-
should be built on, for nutrition and resilience icantly improved from 77 per cent in 2018 to
more generally. It also suggested that a ‘life 91 per cent in 2019 (based on UNICEF targets),
cycle’ approach suggested some critical points reaching 237,123 children (123,722 girls) in 2019
of nutrition intervention that were currently un- (COAR 2019). These results were said to be
der-served. possible due to the number of health facility
and community service delivery points almost
UNICEF progress to end 2019 doubling and a significant increase in the num-
ber of trained frontline healthcare providers.
5.4.5 In 2019, analysis of bottlenecks relating According to the 2019 COAR, repositioning of
to nutrition interventions reportedly helped nutrition supplies in the dry season “provided
to inform a more targeted approach at state continuity of life-saving treatment for children
level, resulting in substantial improvements to with SAM and was critical against a background
service delivery, according to the 2019 COAR of increased admissions in 2019”.
2019. An ‘evidence-based approach’ to plan-
Table 7 UNICEF health results against targets 2016 to end 2019
Indicators Year UNICEF Target UNICEF Results UNICEF %
Achieved
# of Children aged 6 to 2016 253,605 203,335 80
59 months with SAM
admitted for treatment 2017 207,257 206,993 100
2018 215,312 206, 673 96
2019 220,700 237,123 107
# of pregnant and 2016 567,366 975,330 172
lactating women with
access to infant / 2017 590,134 1,028,804 174
young child feeding (IYCF)
2018 1,013,536 950,376 94
counselling for appropriate
feeding
2019 984,700 1,672,942 170
Source: UNICEF HAC and SitReps
92 Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the South Sudan Humanitarian Crisis (2016-2019)
5.4.7 Significantly expanded provision of
counselling on appropriate IYCF helped to
maintain high levels (69 per cent) of exclusive
breastfeeding. But the 2019 bottleneck analysis
revealed that the quality of counselling ser-
vices was a key constraint on progress in this
area.136 This was due to a number of factors in-
cluding lack of staff capacity, lack of availability
of culturally-appropriate counselling and train-
ing materials, and lack of proper recording and
reporting. Though access improved substan-
tially after the renewal of the peace process in
2018, intercommunal conflicts have reportedly
caused the suspension of nutrition services in
some pockets of the country.137
5.4.8 Work in response to the recommen-
dations in Part One has proceeded, although
progress in some areas has been slow (and
more recently hampered by the COVID-19 pan-
demic).138 The number of Targeted Supplemen-
tary Feeding Programme (TSFP) sites increased
in 2019, and progress on this and the number of
Outpatient Therapeutic feeding Program (OTP)
sites has reportedly been maintained in 2020.139
A cadre of 6,221 community nutrition volun-
teers has been engaged, building on existing
community volunteer cadres in various sectors
(health, WASH and C4D community mobiliz-
ers). However, training and mentoring of those
volunteers has been delayed by COVID-19.
Similarly, the inclusion of adolescent and
school-age children (particularly girls) in nutri-
tion programmes has been hampered in 2020
by the COVID-related closure of schools.
One area where informant interviews sug-
gested that more work was needed was in the
© UNICEF/UNI176400/Holt
coordination of UNICEF work in schools with
136 Feedback from SSCO nutrition section.
137 Key informant interviews during field visits in for the present evaluation also suggested some gaps in service, e.g. for
supplementary feeding of infants 0-6 months in Bentiu PoC (2019).
138 The update in this and the following sections is based on feedback from SSCO.
139 In 2020, SAM admissions have reportedly fallen by around 20% (January to October).
CHAPTER 5: THE WASH RESPONSE 93
that of WFP on school feeding programmes. velopment Programme (UNDP) around resil-
The latter depends heavily on the availabil- ience-building and the United Nations Office
ity of suitable infrastructure (notably WASH), for Project Services (UNOPS) on cash for work
which as noted above is not always present and non-conditional cash incentives. Both of
or properly maintained. Informants suggested these partnerships are designed to help fami-
that this constituted a constraint on the ability lies cope better during periods food shortage.
to expand the school feeding programme with
all its attendant benefits regarding not just nu- 5.4.10 In 2018 and 2019, UNICEF led a national
trition but school attendance, child protection nutrition assessment – the first for two con-
and otherwise. secutive years since 2010. As noted above, this
assessment indicated a significant reduction
5.4.9 With its partners and in collaboration in levels of stunting and acute malnutrition,
with the Ministry of Health, UNICEF started as well as improvements in IYCF and Vitamin
working on resilience-building and lean season A coverage. UNICEF supported data quality
response planning in late 2019 and 2020. This improvements of the nutrition component of
included creation of common programming the FSNMS, which enabled the monitoring of
framework and coordinated (preventive) food trends in nutrition indicators at national and
security and nutrition assistance to the most state level. UNICEF also contributed to devel-
vulnerable over the lean season. The overall opment of a multisectoral nutrition strategic
approach is to “widen the resilience strategy plan, 2022-2030 and implementation roadmap,
and approaches to shock-sensitive social pro- which was endorsed by the Ministry of Health.
tection”140, with a focus on behaviours and The nutrition cluster has been leading the ex-
targeted local support, including regular needs ercise of integrating nutrition into the health
monitoring to avoid the need for negative cop- system. The development of framework of inte-
ing strategies. gration was one of key activities of the annual
work plan of the nutrition cluster. However, this
In addition to working with the Ministry of exercise has been constrained due to shortage
Health, WFP, FAO, WHO and CSOs (national of funding and other competing priorities, in-
and international), UNICEF is building strate- cluding responding to COVID-19.
gic partnerships with the United Nations De-
140 UNICEF, South Sudan resilience-building and lean season response planning, 2019–2021. Juba.
94 Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the South Sudan Humanitarian Crisis (2016-2019)
6
CROSS-CUTTING ISSUES
© UNICEF/UN068346/Hatcher-Moore
6.1 ‘CENTRALITY OF PROTECTION’ second of three objectives in the South Sudan
AND PROTECTION Humanitarian Response Plans for 2017, 2018
and 2019. Thus, the 2017 plan “recognizes that
MAINSTREAMING
South Sudan is first and foremost a protection
crisis and underscores the centrality of protec-
6.1.1 In this section we consider the extent tion of civilians to the response”. For UNICEF, as
to which UNICEF has successfully integrated a member of the South Sudan HCT, this implies
wider protection concerns into its overall pro- obligations that go beyond its mandated child
gramme in South Sudan. Some aspects of this protection role and extend to its wider humani-
agenda were included in the sectoral analysis in tarian role.
Part One of the evaluation. Here we focus more
on the question of whether and how UNICEF This extract from the 2019 HRP sums up the
work (programme and advocacy) is informed joint commitment:
by a wider protection and security perspective.
Through specialized and joint, integrated
Background and definition services, all humanitarian actors will advocate
for and respond to the protection needs of
6.1.2 The centrality of protection agenda is conflict-affected people with due regard
one to which the IASC principals (including the to international norms and standards and
Executive Director of UNICEF) have explicitly reduce the protection risks faced by most
committed themselves.141 It also constitutes the vulnerable groups, including women at risk.
© UNICEF/UNI171865/Zocherman
141 Inter-Agency Standing Committee, ‘The Centrality of Protection in Humanitarian Action’, statement by the IASC Principals,
17 December 2013, IASC, Geneva. The UNICEF understanding of the centrality of protection principle is now articulated in the
new (2020) version of the CCCs in comprehensive terms: “Protection is the purpose and intended outcome of humanitarian
action and must be central to preparedness efforts, as part of immediate and life-saving activities, and throughout the duration of
humanitarian response and beyond. UNICEF commits to design and implement a humanitarian response that helps keep people with
vulnerabilities from harm, protect them from violence, coercion and abuse, reduce the threats they face, minimize their exposure to
these and increase their capacity to cope. The protection of all persons affected and at risk is central to UNICEF decision‐making and
response, including UNICEF engagement with states and non-state parties to conflict”.
96 Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the South Sudan Humanitarian Crisis (2016-2019)
Box 6 Mainstreaming protection: Four key elements
Protection mainstreaming is the process of incorporating protection principles and promoting
meaningful access, safety and dignity in humanitarian aid. The following elements must be
taken into account in all humanitarian activities:
1. Prioritize safety and dignity, and avoid causing harm: Prevent and minimize as much as
possible any unintended negative effects of your intervention which can increase people’s
vulnerability to both physical and psychosocial risks.
2. Meaningful access: Arrange for people’s access to assistance and services – in proportion
to need and without any barriers (e.g. discrimination). Pay special attention to individuals
and groups who may be particularly vulnerable or have difficulty accessing assistance and
services.
3. Accountability: Set up appropriate mechanisms through which affected populations can
measure the adequacy of interventions, and address concerns and complaints.
4. Participation and empowerment: Support the development of self-protection capacities and
assist people to claim their rights, including – not exclusively – the rights to shelter, food,
water and sanitation, health, and education.
6.1.3 While the evaluators were informed directly to the ways in which UNICEF designs
that UNICEF SSCO had a centrality of protec- and delivers its services, while the second two
tion strategy,142 this was not made available relate more to people’s ability to claim their
and did not appear to have been implemented rights. The ‘participation and empowerment’
in practice. Awareness on this topic was found concept in particular is one which is fundamen-
to be low among UNICEF staff, for whom pro- tal to creating genuine local ownership, as well
tection appeared to be essentially defined by as to fostering accountability. This concept ex-
the child protection agenda. As noted in Sec- tends beyond ‘protection’ as it is traditionally
tion 4, however, mainstreaming of child pro- conceived and is an agenda to which UNICEF
tection throughout the programme was also and other United Nations agencies have given
weak (particularly in health, WASH and nutri- increasing attention over the latter part of the
tion), suggesting a more general limitation in evaluation period.
UNICEF application in practice of the concept
of protection across its whole programme. 6.1.5 Although elements of the first (‘do no
harm’) principle were found in much of the
6.1.4 Of the four elements of protection main- UNICEF programme in South Sudan (see Part
streaming identified by the global protection One evaluation), this was found to be inconsist-
cluster (Box 6 above), the first two relate most ent and patchy. The evaluators conclude that
142 UNICEF KII, Juba.
CHAPTER 6: CROSS-CUTTING ISSUES 97
UNICEF could do more to ensure that families period, this is more likely attributable to the
can access the services it provides through direct and indirect effects (including economic
its partners in safety and dignity, and that a impacts) of local conflict and people’s response
safety audit should be part of both the design to it than it is to climatic factors.
and monitoring processes for the relevant ser-
vices.143 Over the evaluation period, the SSCO In particular, the IPC classification does not
increased its attention to the question of access, capture the factors driving people’s behaviour:
and brought in a specialist in this area to com- why, for example, they may choose to leave
plement work done by OCHA, WFP and others. home and abandon their fields, or choose to
This was a valuable initiative, and important for return to their home areas from the relative
UNICEF to engage fully in coordinated action safety of IDP camps. This is often about families
on access. The access specialist is reported to weighing risks, and in particular about weigh-
have played an integral role within the OCHA- ing (perceptions of) security and related safety
led access working group and helped shape fears against the desire to return to normality
much of the United Nations access strategy.144 while ensuring they can meet basic needs,
It was less clear to the evaluators how this work pursue livelihoods, access services, including
fed into the design and implementation of the schooling for children.145 To concerns about
UNICEF programme. physical security must be added the economic
pressure caused by the loss of livelihoods, land
6.1.6 Most fundamentally, the UNICEF ap- and property, and the wider context of price in-
proach does not appear to be consistently flation and national economic decline.
grounded in an analysis of the wider security
context – and of people’s response to that con- 6.1.7 During the evaluation period, UNICEF
text. Much of the threat analysis of UNICEF commissioned a survey to assess perceptions
and of the wider United Nations system (e.g. of risk and challenges in accessing services.146
as articulated in the HRPs) is based on the IPC As far as the evaluators could determine, this
system of ‘phase classification’, highlighting was a one-off assessment, and again it is not
threats to people’s ability to secure basic needs clear how it helped inform the programme re-
(food, health, etc.). While the IPC framework sponse. More regular review of these risk per-
is essential to capturing shifts in the overall ception factors, through KAP surveys or oth-
humanitarian situation and informing the pri- erwise, could provide a more geographically
oritization of responses, it does not in itself nuanced and time-sensitive picture.147 From the
explain the causal factors determining why a surveys that have been conducted (e.g. in Juba
given area might be in (say) IPC Phase 4 or 5. In PoC), one of the factors emerging concerning
the context of South Sudan over the evaluation return of displaced people was that people’s
143 Building on the work on PSEA already being undertaken and on earlier GBV safety audit work. The ‘safety perceptions’ study
conducted by Forcier Consulting for UNICEF in 2017 provides a useful benchmark in this regard (Safety Perceptions Assessment:
UNICEF-supported interventions in selected communities in South Sudan, June 2018).
144 Feedback from SSCO on first draft report.
145 Perception studies and multiple KIIs from field visits and with agencies (UN and NGO) in Juba.
146 See for example Forcier, Safety Perceptions Assessment.
147 In this context, it should be noted that UNICEF uses a variety of means to gauge people’s perceptions, not just its own KAP
surveys, and that programme strategy is informed by “baseline, mid-line and end-line studies which supports planning, course
correction and evaluation” (communication with SSCO).
98 Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the South Sudan Humanitarian Crisis (2016-2019)
fears were exacerbated by the lack of availa- issues, nor to evaluate the functioning of the
ble information about the security situation in MRM. However, a number of external inform-
home areas. The 2018 perceptions study also ants suggested that UNICEF should be more
suggested that disabled people and children consistent in raising child protection issues
were the groups facing most difficulty in ac- directly at the highest level,149 rather than rely-
cessing services. ing on their being reported up through the pro-
tection cluster led by the United Nations High
6.1.8 The result of the above is that while data Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), which
on nutrition and food security are relatively reportedly tends to be dominated by displace-
strong, information about safety (security in- ment issues. UNICEF should remember that
cidents and perceptions), social cohesion and delivering its own programme forms only a
factors like ethnic partitioning, is less consist- part of its responsibilities, and that its mandate
ently gathered, and the particular implications as the leading international agency for children
of these factors for UNICEF programming are means that it has a responsibility to speak con-
less systematically considered. For example, in- sistently on child rights, and in particular to
cidents reported as ‘cattle raiding’ often appear highlight major threats to children’s security
on further investigation to be more complex and welfare. This responsibility extends be-
and to involve particular threats to children. A yond the MRM, and UNICEF has a unique role
number of respondents to the evaluation sug- to play here.
gested that UNICEF was not as responsive to
such incidents as it should be, either through 6.1.10 Child protection and gender-based vi-
the MRM or the regular programme.148 olence – both of which are thought to be dra-
matically under-reported – have their own dy-
One example given by a respondent to the eval- namics, including cultural factors, that can only
uation concerned a CFS in Pochalla (in Jonglei), be properly understood in the wider protection
where children of ten years and above ‘all ap- context. All elements of UNICEF programming
peared to have guns’. The children in question need to be informed by this wider understand-
were required to leave their guns at the door of ing, pointing to the need for assessment and
the CFS, but the issue was not otherwise taken ongoing monitoring of the protection context
up by UNICEF, being reportedly explained away in each location in collaboration with other
as “being to do with cattle raiding”. The evalu- actors. While work by UNHCR, IOM and OCHA
ators could not confirm the accuracy of this on this agenda is of great relevance, UNICEF
particular account, but this and other examples needs to find ways to consistently monitor the
point to a potentially dangerous normalization protection situation from the perspective of
of a type of situation that should immediately children and their families, and to report and
have been investigated and actioned further. act consistently on critical incidents involving
children. It should use this wider analysis to in-
6.1.9 The evaluators were not able to review form both its advocacy and its programming,
in detail UNICEF advocacy on child protection including its work on access.
148 External informant interviews in Juba and field locations.
149 Ibid.
CHAPTER 6: CROSS-CUTTING ISSUES 99
6.2 UNICEF PARTNERSHIPS IN
SOUTH SUDAN
6.2.1 UNICEF has worked with government
institutions, United Nations agencies, NGOs
and CSOs in the delivery of its programme in
South Sudan. The relative lack of capacity in
government social systems and institutions
noted in earlier sections – coupled with limited
government reach in areas that turned from
‘green’ to ‘red’ after 2016 – has led to the need
for a high degree of involvement by civil soci-
ety in the social sectors. For the service deliv-
© UNICEF/UN043949/Holt
ery component of its work in particular – and so
for the bulk of the ‘emergency’ element of its
programme – UNICEF has relied on implemen-
tation partnerships with NGOs, local, national come to them through UNICEF. At the core of
and international. There has been heavy reli- that relationship for most has been a contract
ance on local CSO and national NGO partner- (the PCA), based on the delivery of agreed
ships, partly because international NGOs have services in line with related programme doc-
often had limited ability and access to work uments. Partners are accountable to UNICEF
in South Sudan, and partly through a desire for delivery against commitments under those
to pursue a ‘localisation’ agenda.150 This has agreements, including defined reporting re-
raised a number of issues that we explore here. quirements. Partners are vetted for their ability
to comply with HACT, prevention of sexual ex-
‘Implementing’ partnerships ploitation and abuse and other UNICEF require-
ments, something that can be very onerous for
6.2.2 The relationship between UNICEF and smaller NGOs and CSOs.152 This issue is not
its partners is multifaceted, but for many of the unique to South Sudan.
NGO partners it has been predominantly a fi-
nancial relationship. This is partly a matter of The great majority of UNICEF service deliv-
perception: many of the South Sudanese NGO ery work is implemented by and through its
partners interviewed said that UNICEF was partners. Given this reality, the question for
their ‘donor’ rather than their partner.151 But the evaluation is partly how well UNICEF has
it reflects the reality that for many of the local performed the contract management aspects
and national NGOs, the bulk of their funding of its partnerships, including the efficiency of
(for some, 100 per cent of their funding) has the contracting process, and the related supply,
150 The balance of UNICEF partnership work over the evaluation period has been roughly 50:50 between national and international
NGOs. A higher number of national partnerships is balanced by the higher value of INGO contracts.
151 Interviews with NGOs in Juba and field locations. One informant from a major national NGO partner commented that “the reality
is that UNICEF is the donor and we are the implementer”.
152 The importance of due diligence in the selection of partners should be acknowledged here, particularly in the highly conflict-
affected and politicized environment in which CSOs operate and of which they form part.
100 Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the South Sudan Humanitarian Crisis (2016-2019)
quality control and monitoring functions. Be- agenda has been a matter of sometimes pro-
yond that lie questions about the organization’s tracted negotiation. This might be seen as an
wider value and performance as a partner and inevitable consequence of the requirement for
aid intermediary, and about the nature, value UNICEF to fulfil its mandate and to comply with
and sustainability of the partnerships in ques- specific organizational policies and commit-
tion.153 ments, including the CCCs, but while partners
understood this, some felt that the application
6.2.3 Although the funding and contractual of these commitments to the context could
aspect of the partnership relationship with have been better contextualized through more
NGOs has tended to dominate, the UNICEF role strategic dialogue.157 Some of the larger NGOs
in providing technical support, guidance and reported an improvement over time in their en-
capacity-building to partners is a major com- gagement with UNICEF in this regard, particu-
ponent of the relationship (particularly for the larly in respect of joint forward planning, but
smaller and less experienced NGOs) and one some also felt there was much more scope for
that is widely appreciated.154 This is the clear- genuine mutuality in this area.
est aspect of the organization’s ‘added value’
as a partner beyond its financial support role. 6.2.5 The tension between the perception
Indeed, one of the main requests from partners of UNICEF as a ‘donor’ and as a ‘partner’ is
is for greater support to and mentoring of lo- sometimes exacerbated by the organization’s
cal CSOs.155 This has both short- and potential promotion and marketing of its own role. As
longer-term benefits in terms of building CSO noted above, this is linked to the way in which
capacity. The evaluation found that the bureau- UNICEF acknowledges – or fails to acknowledge
cracy entailed in the PCA process ties up spe- – the role of its partners. “It’s demoralizing that
cialist staff whose time might be better spent UNICEF just takes credit” said one respondent
in providing technical support, quality control to the evaluation.158 Some expressed the view
and implementation support to partners (see that donors were under the impression that
further below). UNICEF did direct implementation “and were
shocked to find that it does not”. The evaluators
6.2.4 As noted in earlier sections, although saw enough evidence through its field visits
partners have been involved to some extent and interviews to confirm the validity of these
in strategy formulation, this was felt by many concerns. Failure to properly acknowledge the
respondents to be an essentially top-down central role of partners, and the joint owner-
process, depending to some extent on the par- ship of the related programme, is corrosive
ticular UNICEF section involved.156 In general, of the sense of genuine partnership and risks
NGO partners have followed an agenda set by undermining attempts at localization and the
UNICEF, although the implementation of that building of a sense of local ownership. UNICEF
153 While we limit our discussion here to the South Sudan context, these are organization-wide concerns.
154 Interviews with partners in Juba and field locations; responses to online partner survey for the evaluation.
155 Ibid.
156 This perception is shared by some of the UNICEF staff interviewed in field offices, who were frustrated that after agreeing joint
approaches through consultation with partners, these were overridden in Juba.
157 Ibid.
158 At least one respondent felt that WFP and UNHCR were better at acknowledging the role of their partners.
CHAPTER 6: CROSS-CUTTING ISSUES 101
needs to be particularly careful in its external and to take a different approach to risk man-
communications to fully acknowledge the role agement. Rather than try to micro-design the
of its partners, and it needs itself to recognize programme in advance and to try to manage
that its own role is essentially an enabling implementation and accountability risks up
rather than a direct implementation one.159 front, UNICEF should invest more in the down-
stream processes of support, quality control
6.2.6 More than any other issue, the con- and oversight. Timely production of (imperfect)
tracting and partnership agreement process PCAs and then proper monitoring of their im-
was raised as a concern by those consulted for plementation is likely to produce better results
this evaluation.160 For the most part, the issues than the current highly extended PCA negoti-
raised related to the time taken to negotiate ation process, with all of its attendant oppor-
a new or revised PCA, and the gaps between tunity costs.161 To this end, UNICEF should free
PCAs that left smaller CSOs in particular finan- up time of technical specialists who currently
cially vulnerable and sometimes struggling to spend a large proportion of their time in draft-
meet staff and other costs, sometimes over ing and reviewing contract and programme
several months. Some of the comments to documents. Some of the related process inef-
the evaluators from UNICEF partners illustrate ficiency appears to lie in the dual processes of
the concerns: “Delays in payment can last 6-9 field-level and Juba-level negotiation. Although
months. This is drastic, particularly for smaller this is not an area that the evaluation was able
NGOs… and the 7 per cent support costs have to review in detail, it demands further consider-
been withdrawn”. “We don’t have the same ation if UNICEF is to build on and strengthen its
problem with UNHCR, WFP, or UNDP.” “We current partnership portfolio.
have a very positive relationship with UNICEF
technical staff, but the relationship gets soured 6.2.8 With regard to other aspects of contact
by the expectation that we will do things at management and support, the supply function
own cost during gaps in funding.” is another key area of UNICEF added value, and
one that is greatly valued by partners. However,
6.2.7 The partner contracting process ap- problems with supply were raised by a number
pears to be an enduring problem for UNICEF. of NGO partners, national and international.
While the larger NGOs (particularly the INGOs) While the supply process had worked relatively
are generally able to ‘weather’ the extended better for education – allowing for challenges
process involved, smaller NGOs and CSOs posed by contextual factors – it was raised by
have much less capacity to do so. The evalu- partners as a persistent problem. One major
ators conclude that UNICEF needs both to national NGO partner noted that supplies were
streamline its partnership agreement process “always late, especially for more remote lo-
159 Space forbids further discussion of this topic, but UNICEF should reflect on its own guiding principles for civil society partnerships
and consider the danger that its relationship with its partners becomes one of principal-agent, or indeed of patron-client. While the
disparity of size and power may place some inevitable limits on the equity and mutuality of partnerships, the demands of urgent
service delivery should not be allowed to frustrate the goal of local ownership and sustainability.
160 External informant interviews in Juba and field locations, conducted between November 2018 and March 2019. Some of these
same concerns were noted in Part One of the evaluation.
161 In common with many large organisations, UNICEF is not always good at reckoning the effects of delayed or extended process –
which tend to be largely ‘invisible’ costs. Yet as argued here, those delays can be highly damaging both with regard to outcomes for
children and with regard to the local organisations that serve them.
102 Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the South Sudan Humanitarian Crisis (2016-2019)
cations”. An international NGO partner agreed, 6.2.10 At the central (ministry) level, collabora-
saying “we end up paying for our own logistics, tion with the Ministry of General Education and
we have to fundraise separately to airlift the Instruction was reported by both parties to be
UNICEF supplies. National NGOs probably don’t strong and constructive. As with the other social
have that luxury, so things stay in Juba”. Such sectors, the ministry has been under-resourced
problems were particularly acute in 2017 and and therefore has been particularly reliant on
early 2018, with the supply picture appearing to internationally-funded programmes and on
improve through to 2019. UNICEF and other partners to supplement its
work and extend its effective reach in contested
Other partnerships areas of the country. The partnership with the
Ministry of Gender, Child and Social Welfare
6.2.9 With the descent into conflict in 2016, – the main government body responsible for
areas where UNICEF had formerly been able to child protection and welfare – has been less ob-
work in partnership with government fell under viously effective, in large part because the min-
the control of opposition forces, demanding a istry itself is severely under-resourced and be-
switch of focus in those areas towards more di- cause the child protection agenda has not been
rect implementation, largely through CSO part- consistently prioritized by the Government.
ners. With the advent of the renewed peace pro-
cess in 2018, UNICEF made increasing efforts to 6.2.11 UNICEF has had a range of more
help regenerate a sense of local engagement broadly defined partnerships and joint pro-
with and shared ownership of its programme. grammes with other United Nations agencies.
This applies not just to the CSOs discussed Interviews conducted for the evaluation suggest
above but crucially to local government bodies. that these partnerships have generally worked
This ‘localization’ approach is an essential part of well, although in almost all cases there is scope
attempts both to ensure the sustainability of the for greater collaboration – particularly on the re-
related programme elements and to build polit- silience agenda and approaches like multi-pur-
ical accountability for ensuring children’s secu- pose cash distribution. Probably the most signif-
rity and well-being (as discussed in Part One). icant of these partnerships has been with WFP.
However, as with CSOs, the lack of local govern- Here, the direct collaboration on IRRMs was felt
ment capacity and resources – and varying de- to have been excellent and has considerably ex-
grees of political and institutional commitment tended the reach of both agencies.162 Some other
– present a major challenge to this strategy. The areas of work still required stronger joint efforts,
evaluation was not able to consider this issue in notably in relation to school feeding and WASH
detail, but it notes that UNICEF is much better in schools. WFP informants noted that the areas
placed than most international agencies to build that had worked best were those conceived as a
partnerships with local authorities, and indeed jointly delivered package between UNICEF and
to help foster collaboration between those au- WFP – as with the joint European Union-funded
thorities and local CSOs. Despite the challenges education in emergencies programme. Different
involved, this should remain a central part of the targeting criteria between the two agencies was
UNICEF approach. noted as one barrier to closer collaboration.163
162 External KII, Juba.
163 Ibid.
CHAPTER 6: CROSS-CUTTING ISSUES 103
tility of funding flows to South Sudan, this is
also a very fragile set of arrangements. Gaps
or delays in funding such as occurred in 2019,
as well impacting vital services for children, are
potentially disastrous for smaller CSOs. Staff
and technical know-how are lost, and the loss
of local capacity makes sustainability and local
ownership harder to achieve.
6.2.13 The challenge for UNICEF in the me-
dium term is to assist the transition to a more
resilient and sustainable set of national and
local institutions for children (government and
CSO), including more predictable and reliable
funding and technical support. In the short
term, meeting ongoing acute needs requires
© UNICEF/UN043955/Holt
continued direct support and oversight – and
securing the necessary programme funding,
preferably on a multi-annual basis. The latter
Among other agencies interviewed, FAO also in turn depends in part on donor confidence
noted the need for more joint programming in the partnership arrangements with both
on resilience and for closer collaboration with government and CSOs to deliver vital services
UNICEF on nutrition education and specifically effectively and accountably. But it also de-
education for pastoralist children, stressing its pends on advocacy with the donors about the
significance for the peace process. consequences of lack of funding, both for the
immediate well-being and security of children,
Conclusion and for the viability of the local and national
institutions on which they are likely to depend
6.2.12 UNICEF has done well to build a port- in the future.
folio of civil society partnerships to enable its
emergency programme to cover both con-
flict-affected and more stable areas over time. 6.3 THE GENERATION AND USE
It has found a pragmatic balance between in-
OF CHILD-RELATED DATA
ternational, national and local implementing
AND EVIDENCE
partnerships alongside ongoing partnerships
with government and United Nations bodies. 6.3.1 Part One of the evaluation highlighted
Although the quality of services has been var- the scarcity of data on some key aspects of the
iable (as discussed in previous sections of this ‘child survival’ sectors (WASH, health, nutri-
report), this approach has substantially paid tion). Some of this concerned a lack of reliable
off in terms of programme delivery and to a and up-to-date contextual data, for example
lesser extent in terms of building local and na- on people’s access to improved water sources,
tional capacity. However, given the high level but in some cases, it also concerned gaps or
of dependency of smaller agencies on UNICEF uncertainties in the programme-related data.
financial and technical support, and the vola- As noted in Section 5, this remains an area of
104 Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the South Sudan Humanitarian Crisis (2016-2019)
concern for the child survival sectors, and the 2019. For data reported through the RAM there
availability both of reliable contextual and pro- were no target figures, making it hard to make
gramme-related data is also a matter of concern inter-year comparisons or to draw substantive
in the CP and education sectors that are the fo- conclusions about results. At the child protec-
cus of the present evaluation. In this section we tion sub-cluster level, data are reportedly an-
consider some of the challenges involved, as alysed and shared with partners, at least for
well as questions about the management and accessible areas, but the information available
utilization of data by UNICEF. (dating back to 2016) on the sub-cluster website
is not updated.164 Besides assessments con-
6.3.2 Given the general lack of updated con- ducted by NGOs, it was not clear to the evalua-
textual data for South Sudan, the scope for tors whether there was an annual assessment
monitoring progress at outcome level has been process led by the sub-cluster to feed into the
very limited. The last national household survey HNO.
was done in 2010 and an update of the situation
of women and children done in 2017/2018. Pop- 6.3.4 The data situation is better in the ed-
ulation data were last collected in the 2008 cen- ucation sector. Enrolment and access data are
sus and the country has been using population collected regularly through UNICEF partners.
projections since. Gender-disaggregated data There is also an annual education census and
for most programmes are either not available update of education management information
or are not consistently generated, and the lack systems data, while programmes like BTL and
of availability of outcome-level data has been the Girls’ Education South Sudan programme
a problem for most elements of the UNICEF (GESS) also provide interim updates on the
programme. With the gender-based violence overall education situation. Gaps remain, how-
programme for example, data are available ever, particularly with regard to data on educa-
concerning the population reached with pre- tion outcomes for girls and boys, for which the
vention and response services, but they are not latest available information dates back to na-
sufficient to draw conclusions on the impact tional educational assessments in 2016/2017.165
of the programme on the incidence of gen- There are also gaps in the enrolment data for
der-based violence, nor to shed light on trends secondary education. The education cluster
for issues like domestic violence. has a website with reasonably up-to-date in-
formation on various aspects of the education
6.3.3 Gaps in the available information have cluster’s work, including updates of educa-
limited the evaluability of the child protec- tion-related data.166 An annual education needs
tion elements of the programme in particular. assessment feeds into the HNO, and this is sup-
Only limited data from the MRM process were plemented by NGO assessments on specific as-
available to the evaluators, but even data for pects of education in emergencies.
CAAFAG were incomplete in the HACs for 2017-
164 https://www.humanitarianresponse.info/en/operations/south-sudan/child-protection
165 UNICEF & MoGEI Assessment of Early Grade Learners in Literacy and Numeracy in South Sudan - Assessments 1 (2017) and 2
(2018) Final Reports
166 https://www.humanitarianresponse.info/en/operations/south-sudan/education
CHAPTER 6: CROSS-CUTTING ISSUES 105
UNICEF target-setting and choice ter for its reporting, thereby avoiding the confu-
of indicators sion created by the use of different indicators.
But here the evaluators felt that UNICEF should
6.3.5 Target-setting and outcome monitoring have some indicators relating specifically to its
are areas of some concern for the programme own performance, e.g. in its role as cluster lead
as a whole, with questions arising about the agency (for example, ensuring a functional and
rationale for (and realism of) targets set and regularly updated cluster website).
the focus on reporting outputs (typically ‘num-
bers reached’ with a given service) with little Programme monitoring and reporting
reference to actual outcomes. The child protec-
tion programme is of particular concern in this 6.3.7 The primary source for programme-re-
regard, compounded by the data gaps noted lated data is UNICEF implementing partners,167
above. Moreover, UNICEF CP-related pro- via the PCA monitoring and reporting process.
gramme data were found to be quite radically Despite capacity-building in this area, local
inconsistent between sources (HAC and RAM) partner capacity to monitor and report accu-
and between years (indicators and targets). No rately and in a timely way time is said to have
satisfactory explanation for these inconsisten- remained limited.168 With the recent emphasis
cies could be provided to the evaluators. This is on ‘localization’ and engagement of more na-
an area that demands remedial action, since it tional NGOs, capacity constraints in this area
has a significant bearing on the organization’s have become both more apparent and more
ability to manage and account properly for its significant. While some improvements in local
work in this area. This should include strength- partner reporting (especially in child protec-
ening the data quality assurance process in the tion) were observed over the evaluation pe-
SSCO. riod,169 timely reporting is still a problem and
questions remain about the accuracy of the
6.3.6 With regard to technical capacity devel- data reported (see below).
opment of partners working on child protection,
the indicator for the relevant outputs (“quality 6.3.8 Through field monitoring visits,
technical support to CP programme delivery”) UNICEF staff follow-up on PCA implementation
does not adequately reflect the content of the and quality assurance. The education section
capacity development work, which includes appears to have a well joined-up approach to
provision of guidelines, training, coaching and monitoring. Its field monitoring plan incorpo-
other elements. More importantly, since it is rates a HACT quality assurance process and is
entirely output-based, it does not provide a ba- based on a standard field monitoring checklist/
sis to gauge the effect of these interventions. programme visit report that allows the staff to
collect standardized data. Action points arising
For its education in emergencies work, the ed- from these field visits are discussed on a weekly
ucation section has (since 2018) harmonized its basis and the action tracker is shared with the
use of indicators with that of the education clus- field offices for follow-up and implementation.
167 UNICEF has 131 CSO partners and of these 44% are national NGOs receiving 28% of UNICEF funding (2018 COAR).
168 KII UNICEF SSCO staff, Juba.
169 Field visits and KIIs.
106 Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the South Sudan Humanitarian Crisis (2016-2019)
Reported results help determine the length of the data received. Some of the questions con-
the PCA and the periodicity of reporting. cern the completeness of the data reported: for
example, where data have been reported for
Programme data: Coverage, reliability the sub-national or state level, the evaluation
found that numbers reported on ‘reach’ did not
6.3.9 A number of questions were raised by always represent coverage data for the whole
UNICEF staff during the evaluation about the state or county.
reliability and accuracy of the results reported
by partners. Security and other challenges have 6.3.10 To help fill programme performance
meant that oversight work and monitoring by and context-related data gaps, the social pol-
UNICEF staff has often been frustrated. The icy, planning and monitoring and evaluation
result is a relatively low level of confidence in (SPPME) section launched a sentinel moni-
© UNICEF/UNI201156/Ohanesian
170 KII Juba. Other important tools being used to improve the quality of contextual data include Lot Quality Assurance Sampling
(LQAS) for health service performance and outcomes; satellite imagery to help make population estimates, and infrastructure
mapping and similar techniques for sector-specific research activities.
CHAPTER 6: CROSS-CUTTING ISSUES 107
toring system in 2019 using selected schools 6.3.12 Within the education section, there is
and health facilities to routinely collect data on an M&E team that has since 2018 developed
women and children, and to build a picture of a monitoring network to enable data collation
trends and disparities over time to support pro- and sharing between the partners, field offices
gramme implementation.170 SPPME also un- and the M&E team in Juba. Quality assurance
dertook an office-wide data mapping exercise and consolidation of all the data is done by the
in 2018. A centralized database was established M&E team within the section. The information
in 2019 to serve as a repository for results data, collected through these dashboards is reported
disaggregated by field location and including to be useful for donor reporting, feedback
monthly reporting against the relevant indica- discussion with partners and addressing the
tors. It was unclear to the evaluators to what strategic monitoring questions. Implementing
extent the database had been used in practice partner monitoring also done through one of
for programme management purposes. the M&E dashboards involves tracking of all
indicators from the project documents. This
More generally, steps were taken from 2018 system is reported to have worked well and
to strengthen the monitoring and evaluation to have allowed the section to monitor and
(M&E) function both at Juba and field office follow-up issues relating to programme imple-
levels. For example, an M&E specialist for the mentation.
CP section was recruited in 2019, and the educa-
tion section also has its own M&E capacity. This Utilization of data
represents an important advance, although the
evaluation was not able to judge the effects of 6.3.13 While UNICEF collects a lot of data,
specific measures taken. especially related to programme outputs, it is
not clear how much of that evidence is used,
Information management and the particularly in informing real-time emergency
responses and to influence ongoing program-
use of data
ming. The IRRM mechanism has been useful in
6.3.11 UNICEF has considerably strength- extending assessments and monitoring some
ened both its own information management of these remote locations and also providing a
capacity and that of the relevant clusters. The glimpse on what more can be done in terms
education and CP Sections have their own in- of response to these hard to reach populations.
formation management officers (IMOs), as well However, it is unclear how systematically the
as providing IMOs for the education cluster and resulting data have been collated and used.
(from 2018) the CP sub-cluster. At Juba level,
between 2016-2018, the arrangement was such
that the information management officer for
the sub-cluster would split his time 50/50 with
the UNICEF CP section to provide M&E sup-
port, but this was found to be insufficient.
108 Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the South Sudan Humanitarian Crisis (2016-2019)
7
CONCLUSIONS AND
RECOMMENDATIONS
© UNICEF/UN014035/Rich
7.1 OVERALL CONCLUSIONS ON THE 7.1.2 While this evaluation focuses on the
UNICEF RESPONSE, 2016-2019 period up to the end of 2019, the year 2020 has
seen major developments. The political settle-
ment and uneasy peace that accompanies it
7.1.1 UNICEF has faced major strategic chal- has allowed greater access for service delivery
lenges in South Sudan. On the one hand, the but has not resolved many of the underlying
protracted and multi-faceted crisis of the past causes of instability. Local insecurity and con-
few years has created acute vulnerabilities flict remain a reality for many. In system terms,
and support needs for millions of children. On these factors and continued lack of investment
the other hand, the national and local govern- in the social sectors have meant ongoing major
mental institutions and systems that would deficits in essential services for children. The
normally be expected to address those needs COVID-19 pandemic and related control meas-
and to protect children have been (largely) ures have had a significant impact in some
weak or absent, and civil society has had only areas, notably through the closure of schools,
very limited capacity to provide services. As a and education progress made up to 2019 is in
result, direct support to large-scale emergency danger of being reversed. Yet for most South
service delivery – mainly through NGO part- Sudanese, COVID it is just one among many
ners – has constituted a clear strategic priority factors with which they have to contend. The
for UNICEF. But the system-strengthening and need for emergency services remains high and
capacity-building agenda that is the necessary the resilience agenda remains a vital one.
complement to direct service delivery has only
fragile foundations to build on, both in terms 7.1.3 The overall UNICEF response to im-
of governmental systems and civil society ca- mediate priority needs for children – the main
pacity. Donor support to this agenda, and par- focus of this evaluation – has been both appro-
ticularly to government system strengthening, priate and largely effective over the evaluation
has been constrained by lack of trust and scep- period. The evaluation found that UNICEF and
ticism about political will and the potential for its partners had been able to deliver essential
progress. services to a substantial proportion of the pop-
ulation in greatest need, within the constraints
Underlying all of this has been the fundamen- of the insecure context, limited access and sig-
tally insecure and unstable environment result- nificant funding deficits (particularly in 2019).
ing from conflict, political instability and eco- The organization deserves great credit for its
nomic breakdown that has severely affected efforts in this regard, which have often been
the physical, social and economic security of crucial to the well-being and life chances of
millions of children and their families. That those it has reached. This has been true in the
instability has also affected the institutions sectors that were the main focus of this evalua-
on which families rely, including the school tion –education and child protection – as well as
system, a situation now compounded by the in the ‘child survival’ sectors of WASH, health
COVID-19 epidemic control measures. And it and nutrition. It must however be recognized
has created an extremely challenging operat- that a high proportion of children in need of
ing environment for agencies seeking to sup- emergency assistance (well over 50 per cent in
port essential services. most sectors) have remained without support.
110 Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the South Sudan Humanitarian Crisis (2016-2019)
Although UNICEF has done its best to target ar- peace and stability – demands such an evolu-
eas and groups of children with the highest pri- tion, yet it remains unclear what the end point
ority needs, this has not always been possible of the transition may be. It sometimes seems
in the prevailing context and with the resources that UNICEF and others are trying to build
available. bridges across a river whose far bank they can-
not yet see, and to construct solid foundations
7.1.4 Any evaluation of UNICEF work in this on a bed of shifting sand.
context has to recognize the dual challenge
noted above: the need to address the imme- 7.1.6 Delivering its own programme has
diate and acute needs of millions of children been the dominant feature of UNICEF work in
while helping to build the systems and capac- South Sudan over the evaluation period. Its
ities required to do so on a sustainable basis. role as an advocate for children has been less
That challenge exists both within and beyond prominent. UNICEF should remember that de-
the humanitarian agenda. In the medium and livering its own programme forms only a part
longer term, the added value of UNICEF must of its responsibilities, and that its mandate as
be judged in terms of its support to building the leading international agency for children
effective and resilient systems, institutions and means that it has a responsibility to speak
capacities for children as much as in terms of consistently on child rights, and in particular
enabling quality service delivery. Yet doing so to highlight major threats to children’s secu-
presents an immense strategic and program- rity and welfare. This responsibility extends
matic challenge for UNICEF and its partners, beyond the MRM and the CAAFAG agenda,
and one which (largely for reasons beyond its where UNICEF has demonstrated the power of
control) it has to date been able to address only advocacy. Responding to the formidable chal-
to a limited extent. Specifically, UNICEF efforts lenges of implementing its own programme
at system strengthening and capacity-building has meant that UNICEF may at times have lost
have been challenged by the structural capac- sight of the bigger picture concerning children
ity deficits noted above, themselves in many – or has at least not been as vocal about the
ways a result of chronic under-investment. vulnerabilities and service deficits as might be
expected. While funding of the UNICEF pro-
7.1.5 Over the latter part of the evaluation gramme is clearly an important advocacy goal,
period, as the peace process has evolved, there more consistent communication and advocacy
has been a noticeable change of emphasis beyond that agenda is needed.
by UNICEF, a broadening of the strategy from
predominantly responsive to more preventive 7.1.7 On the application of the ‘centrality of
(resilience) approaches. The joint 2019-2023 protection’ principle and the mainstreaming
UNICEF-WFP multi-sectoral resilience pro- of protection concerns throughout its pro-
gramme illustrates this evolution. This has been gramme, UNICEF (in common with many other
accompanied by greater planning for transition agencies) appears to have made little progress.
from humanitarian to more sustainable devel- The evaluation found that staff see protection
opmental approaches. The protracted nature almost exclusively in terms of child protection.
of the crisis – and the prospects for enduring Although elements of the ‘do no harm’ principle
CHAPTER 7: CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS 111
were found in much of the UNICEF programme of funding flows to South Sudan, this is also a
in South Sudan (see Part One evaluation), the very fragile set of arrangements. Gaps or de-
evaluators conclude that UNICEF and its part- lays in funding such as those that occurred in
ners could do more to ensure that families can 2019, as well impacting vital services for chil-
access the services they provides in safety and dren, are disastrous for smaller CSOs. Staff
dignity. and technical know-how are lost, and the loss
of local capacity makes sustainability and local
Most fundamentally, the UNICEF approach ownership harder to achieve. Loss of key gen-
does not appear to be consistently grounded in der-based violence partners is one example of
an analysis of the wider security context – and this.
of people’s response to that context. Much of
the threat analysis of UNICEF and of the wider UNICEF can help mitigate this fragility by
United Nations system (e.g. as articulated in streamlining its partnership agreement pro-
the HRPs) is based on the IPC system of ‘phase cess, adjusting its approach to risk manage-
classification’, highlighting threats to people’s ment and agreeing multi-year partnerships. In
ability to secure basic needs (food, health, etc.). the short term, meeting ongoing acute needs
The IPC classification does not capture the fac- requires continued direct support and over-
tors driving people’s behaviour. sight – and securing the necessary programme
funding. The latter in turn depends in part on
The result of the above is that while data on nu- donor confidence in partnership arrangements
trition and food security are relatively strong, with both government and CSOs to deliver vital
information about safety (security incidents services effectively and accountably. It also de-
and perceptions), social cohesion and factors pends on advocacy with the donors about the
like ethnic partitioning is less consistently gath- consequences of lack of funding, both for the
ered, and the particular implications of these immediate well-being and security of children,
factors for UNICEF programming are less sys- and for the viability of local and national insti-
tematically considered. tutions on which they are likely to depend in
the future.
7.1.8 UNICEF has done well to build a port-
folio of civil society partnerships to enable 7.1.9 Maximizing the synergies between
its emergency programme to cover both con- the different sectors in which UNICEF works
flict-affected and more stable areas over time. is rightly thought to be essential to an effec-
It has found a pragmatic balance between in- tive response. Yet although UNICEF has made
ternational, national and local implementing efforts to build an integrated programme, the
partnerships alongside ongoing partnerships evaluators were left with a sense that the mul-
with government and United Nations bodies. ti-sectoral model of programming is not ‘natu-
Although the quality of services has been vari- ral’ within the organization. Sectors are siloed,
able, this approach has substantially paid off in not least because of UNICEF administrative
terms of programme delivery and – to a lesser and financial processes, and multi-sectoral
extent – in terms of building local and national programming is not incentivised. Nor does the
capacity. However, given the high level of de- PCA process encourage such integrated ap-
pendency of smaller agencies on UNICEF fi- proaches.
nancial and technical support, and the volatility
112 Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the South Sudan Humanitarian Crisis (2016-2019)
7.1.10 While some progress has been made 7.2 CONCLUSIONS ON EDUCATION
over the evaluation period with regard to da- AND CHILD PROTECTION
ta-gathering and monitoring, much remains
to be done – both on contextual and pro-
Education
gramme-related data. UNICEF should continue
to work with government and others to increase 7.2.1 The evaluation found that the UNICEF
the availability and reliability of outcome data, programme has been grounded in regular as-
notably with regard to educational outcomes sessment and has responded to priority needs
for girls and boys. Filling needs assessment as far the situation and access has allowed.
and data gaps in areas like gender-based vio- The emergency education response rightly fo-
lence, CAAFAG and other areas of child protec- cussed on providing emergency education in
tion should be a matter of renewed effort, and the most conflict-affected states, with priority
should involve more regular use of (sensitively given to areas in which the number of out of
conducted) surveys and focus group discus- school children was highest. The IRRM mech-
sions. UNICEF must ensure proper monitoring, anism was used as a last resort for areas that
reporting and information management for its were otherwise very hard to reach. In 2019 as a
work on child protection, which has been defi- result of the peace process, UNICEF and the ed-
cient both from a management and accountabil- ucation cluster have expanded the programme
ity perspective. Inconsistencies and gaps in the to all states. Despite that, the context remained
data and reporting have significantly affected very challenging: high levels of localized inse-
the evaluability of this area of UNICEF work. curity and displacement continue, while rains
© UNICEF/UN070620/Hatcher-Moore
CHAPTER 7: CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS 113
and floods are significant constraints on ac- able to respond flexibly to the evolving educa-
cess. As with many other sectors, a major fund- tion needs found in South Sudan’s highly chal-
ing shortfall 2019 limited programme coverage lenging environment. However, although the
in that year. links between the three components have be-
come clearer over the course of the evaluation
7.2.2 The evaluation concludes that UNICEF period, more work is needed to spell out those
did well to expand its education work over links in programmatic terms.
the evaluation period in the face of evolving
needs and new opportunities, although pro- 7.2.4 The UNICEF emergency education
gress has stalled more recently (2019/20) – and strategy has been consistent with the educa-
the COVID-19 crisis now threatens to reverse tion cluster strategy and generally also with
the gains made. Since 2016-2017, UNICEF tar- the CCCs (2010 version). UNICEF has become
get-setting had been based on an attempt to increasingly responsive to the feedback of
progressively reduce the number of children partners, although community involvement in
out of school while retaining children already strategy development and planning has been
enrolled. Target figures show a progressive in- limited.
crease of approximately 200,000 children per
year to be reintegrated in the school system 7.2.5 The emergency education programme
or provided with emergency education oppor- has achieved very substantial results through-
tunities. However, the scale of the programme out the evaluation period. This is particularly
remains insufficient to cover the emergency true with regard to access to education (enrol-
education needs: UNICEF covered 30 per cent ment and retention) for IDPs in PoCs and hosted
of the assessed education needs in 2016; 24 in communities; establishing safe education fa-
per cent in 2017, 30 per cent in 2018 and 26 cilities (temporary learning spaces); provision
per cent in 2019. Moreover, inclusion of some of essential education material; teacher train-
of the most vulnerable – for example children ing; and community mobilization and engage-
with disabilities, children in pastoralist com- ment through SMCs, PTAs, and mobilization
munities, over-age students and girls facing campaigns.
early and forced marriage – is addressed only
to a limited extent. Most recently, efforts to ex- However, despite all efforts, serious questions
tend access to education have been massively remain over the quality of teaching – and there-
compromised in 2020 by school closures due fore about educational outcomes for children.
to COVID-19. These will extend into 2021 and Many teachers themselves have only limited
threatens to reverse the progress made over education and limited literacy. Short duration
the evaluation period. training and limited follow-up and supervision
are in themselves not sufficient to produce the
7.2.3 The UNICEF education response strat- desired change in teaching quality.
egy from 2016 to 2019 has been built on a com-
bination of humanitarian and development 7.2.6 The main challenge to direct fulfilment
elements. The two main components (educa- of the CCCs – given the limits to government
tion in emergency, and system strengthening) capacity – has been the limited scale of the
were linked through a cross-cutting approach programme compared to needs, and limited
to conflict-sensitive education and peacebuild- coverage due to access constraints. On the
ing. The result has been a programme that was core objective of increasing enrolment, there is
114 Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the South Sudan Humanitarian Crisis (2016-2019)
clear evidence that UNICEF has been effective community have had access to a wide range of
in bringing large numbers of conflict-affected relevant and well-presented information.
children into schools. Some improvement in
the enrolment of girls (from 20 per cent to 40 7.2.9 The emergency education programme
per cent) has been supported by specific in- has worked on building the resilience of chil-
centives for girls' attendance (cash and food), dren and communities as well as teachers and
provision of dignity kits, and separate latrines other education personnel. Despite important
for girls. However, high drop-out rates remain gains (e.g. improvement of girls’ enrolment),
as well as strong cultural and economic coun- more needs to be done to make sure that
ter-factors. conditions for resilience are sustained. This in-
cludes the availability of functioning separate
7.2.7 Coordination of the education pro- WASH facilities in schools for girls and boys,
gramme with other sectors within UNICEF has coaching and supervision for trained teachers
been variable. It has worked well with child and involvement of communities in education
protection (including child protection messag- planning. Crucially, it also includes sustainable
ing, psychosocial support and mine risk educa- schemes for paying teachers’ salaries and in-
tion) and relatively well with WASH, although centives.
maintenance of WASH facilities in schools has
been a weakness – something that appears to 7.2.10 UNICEF has invested in partnerships
have knock-on effects with regard to extend- with national NGOs and CBOs, in line with the
ing school feeding programmes. Coordination localization agenda. More needs to be done to
with health and nutrition appears very weak. strengthen the delivery capacity of these CSOs
(including faith-based organisations). Com-
7.2.8 UNICEF has contributed significantly munity mobilization and engagement though
to the education cluster both at national and campaigns and work with PTAs has contributed
state level. This included coordination of inter- to increased enrolment and retention of girls
ventions, addressing gaps without duplication, in PoCs and targeted communities. Aware-
information management, needs assessments, ness-raising of communities through C4D ap-
providing technical expertise, developing proaches also contributed to the safety and
standards and guidance, and supporting the protection of children on their way to education
technical capacity development of cluster facilities and in schools. Despite these positive
members. The ability of students from the PoCs achievements, sustained community mobiliza-
to take part in national exams can be attributed tion has been constrained by the low level of
largely to the work of the cluster. parental education and weak community partic-
ipation in education planning.
Co-leadership of the national/central education
cluster with Save the Children has worked well. 7.2.11 UNICEF has invested substantially in
During field visits, all the respondents from provision of TLS, education supplies, basic
NGOs expressed a high degree of satisfaction training, and incentives for teachers/volunteer
with the national cluster response. Informa- teachers. While these have been essential areas
tion management and information-sharing of intervention in an emergency context and
by the education cluster appear to have been have extended the UNICEF reach considerably
consistent and effective, and the humanitarian in otherwise inaccessible areas, there are inevi-
table questions about the quality and sustaina-
CHAPTER 7: CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS 115
bility of results achieved through this approach.
While UNICEF and its partners need to maintain
direct support to fill critical gaps for crisis-af-
fected populations not otherwise catered for by
the mainstream education system, it also needs
to plan for transition to a more sustainable ap-
proach in the medium to longer term.
Child protection
7.2.12 Part One of the present evaluation
noted that “more than in any other ‘sector’,
the gap between vulnerabilities and the abil-
ity of humanitarian agencies to reduce them
© UNICEF/UN069038/Hatcher-Moore
is apparent in relation to child protection”.
Many of the threats to children have come not
from the direct effects of conflict, but from the
more indirect effects of (for example) living in Limited access and availability of national and
displaced camps, the breakdown of law and local capacities have challenged prioritization.
order, increased criminality and the disruption More recently, and most notably in 2019, lim-
of community protection mechanisms. Some ited funding has had a dramatic adverse im-
threats, particularly for girls, arise from the in- pact on the scale and scope of the programme
tensification of existing cultural practices such delivered.
as early or forced marriage.
7.2.15 Within its limits, the child protection
7.2.13 Despite the constraints in terms of da- programme was found to be highly relevant to
ta-gathering, the UNICEF child protection pro- the most critical vulnerabilities and protection
gramme in South Sudan appears to have been needs of children, and made a significant con-
based on a sound understanding of the protec- tribution to reducing the number of children
tion issues involved and their inter-relations. and young people exposed to, or at risk of, vi-
The response was informed by regularly up- olence, exploitation and abuse in emergency
dated situation of women and children surveys, and non-emergency settings. The programme
protection and child protection assessments as has balanced delivering critical child protection
part of the HNO process, and thematic situa- services, promoting positive behaviours and
tion analysis for child protection in emergency strengthening policies and systems to build a
areas. A partner capacity assessment in child protective environment for children. The capac-
protection (2017) has contributed to shaping ity development effort toward local partners
the type of technical support and capacity de- (through training and technical guidance) has
velopment effort needed by partners. been particularly appropriate and necessary.
7.2.14 The scale of the UNICEF programme 7.2.16 The child protection in emergency re-
remains modest compared to the extent of the sponse was rightly focused on enabling critical
protection needs in the country and the prioriti- child protection services and based on a clearly
sation and targeting strategy are not fully clear. defined overall strategy. Theories of change
116 Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the South Sudan Humanitarian Crisis (2016-2019)
have been clearly articulated for each pro- UNICEF and its partners have operated. Within
gramme cycle, as well as for individual thematic those limits, UNICEF managed to balance ser-
areas. The overall strategy is aligned over time vice delivery with support to system-building,
with those of the child protection sub-cluster, service delivery, capacity development of part-
the gender-based violence sub-cluster and con- ners and changing of social norms (especially
sequently with the protection cluster strategy on gender-based violence). This effort has not
and the overarching protection strategy of the yet fully borne fruit, although some encourag-
HCT. The strategy includes a mixed humani- ing results have been seen. It is to be expected
tarian and development approach, combining that some of the gains achieved so far will set
a system-strengthening component with an back in 2020, given the effects of COVID-19 and
emergency child protection service delivery continuing funding constraints. In particular,
component. Although this evaluation focuses the combined effect of economic hardship and
on the latter, the evaluation acknowledges the closure of schools may have increased child
importance of the continued effort to build an protection risks, including early marriage, ex-
enabling environment, and more immediately ploitation and abuse.
of building capacity to deliver consistent and
good quality services for child protection. 7.2.19 In 2019 in particular, child protection
services were challenged by a major lack of re-
7.2.17 UNICEF lacks an overall child protec- sources. This has mostly affected the CAAFAG
tion mainstreaming strategy across UNICEF reintegration, PSS activities, gender-based vi-
sections and sectors of intervention. The ex- olence and MRE. More generally, operational
ception to this is the management response to constraints and shifting vulnerabilities have
the gender-based violence evaluation, which meant that UNICEF has often had to operate
provided a clear strategic framework for main- in ‘fire-fighting’ and responsive mode, and
streaming of gender-based violence concerns has not always been able to take advantage
in other sectors. of opportunities as they arise. Child protection
services were most effective in PoCs and in
Integration171 of child protection in UNICEF sec- situations in which engagement with commu-
tions and sectors is not fully articulated, with nities, families and children could be more sys-
the exception of C4D and education. Whenever tematic, allowing a balance of prevention and
a clear integration strategy exists, UNICEF has response services. As noted in Part One of the
shown that wider protection outcomes could evaluation, CP services delivered through the
be achieved through the synergies between IRRM probably had relatively limited impact.
various sectors. Examples of this are the im- That said, targets and results disaggregated
pact at community level of CAAFAG reintegra- by modalities of intervention (static, outreach,
tion programmes and that of the WASH and mobile and IRRM) are not available. This makes
gender-based violence integrated programme. it impossible to evaluate the effectiveness of
the different operation modalities.
7.2.18 Overall, the child protection pro-
gramme has been effective within its limited 7.2.20 The child protection programme has
scope, given the severe constraints under which largely delivered against the CCCs. All the-
171 For the purpose of this report “integration” refers to the intentional combination of child protection and GBV services within other
sectors. For example incorporation of MRE as subject in the education curricula.
CHAPTER 7: CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS 117
matic areas show progress towards improving outcomes. Yet as noted above integrated pro-
quality of services through provision of the- gramming appears hard to achieve in the cur-
matic guidance and standard methodological rent organizational culture. This way of working
approaches. There remain areas of weakness. creates a disjointed picture in which UNICEF
For example, participation of girls and boys, itself cannot fully read the impact and multi-
families and communities in the programming plier effects of multi-sectoral programming on
has not always been ensured throughout the the protection of girls and boys, families and
programme. This requires further work. communities.
Overall the mainstreaming of child protection
has been weak in nutrition, health and WASH, 7.3 CONCLUSIONS ON WASH,
although much stronger in education. The gen-
HEALTH AND NUTRITION
der-based violence agenda, by contrast, has
been consistently mainstreamed throughout 7.3.1 In 2019, UNICEF made some progress
the response. on the system-strengthening aspects of the
WASH agenda, and on better integrating its
7.2.21 UNICEF has significantly contributed WASH response with other aspects of its work.
to child protection coordination mechanisms It also made some progress on community
both at central and state levels. This included engagement and on building partnerships for
providing technical expertise to lead technical sustainable WASH initiatives.
working groups on thematic areas, developing
standards and guidance, and supporting tech- Yet despite the extent of continuing WASH
nical capacity development of cluster mem- needs, UNICEF results showed a major drop-
bers. However, the coordination capacity of off in ‘safe water’ results achievement between
the sub-cluster is low compared to the coordi- 2016-2017 and 2018-2019. This appears to be
nation needs in the country, especially at state related to lack of available funding as much
level. Amongst other effects, this contributed to as to access and other challenges – and it rep-
major gaps in information-sharing. resents a major setback in tackling one of the
major areas of vulnerability for South Suda-
7.2.22 UNICEF has made a significant con- nese children and their families. The COVID-19
tribution to strengthening local CP capacities pandemic is reported to have placed additional
through technical support and capacity devel- constraints on the programme in 2020. WASH
opment. These efforts were greatly appreciated in schools remains a priority area for collabora-
by partners, especially national NGOs. Its work tion and scale-up, particularly given its crucial
on national system strengthening (including links to health and nutrition as well as its signif-
social workforce strengthening) remains im- icance for girls’ attendance at school.
portant, though the nature of the context is
such that only limited progress has been possi- 7.3.2 With regard to health, UNICEF and its
ble in this area. partners have achieved significant vaccination
results, but they have struggled to maintain
UNICEF needs to increase its focus on mul- vaccination coverage in areas affected by con-
ti-sectoral programming as a way of building flict and other humanitarian crises. Together
resilience. Gender-based violence and CAAFAG with its WASH work, UNICEF preventive work
integrated programming showed very positive
118 Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the South Sudan Humanitarian Crisis (2016-2019)
7.4 RECOMMENDATIONS
on vaccination and distribution of treated bed
nets is perhaps its most important health con- These recommendations are made on the ba-
tribution. sis of analysis of UNICEF emergency work in
South Sudan up to the end of 2019 and mostly
UNICEF continues to play a significant role derive from analysis that holds true for the
both in curative and preventive interventions. whole of the evaluation period (2016-2019). In
The treatment of children with severe acute other words, they reflect more structural issues
malnutrition remains a vital necessity, while that the evaluators believe UNICEF needs to
health promotion work at community level address in order to increase the coverage, rel-
– including work through the integrated com- evance, effectiveness and quality of its emer-
munity mobilization network – is important to gency-related work in South Sudan, and to
the wider public health agenda in South Sudan help build the foundations for stronger local
as well as specifically to the promotion of child and national institutions to protect and educate
health. South Sudanese children in the future.
7.3.3 Despite an apparent improvement over While the evaluators believe that the recom-
the years since 2010, the nutrition situation re- mendations remain valid and relevant at the
mained critical by the end of 2019. UNICEF and time of writing (end of 2020), they will need to
its partners have done well to maintain and grow be interpreted and applied in the light of the
its treatment programme for children with SAM current context in South Sudan and the situ-
over the evaluation period. UNICEF has also sig- ation currently faced by UNICEF and its part-
nificantly expanded provision of counselling on ners. The ongoing COVID-19 pandemic and its
appropriate IYCF and helped to maintain high impact is one of the main variables here, and
levels (69 per cent) of exclusive breastfeeding – some of the recommendations take specific ac-
although the quality of counselling services ap- count of this. But other factors arising in 2020
pears to be a significant constraint on progress – including the political and economic context,
in this area. More broadly, its work in partner- as well as the donor funding picture – will also
ship with WFP, FAO, the Ministry of Health and have changed the operating landscape.
a range of other partners on nutrition-related
resilience is an important contribution to the Recommendation 1: Education
prevention and preparedness agenda. UNICEF should thoroughly review its strategy
and planning on education in the light of the
COVID-19 pandemic. It should work with the
government (and specifically MoGEI) to forge
stronger policy and planning links between
emergency education interventions and the
mainstream education system. It should work
to strengthen inclusion in education for the
most vulnerable, and to strengthen inter-sec-
toral links between education, nutrition, health
and WASH. And it should continue to pro-
mote a localization agenda for EiE, including
investment in CSO capacities and education
© UNICEF/UNI169657/Nesbitt
support partnerships with local authorities.
CHAPTER 7: CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS 119
tions in emergency education should be
R1.1 Adapting to the impact of COVID-19
stressed, and partnership between CSOs
UNICEF should revise and adapt the ed-
and government promoted.
ucation programme strategy and plan
– including implementation of the BTL
evaluation management response plan R1.3 Inclusion
– in light of the COVID-19 pandemic, its UNICEF should prioritize work to enable
ongoing effects and likely future impact access to education for the most vulner-
on children’s education. This should take able children in emergencies (and gener-
account of the effect of school closures on ally), including children with disabilities,
children’s safety and welfare as well as on children in pastoralist communities, over-
their education. age students and girls facing early and
forced marriage.
R1.2 Linking emergency and
mainstream education R1.4 Inter-sectoral strategies
Given the importance of forging stronger UNICEF should work to ensure stronger
links between emergency education re- links at policy, planning and implemen-
sponses and the mainstream education tation levels between the education pro-
system, UNICEF should advocate for – and gramme and nutrition, health and WASH,
support MoGEI to produce – an education while building on current close links with
sector development plan that includes child protection. Opportunities are cur-
emergency education responses within it. rently being missed both to educate chil-
It is suggested that this should include: dren and their families on these health-re-
lated agendas, and to have a direct impact
i. Education in emergency protocols within
on children’s health and nutrition through
the policy framework, so that these can
better integrated services. This applies
be quickly activated in response to fu-
both to the UNICEF programme and at the
ture emergencies (e.g. displacement,
inter-agency level, where UNICEF should
COVID-19, flooding, areas of conflict) with
champion a more integrated approach
defined transitional pathways back to the
through the clusters and HCT.
mainstream education system;
ii. An action plan to ensure sustained access R1.5 Community mobilization
for all children to good quality education and local capacities for education
opportunities in emergencies. Priority UNICEF should continue to strengthen
areas here – as for the mainstream edu- community engagement with the educa-
cation system – are education financing tion programme at design, planning, de-
(teacher salaries/incentives), quality of livery and monitoring stages. This should
teaching and learning (including teacher include stronger local accountability
development) and inclusion. mechanisms as well as continued efforts
to promote direct parent involvement in
iii. In pursuing this agenda, UNICEF should
education, e.g. through PTAs and SMCs.
be careful not to enable bureaucratic or
UNICEF should continue to invest in the
political obstacles in the way of respon-
capacity of national NGOs and CBOs to
sive action on education in emergencies.
ensure continued capacity at local level,
The key role of civil society organisa-
and to this end should formulate a capac-
120 Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the South Sudan Humanitarian Crisis (2016-2019)
ity development strategy in partnership tection mainstreaming action plan across
with international NGOs and the educa- all sectors, similar to the gender-based
tion cluster. violence action plan. This should span
needs assessment, programme design,
implementation and monitoring.
Recommendation 2: Child protection
UNICEF child protection work in South Sudan R2.3 Programme integration and inter-
can be strengthened in a number of ways. sectoral strategies
A child protection perspective needs to be UNICEF should develop and implement a
mainstreamed across its whole programme, child protection integration plan, building
and specific CP elements should be integrated on lessons learned from work on CAAFAG
into UNICEF work on nutrition, health and and gender-based violence. Including es-
WASH (as they are with education) as part sential child protection measures in all
of an integrated multi-sectoral approach. sector funding applications could help to
Funding should be sought as a matter of overcome CP funding shortfalls and gaps.
priority for continuing work on gender-based
violence, PSS and CAAFAG, where UNICEF R2.4 Impact of COVID-19 pandemic
has shown it can make a unique and effective The impact of COVID-19 pandemic con-
contribution. Finally, UNICEF should be more trol measures – especially the closure of
prepared to use its mandate to pursue high- schools – on the protection of children
level advocacy for South Sudanese children. should be closely monitored and as-
sessed. This may offer an opportunity for
renewed joint strategic planning between
R2.1 Re-invest in gender-based violence, PSS the education and other sections.
and CAAFAG programming
UNICEF has made a considerable invest- R2.5 Strengthening child protection
ment in CP work spanning the short and systems and capacities
the medium/long terms, in particular the UNICEF should continue to invest in
gender-based violence programme (with strengthening child protection systems
its social norm change component) and and capacities with communities, civil
the CAAFAG programme (with its reinte- society and government, and should seek
gration component). Those programmes to foster CP partnerships between these
were discontinued before they could fully different actors. That should include rais-
achieve their results, and PSS has suffered ing awareness on issues related to child
from reduced funding. The evaluation labour as well as early marriage and do-
strongly recommends that UNICEF con- mestic abuse. This is especially important
tinue to re-invest in these programmes, in light of heightened child vulnerability
and to re-engage donors with these cru- as a result of the COVID-19 and school
cial agendas. closures.
R2.2 Child protection mainstreaming R2.6 Child protection advocacy
A child protection lens should inform Given its mandate and experience,
every element of the programme. UNICEF UNICEF occupies a unique position as an
should develop and implement a child pro- advocate for children. But the evaluation
CHAPTER 7: CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS 121
found that its voice was not heard con- the funding pipeline to partners. It should also
sistently or strongly enough, given the change its approach to risk management in its
extraordinary level of abuse suffered by implementing partnerships, adopting a more
children in South Sudan. UNICEF and its ‘downstream’ focus involving closer mentor-
partners must avoid the trap of ‘normal- ing, oversight and quality control. The time
izing’ serious incidents affecting children, of specialist staff in the Juba country office
and it should not rely solely on the MRM should be freed up from some of the current
in this regard. UNICEF SSCO and ESARO contract-related process to focus on providing
senior management should be prepared technical support and mentoring to field offices
to raise child protection issues directly at and partners. UNICEF should as far as possible
the highest levels rather than relying on increase capacity-building support to local and
others (including the protection cluster) to national CSO partners and try to secure pre-
do so. dictable multi-year funding. It should also fos-
ter local collaborative arrangements between
R2.7 Strengthen CP sub-cluster CSOs and local government.
coordination effort
Strengthen the coordination and informa-
tion-sharing capacities of the CP sub-clus- Recommendation 5: Data and monitoring
ter according to the coordination needs in UNICEF should continue to work with govern-
the country and besides the staffing re- ment and others to increase the availability and
quirements recommended for the cluster. reliability of outcome data, notably with regard
to educational outcomes for girls and boys. Fill-
ing needs assessment and data gaps in areas
Recommendation 3: Centrality of protection like gender-based violence, CAAFAG and other
Application of this principle is the responsi- areas of child protection should be a matter of
bility of all UNICEF sections. UNICEF needs to renewed effort and should involve more regu-
ground its field programme more clearly in an lar use of (sensitively conducted) surveys and
analysis of the evolving security situation as it focus group discussions. UNICEF must ensure
bears on the security of children and their fam- proper monitoring, reporting and information
ilies, their decisions and the choices available management for its work on child protection,
to them. More regular perception surveys (con- which has been deficient both from a manage-
ducted by UNICEF or others) could provide a ment and accountability perspective. Inconsist-
substantial basis for this analysis. In order to encies and gaps in the data and reporting have
better ensure that families can access its ser- significantly affected the evaluability of this
vices safely and in dignity, an explicit safety area of UNICEF work. The SSCO should also
review should be part of both the project ap- strengthen its data quality assurance processes
proval and routine monitoring processes for to prevent a recurrence. It is suggested that to
the relevant services. achieve improvements in this area, dedicated
support may be required for the child protec-
Recommendation 4: Partnerships tion section in the form of an information man-
UNICEF should review its partnership agree- agement officer.
ment processes with a view to streamlining
the process, and avoiding damaging gaps in
122 Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the South Sudan Humanitarian Crisis (2016-2019)
123