UNICEF Cambodia Child Protection Programme
Outcome Evaluation
2019-2023
Author: Kirsten Anderson
February 2023
baaR
eniotnA/0202/aidobmaC
FECINU
©
UNICEF Cambodia
Child Protection Programmes
2019-2023
Outcome Evaluation
United Nations Children’s Fund
© United Nations Children’s Fund, Cambodia, 2023
Exchange Square, 5th floor
Bldg. no. 19&24 Street 106, Sangkot Wat Phnom, Khan Daun Penh, Phnom Penh
February 2023
The purpose of publishing evaluation reports produced by the UNICEF Cambodia is to
fulfil a corporate commitment to transparency through the publication of all completed
evaluations. The reports are designed to stimulate a free exchange of ideas among those
interested in the topic and to assure those supporting the work of UNICEF that it rigorous-
ly examines its strategies, results, and overall effectivenes
The contents of the report do not necessarily reflect the policies or views of UNICEF
The designations in this publication do not imply an opinion on the legal status of any coun-
try or territory, or of its authorities, or the delimitation of frontiers.
The copyright for this report is held by the United Nations Children’s Fund. Permission
is required to reprint/reproduce/photocopy or in any other way to cite or quote from this
report in written form. UNICEF has a formal permission policy that requires a written re-
quest to be submitted. For non-commercial uses, the permission will normally be granted
free of charge. Please write to the Evaluation Office at the address below to initiate a
permission request.
Please cite the work as follows: UNICEF. 2023. “UNICEF Cambodia Child Protection
Programme 2019-2023 Outcome Evaluation Final Report”. UNICEF Cambodia
For further information, please contact:
Evaluation Office
United Nations Children’s Fund
Three United Nations Plaza
New York, New York 10017
evalhelp@unicef.org
2 UNICEF Cambodia Child Protection Programme 2019 -2023: Outcome Evaluation
Title
Outcome evaluation of UNICEF Cambodia
Child Protection Programme, 2019 – 2023
Geographic regions
Phnom Penh, Battambang, Kandal, Oddar Meancheay,
Pursat, Ratanakiri and Siem Reap
Timeline of the evaluation
1 June 2022 – 31 January 2023
Date of report
22 December 2022 (First Draft)
Country
Cambodia
Evaluation Team
Kirsten Anderson, Awaz Raoof, Em Poul, Sophea Suong
Supervision: Professor Dame Carolyn Hamilton
Commissioning organisation
UNICEF Cambodia
UNICEF Cambodia Child Protection Programme 2019 -2023: Outcome Evaluation 3
baaR
eniotnA/2202/aidobmaC
FECINU
©
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This evaluation is being conducted by Coram International on behalf of UNICEF Cambodia
Country Office. The Coram International team was led by Kirsten Anderson, and evaluation
team members included Awaz Raoof, Em Poul and Soksophea Suong. Professor Dame
Carolyn Hamilton provided overall supervision and guidance to the evaluation team.
Coram International is part of Coram Children’s Legal Centre, a UK NGO dedicated to the
promotion and protection of children’s rights. Further information can be found at www.
coraminternational.org.
The report has benefitted from helpful advice, guidance, and support from the Evaluation
Reference Group (ERG) throughout the process. This group comprised of Phi No (Director of Child
Protection, MoSVY), Ly Yasak (Director of General Administration, MoI), Thoeun Danet (Member of
AYRG), Marc Bonnenfan (Deputy Director, Office of Public Health and Education, USAID), Severine
Chevrel (USAID), Vathana Hoy (USAID), Einosuke Kamegai (Secondary Secretary, Embassy of Japan),
Lo Leang (Acting Chief of Party, Family Care First, Save the Children), Adrian De Giovanni (Head
of International Programs, Partner Relations & Value Add, UNICEF Australia National Committee),
Alexandra Eaves (UNICEF Australia National Committee), Kouch Chong Korn (Member of AYRG),
Kirsty Milev (ChildSafe Alliance International Technical Coordinator, Friends International, 3PC),
Sebastien Marot (Friends-International, 3PC) and Sokroeun Aing (Program Analyst-Gender/Right
and Health, UNFPA), who provided invaluable support throughout. The ERG also comprised of
UNICEF staff including Marianna Garofalo (Chief of Child Protection, UNICEF Cambodia), Suman
Khadka (Child Protection Specialist, UNICEF Cambodia), Juanita Vasquez Escallon (Multi Country
Evaluation Specialist, UNICEF Cambodia) and Maha Homsi (Child Protection Advisor, UNICEF
EAPRO).
The authors are very grateful to all of the experts, stakeholders, service providers,
children and caregivers who participated in the research and shared valuable information,
experiences and insights.
4 UNICEF Cambodia Child Protection Programme 2019 -2023: Outcome Evaluation
© UNICEF Cambodia/2018/Todd Brown
CONTENTS
Acknowledgements
4
List of Acronyms 7
Executive summary 9
Introduction 21
Context of the evaluation 23
Child protection situation 23
Child protection system structure 28
Object of the evaluation 29
Conceptual framework and structure 29
Theory of change 31
Strategies and interventions 32
Strategic changes to the Child Protection Programme 37
Purpose, objectives and scope of the evaluation 43
Purpose and objectives 43
Key users and intended use of the evaluation 44
Scope of the evaluation 45
Evaluation criteria and questions 47
Evaluation questions 47
Evaluation matrix 52
Methodology 53
68
Data analysis
Validation and oversight 69
Ethical considerations 70
Consideration of potential constraints and mitigating strategies 71
Findings 73
Relevance 73
Coherence / connectedness 90
Effectiveness 93
Impact 126
Efficiency 130
Sustainability 138
Conclusions 143
Lessons learned 147
Recommendations 149
6 UNICEF Cambodia Child Protection Programme 2019 -2023: Outcome Evaluation
LIST OF ACRONYMS
3PC Partnership Programme for Protection of Children
C4D Communication for Development
CCLC Coram International at Coram Children’s Legal Centre
CCT Cambodia Children Trust
CBO Community Based Organisation
COVID-19 Coronavirus 2019
CPIMS Child Protection Information Management System
CPD Country Programme Document
CRC Convention on the Rights of the Child
EAPRO East Asia and Pacific Regional Office
ILO International Labour Organization
LGBT Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, Transgender
MOI Ministry of Interior
MoSVY Ministry of Social Affairs, Veterans and Youth Rehabilitation
MHPSS Mental Health and Psychosocial Support
RGC Royal Government of Cambodia
SDG Sustainable Development Goals
SITAN Situation Analysis
TOC Theory of Change
TOR Terms of Reference
UN United Nations
UN-Women United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women
UNDP United Nations Development Programme
UNICEF United Nations International Children’s Fund
USAID United States Agency for International Development
VAC Violence against children
WASH Water, sanitation and hygiene
WHO World Health Organization
UNICEF Cambodia Child Protection Programme 2019 -2023: Outcome Evaluation 7
© UNICEF Cambodia/2022/Youra Soeum
EXECUTIVE
SUMMARY
UNICEF’s Child Protection Programme
2019 – 2023
Cambodia has made notable progress in establishing a child protection system, and the key elements of
a system are in place, yet despite this progress, Cambodia’s child protection system is still underfunded
and understaffed. While there have been significant improvements in establishing systematic coordination
mechanisms in preventing and responding to the need of the vulnerable children who are at risk, these
systems are still at basic and initial level. UNICEF’s Child Protection Programme aims to address key gaps in
the child protection system according to three output areas:
1
By 2023, national and subnational authorities have the knowledge, tools, resources and
authority they need to formulate and implement the institutional and legal frameworks
to strengthen child protection prevention and response interventions in a more enabling
legislative, policy and financing environment.
2
By 2023, the broader child protection workforce in the spheres of social work, welfare,
justice, health and social protection, has the knowledge, tools, resources and authority it
needs to identify vulnerable children and provide child prevention and protection services
to reduce violence and exploitation and enhance children’s access to justice with priority
accorded to urban poor communities and rural poor centres.
3
By 2023, parents, teachers, religious leaders, communities and adolescents have enhanced
knowledge, skills and attitudes to protect girls and boys from violence and exploitation
through the scaling up of positive discipline, positive parenting and Cambodia PROTECT
child protection programmes.
These three outputs are situated within a system building framework: all are key components or elements that
need to be in place to ensure that children are increasingly free from violence and exploitation in all contexts,
through a comprehensive child protection system. The overall goal of the Child Protection Programme is that
girls and boys, including adolescents, living with family and outside of family care are increasing free from
violence and the threat of violence in their homes, schools, communities, and institutions.
UNICEF Cambodia Child Protection Programme 2019 -2023: Outcome Evaluation 9
The logic underpinning the Programme is that interventions aimed at strengthening the functioning of the
child protection system will result in reduced levels of violence, abuse and exploitation of children. This logic
is embedded within UNICEF’s global approach to child protection programming, which shifted towards a
systems strengthening approach in 2008, in recognition that this approach avoids the fragmentation and
inefficiency of an ‘issue-based’ approach and instead aims at achieving sustainable coverage of child protection
at scale, leading to a more effective and comprehensive approach for children exposed to violence, abuse,
neglect and exploitation.1
Evaluation purpose and intended use
In June 2022, UNICEF Cambodia engaged Coram International to conduct an Outcome Evaluation of the Child
Protection Programme, covering the period 2019 to mid-2022, while taking into consideration the evolution
of the Programme since the previous country programmes as well as the formative evaluation conducted in
2018. The Programme is jointly implemented with the Royal Government of Cambodia (RGC) and a diverse
range of partners at the national and sub-national levels.
The RGC and UNICEF will use the findings and recommendations of the evaluation, including lessons learned,
to inform decision-making processes, including informing the planning processes for the development of the
next Country Programme Document (CPD), 2024-2028. In particular, and as stated in the Terms of Reference,
the five objectives of the evaluation are to:
1
Review the theory of change of UNICEF’s Child Protection Programme including the
interlinkages among the Programme outputs and provide an assessment of how far they
are based on evidence from programme experiences and approaches that have proven
effective in protecting girls and boys in the current country context.
2
Examine the results achieved by UNICEF’s Child Protection Programme, enabling and
disabling factors, considering aspects of both prevention and response, including capacity
development of government institutions at national and sub-national levels, international
and national NGOs, development partners as well as the voices of children, adolescents,
families and communities.
3
Assess UNICEF’s leadership, comparative advantage, ability to leverage resources and
partnerships for strengthening the RGC child protection system at national and sub- national
levels through advocacy and policy influencing, including utilising knowledge management
and evidence-generation to inform policy decisions;
1 Wulczyn, et. al., ‘Adapting a systems approach to child protection: Key concepts and considerations, 2010, UNICEF New York.
10 UNICEF Cambodia Child Protection Programme 2019 -2023: Outcome Evaluation
4
Assess the opportunities for further accelerating action on child protection in Cambodia
with the RGC and partners; and
5
Examine the existing linkages between the outputs of the Child Protection Programme,
as well as inter-linkages with Policy and Public Finance for Children, Education, Health and
Nutrition, and WASH through the joint work such as positive discipline in schools, child
protection service delivery in the health system and communication for development.
Methodology
The evaluation, which used a theory-based approach, drew on a variety of evidence sources to answer
evaluation questions pertaining to the relevance, effectiveness, efficiency, and sustainability of UNICEF’s
child protection work, as well as to cross-cutting questions of gender, equity and human rights. Evidence
gathered includes extensive qualitative data collection in key UNICEF programming provinces (Phnom Penh,
Battambang, Kandal, Ratanakiri and Siem Reap), along with two ‘comparator’ locations, in which UNICEF
has not been engaged intensively (Oddar Meancheay, Pursat). Data collection included an extensive desk
review of programming documents, data and research; key informant interviews with 111 key stakeholders
and programme implementers (national and sub-national Government, NGO, UN and donor), 12 in-depth
interviews relating to individual cases (eight rights holders / beneficiaries and four service providers) and
focus group discussions with 81 rights-holders (70 women and 12 men), along with a quantitative stakeholder
survey, which received 33 responses (20 from within UNICEF and 13 from NGO and Government partners).
Findings
On relevance
• The Child Protection Programme (CP Programme) was found to be highly relevant to Cambodia’s
global development commitments and, in utilising a strong systems building framework, was also
found to be relevant to UNICEF’s global frameworks and priorities. The three output areas of the
Programme were found to respond well to existing gaps and needs within the child protection
system.
• The CP Programme’s multi-tiered approach, involving interventions aimed at strengthening the
system at both the national and sub-national levels, responds well to the programming context
and the engagement with new stakeholders, in particular, the Ministry of Interior (MOI), was
found to be highly relevant to the new decentralised system for social welfare / child protection
service delivery.
UNICEF Cambodia Child Protection Programme 2019 -2023: Outcome Evaluation 11
• While the Programme was found to be highly relevant to Government policies, plans and
commitments, some interventions were not fully operationalised, owing to existing capacity gaps
at the sub-national level, indicating that more attention should have been given to the phasing
and complementarity of the Programme’s interventions at the sub-national level.
• With its focus on addressing violence, abuse, neglect and exploitation of children, the Programme
was found to be highly relevant to the evidence base on the protection risks and needs of children
in Cambodia. However, there was limited systematic engagement of children and adolescents in
the programme design and review.
• While some measures were taken to integrate gender and equity into the Programme
design, these measures were found to be insufficient, and there is a need to engage more
comprehensively with the gender dimensions of child protection issues and more effectively
address the protection needs of children with disabilities, in particular.
• The CP Programme was found to have retained its relevance in the changed context brought
about by the COVID-19 pandemic.
On coherence / connectedness
• The CP Programme worked effectively in coordinating the different interventions of development
partners, including government and NGO partners through supporting the Child Protection Forum
at the national level. The Child Protection Forum brings together UN agencies, Government
stakeholders and NGOs to coordinate their work in child protection systems strengthening.
• At the sub-national level, UNICEF ensured the effective coordination of child protection service
delivery primarily through the Partnership Programme for the Protection of Children (3PC), which
is a collaboration between the government UNICEF and NGOs for the provision of prevention and
response child protection services, coordinated by Friends-International.
• The development and maintenance of respectful, open and enduring strategic partnerships were
key factors in UNICEF’s ability to achieve coherence between the Programme goals and outputs
and the work of other agencies.
12 UNICEF Cambodia Child Protection Programme 2019 -2023: Outcome Evaluation
• However, it was found that work is needed to ensure more effective coordination of interventions
by different UN agencies, such as UN Women.
• In terms of coherence within the Programme design, The CP Programme has included a number
of other issues under output area 3, including on adolescent and youth engagement, child
marriage and online child protection. Stakeholders were clearly supportive of these initiatives,
and there is an evidence base to support the focus on these issues (as set out above). However,
there is a need to link these initiatives to the systems strengthening framework, to avoid the
Programme becoming too ‘issue focused’ and fragmented.
On effectiveness
• The CP Programme has been mostly effective in achieving results aimed at strengthening
the legal and operational environment for child protection (output 1), in particular through the
development of the Child Protection Law and Standard Operating Procedures and establishment
of a social welfare workforce.
• However, while the roll-out of Primero (the Child Protection case management system) has
contributed to some positive outcomes including improving coordinated case management,
organisation, data security / privacy and information management, the operationalisation and use
of Primero as a case management system has been hampered by insufficient capacity at the
sub-national level.
• The evaluation found that that outcomes in relation to the strengthening of the social welfare
workforce and child protection service delivery (output area 2) was mainly positive, though
critical challenges remain which have reduced the overall effectiveness of interventions. Case
management and service delivery appear to be functioning to a reasonable standard in the
‘intervention’ research locations, particularly in contrast to practices in the ‘comparator’ research
locations, with increased government ownership and improved service delivery achieved through
training, coaching and case collaboration processes which pair government social services staff
with NGO social workers to build capacity in government case management systems. Service
delivery was also improved through UNICEF’s efforts in increasing coordination among different
government and NGO service providers.
• However, critical gaps remain in child protection service delivery at the sub-national level, including
the limited capacity and skills of the social welfare workforce, lack of operational budgets and
limited services in some areas (in particular mental health services).
UNICEF Cambodia Child Protection Programme 2019 -2023: Outcome Evaluation 13
• Some positive outcomes were reported in terms of addressing harmful community beliefs and
practices (output area 3), particularly in relation to improved parenting practices and a reduction
in the use of violence discipline by parents. However, this evidence was largely anecdotal and
there are limited data to establish the outcomes or impacts in terms of attitudinal and behaviour
change.
• The CP Programme was effective in adapting to the COVID-19 context through support in
providing emergency packages for vulnerable families affected by COVID-19 and technical
support to government and NGO service providers in changing to remote working modalities
during COVID-19.
On impact
• The CP Programme has had a positive impact on increasing access to services for children exposed
to violence and to reintegration services for children in Residential Care Institutions (RCIs);
increasing access to diversion for children in conflict with the law; increased institutionalisation
of child protection services at the sub-national level through the development of child protection
plans; and the reported reduced use of physical violence among parents who underwent positive
parenting training.
• It was not possible to examine the impact of the Programme on rates of violence, abuse, neglect
or exploitation of children, due to limited available data.
• There was found to be a lack of quality / qualitative impact indicators in the CP Programme’s results
framework, which limits the extent to which the Programme can demonstrate its contribution to
the strengthening of the child protection system.
On efficiency
• The CP Programming approach was found to be efficient in the achievement of the desired
results in terms of resource utilization and timely delivery. This finding is based on the range of
results documented by this evaluation and the programme’s relatively modest financial base.
• Based on the overall results achieved, the CP Programme staff were found to be highly competent
and efficient in terms of their technical capacity to effect positive change for children and
adolescents vulnerable to harm. However, there may be insufficient human resource (in terms of
staff numbers and also particular skill sets – e.g. budgeting, financial planning) to support the full
implementation of these changes.
14 UNICEF Cambodia Child Protection Programme 2019 -2023: Outcome Evaluation
• Cambodia’s child protection sector has a high-level understanding of the child protection situation,
the drivers for children’s protection violations and required solutions to overcome these violations.
However, a critical gap is the understaffing of the sector and a lack of access to systemised and
competency-based learning (focused on applied skills).
• The Government of Cambodia and UNICEF have invested in generating data, evidence and
knowledge to better understand the child protection programme environment as well as to
improve the quality and reach of critical protection interventions. A critical inefficiency appears to
be the limited utilisation of the findings, recommendations and lessons learned of the knowledge
generated.
On sustainability
• The CP Programme has taken some important steps toward increasing government ownership
over the child protection system. However, more work needs to be done, particularly at the sub-
national level, to ensure that essential child protection functions are owned and implemented by
government duty bearers.
• At the national level, the CP Programme has supported the institutionalisation of the legal system
and operational framework through the development of the Child Protection Law and standard
operating procedures (SOPs), through initiatives aimed at embedding a social welfare workforce
for child protection and through the incorporation of initiatives into government policies and
action plans.
• At the sub-national level, some positive steps have been taken to ensure government ownership
over child protection services, for example, through the designation, training and coaching of
social welfare staff. However, critical capacity gaps in the system have meant that NGOs still
carry out the bulk of child protection case work in practice.
© UNICEF Cambodia/2018/Antoine Raab
UNICEF Cambodia Child Protection Programme 2019 -2023: Outcome Evaluation 15
Conclusion and recommendations
UNICEF Cambodia’s CP Programme 2019 – 2023 is a large, multi-component programme that is necessarily
ambitious in scope. It has made some significant contributions to the strengthening of Cambodia’s child
protection system, through a multi-tiered approach that has worked at national and sub-national levels to
strengthen legal and policy frameworks, operational frameworks and capacities (particularly capacities of the
social welfare workforce), along with addressing harmful norms, practices and beliefs that drive violence,
abuse, neglect and exploitation of children. However, critical gaps in the system remain, including the limited
capacity of the social welfare workforce and limited operational capacity at the sub-national level. This has,
to an extent, hindered the CP Programme’s ability to achieve positive results for children. The following
recommendations have been made:
On Programme structure and design
• It is recommended that UNICEF’s next CP Programme explicitly align to the new global Child
Protection Systems Strengthening articulated by UNICEF HQ in 2021, following a robust systems
diagnostic to ensure that the Programme focuses on the areas in which there are clear gaps in the
system. The global CPSS Framework provides an evidence-based and well-articulated structure
for UNICEF’s systems strengthening approach, along with diagnostic tools and monitoring
frameworks. These materials would provide very useful for planning the next CP Programme in
Cambodia and ensuring that it is embedded within a strong systems strengthening framework. In
order to ensure that funding is channelled into systems building initiatives, UNICEF could develop
communications materials for implementing partners and donors on how particular issues
(e.g. online exploitation and abuse) are connected to and best addressed within a broad systems
strengthening framework.
• It is recommended that the next CP Programme continue to use a multi-tiered approach that
is focused on both the national and sub-national levels in order to provide a comprehensive
systems building framework. When the Child Protection Law and Standard Operating Procedures
are adopted, the Programme should shift its focus to supporting national and sub-national duty
bearers to implement the Law and SOPs. Consideration should also be given to the role of
communes and village leaders and how UNICEF can support their role in the system, for example
through increased knowledge, skills and capacity in identifying child protection risks and referral
procedures.
• The Programme logic should articulate how the Programme will ensure vertical coordination
of child protection services and how national programme interventions link to sub-national
interventions.
16 UNICEF Cambodia Child Protection Programme 2019 -2023: Outcome Evaluation
• The next CP Programme design should also consider the phasing of interventions at the sub-
national level and in particular, how more general capacity building interventions can be more
effectively joined up with the Primero case management tool (one consideration should be that
capacity building on Primero should be embedded within broader case management training and
capacity building).
On measuring results
• It is recommended that the next CP Programme consider developing qualitative impact indicators
to be incorporated into the results framework. The next CP Programme should also consider the
use of intermediary results indicators, particularly for social behaviour change components of the
Programme (which typically take more time to demonstrate impact), and it should ensure that
equity indicators (gender, location / remoteness, disability and other equity considerations) are
comprehensively incorporated into the results framework.
On responsiveness to the needs of rights holders, including
girls and boys and children in vulnerable situations
• It is recommended that, in the next CP Programme, a mechanism such as a youth advisory
board, is developed to engage adolescents and youth in the design of the Programme both
routinely (e.g. through a quarterly forum) and at key point in the Programme’s life cycle (e.g. fit
for purpose reviews, monitoring and evaluation / assessments etc.). Adolescents and youth could
be recruited through the AYRG (as CRC Cambodia supports the AYRG in developing skills and
confidence in adolescent and youth participation). It is also important that UNICEF ensure that
the advisory board represents a diverse range of adolescent and youth voices from a range of
different provinces and that it reserves spaces on the advisory board for adolescents and youth
who are in vulnerable situations. UNICEF could consider more innovative ways of engaging with
members of the AYRG and beyond (e.g. through UReport communications). Consideration should
also be given to extending these youth engagements to cover the whole Country Programme.
• It is recommended that a thorough gender analysis be carried out to inform the development of
the next CP Programme to ensure that the gender dynamics of child protection issues are more
fully incorporated into the Programme. This should involve a consideration of the ways in which
violence against children and violence against women intersect and the ways that child protection
programming could incorporate VAW prevention and response initiatives (including how processes
like case management can be better aligned).2 UNICEF could ensure a strengthened process is
in place (management response, accountability framework) to ensure that any recommendations
from gender analyses or other relevant studies are incorporated into the CP Programme. Efforts
should be made to engage in collaborative work with UNFPA and UN Women on the gender
dimensions of the CP Programme.
2 This could be guided by recommendations in UNICEF EAPRO, UNFPA Asia and Pacific Regional Office and UN Women Asia and Pacific Regional Office,
Ending violence against women and children in Cambodia: Opportunities and challenges for collaborative and integrative approaches, 2020.
UNICEF Cambodia Child Protection Programme 2019 -2023: Outcome Evaluation 17
• It is recommended that the CP Programme explicitly integrate the needs of children with
disabilities into the next CP Programme, including through a specific sub-output / result that is
focused on improving services and services delivery for children with disabilities and capacity
building of government and NGO service providers in this area (e.g. under an overall output/s
on improving service delivery), both in terms of advocating for improved services for children
with disabilities at the national level and also through capacity building of service delivery at the
sub-national level. UNICEF Cambodia could also improve the way that disability is mainstreamed
effectively office-wide. This could include through integrating disability in routine office-wide
approval forms etc. to ensure that Programmes systematically consider the needs of children
with disabilities in decisions relating to partnerships, design of interventions and implementation
of specific initiatives. It should also consider development for staff on disability across sectors
to improve their understanding of disability and how it should be incorporated into programme
areas and outputs.
• It is recommended that UNICEF carry out an in-depth equity analysis to identify other groups
of children and parents / carers who may not fully benefit from the CP Programme (or its
components), based on e.g. geographical location, indigeneity, sexual orientation, gender identity,
displacement and so on, and integrate this knowledge into the next CP Programme. In particular,
it is recommended that the next CP Programme consider how it can apply in the context of
children who remain behind, and how particular programme interventions can be adapted. For
example, consideration should be given to the delivery of the positive parenting programme to
grandparents / other caregivers, rather than restricting this programme to parents (mothers).
On enhancing programme effectiveness
• It is recommended that intensive case management training and coaching be delivered to the
social services workforce, and this training / coaching should integrate or link up with training
on the Primero case management system. This is important to ensure that Primero is utilised
effectively as a case management tool, rather than purely an information management system.
Measures to ensure that the training is institutionalised should be continued. Consideration
should be given to the development of an online resource that includes follow up / refresher
training and resources.
• It is recommended that UNICEF’s next CP Programme focus on building capacity for
operationalisation of the child protection system, particularly at the provincial, district and
commune / village levels. This could involve supporting the operationalisation the SOPs, when
they are adopted. Consideration should be given to supporting MoSVY and MOI to carry out
a costing of the operationalisation of the CP system as a whole, and UNICEF should prioritise
supporting MoSVY, MOI and the sub-national administrations in developing and institutionalising
operational budgets for child protection.
18 UNICEF Cambodia Child Protection Programme 2019 -2023: Outcome Evaluation
• A stakeholder mapping could then be carried out to identify which government Ministry /
institution could support each part of the system. The mapping could include the different UN
agencies to ensure that programme outputs utilise and align work already being carried out by
other UN agencies to avoid duplication and inefficiencies.
• Consideration should be given to supporting MoSVY and MOI to attract and retain quality social
workers / social services staff. This could be informed by a study of graduates of the university
social work programme in Cambodia to determine their career pathways etc., along with a
mapping of analysis of similar interventions that have been demonstrated to have been effective
across similar contexts. It could include subsidising or part-subsidising the wages of social
workers from NGOs to be placed within the DoSVY and the District Offices for Social Welfare
to work more closely alongside existing government staff and build their skills. There is a need
for UNICEF to support improved programming in the integration and delivery of mental health
services within child protection service delivery.
• It is recommended that a technical inputs from UNICEF’s social behaviour change specialist
should inform the behaviour change components of the next CP Programme.
• It is recommended that UNICEF consider how to join up programming between different teams,
in particular to ensure the same programming districts are selected for both positive parenting
and positive discipline programmes.
• It is recommended that the next CP Programme consider how to harness the new modalities
that were developed during COVID-19, including for example, online refreshers to support more
in-depth face to face training, providing further support to hotlines etc.
On increasing efficiency
• It is recommended that a gap analysis be carried out between the human resources needs of
the new CP Programme and the existing resources within the child protection team. A plan for
addressing any capacity gaps within the team (e.g. through additional training or recruitment)
should be developed.
• It is recommended that UNICEF Cambodia establish an internal process for ensuring that the
main findings, lessons learned recommendations from studies are considered and applied.
Alternatively, it is recommended that UNICEF build this process into the existing evaluation
management response processes.
UNICEF Cambodia Child Protection Programme 2019 -2023: Outcome Evaluation 19
On ensuring sustainability
• It is recommended that UNICEF develop a full costed operational plan for taking these programmes
to scale, including a plan for phasing out UNICEF funding and ensuring full RCG ownership of
the programmes, though this would need to be planned gradually over the cycle of the next CP
Programme (five years). As part of this, it is recommended that UNICEF support the RCG to
develop a costed plan to take full ownership of Primero. This should include inputs necessary
to build capacity at all levels of the system to enable it to be fully operationalised. Consideration
could be given to developing a long term strategy (15 year +) for full Government ownership of
child protection systems and services which contains concrete actions to be achieved in each CP
Programme cycle toward the outcome of full Government ownership.
• As part of the stakeholder mapping exercise (see above under ‘enhancing effectiveness’), it is
recommended that UNICEF determine which programme component should sit with which
Ministry, and then develop a sustainability plan together with the key Ministry at national and
sub-national levels.
© UNICEF Cambodia/2022/Youra Soeum
20 UNICEF Cambodia Child Protection Programme 2019 -2023: Outcome Evaluation
INTRODUCTION
In June 2022, UNICEF Cambodia engaged Coram International to conduct an Outcome Evaluation of the Child
Protection Programme, covering the period 2019 to mid-2022, while taking into consideration the evolution
of the Programme since the previous country programmes as well as the formative evaluation conducted in
2018. The Programme is jointly implemented with the Royal Government of Cambodia (RGC) and a diverse
range of partners at the national and sub-national levels. The RGC and UNICEF will use the findings and
recommendations of the evaluation, including lessons learned, to inform decision-making processes, including
informing the planning processes for the development of the next Country Programme Document (CPD),
2024-2028. In particular, and as stated in the Terms of Reference (Annex 1), the five objectives of the evaluation
are to:
1
Review the theory of change of UNICEF’s Child Protection Programme including the
interlinkages among the Programme outputs and provide an assessment of how far they
are based on evidence from programme experiences and approaches that have proven
effective in protecting girls and boys in the current country context.
2
Examine the results achieved by UNICEF’s Child Protection Programme, enabling and
disabling factors, considering aspects of both prevention and response, including capacity
development of government institutions at national and sub-national levels, international
and national NGOs, development partners as well as the voices of children, adolescents,
families and communities.
3
Assess UNICEF’s leadership, comparative advantage, ability to leverage resources and
partnerships for strengthening the RGC child protection system at national and sub- national
levels through advocacy and policy influencing, including utilising knowledge management
and evidence-generation to inform policy decisions;
4
Assess the opportunities for further accelerating action on child protection in Cambodia
with the RGC and partners; and
5
Examine the existing linkages between the outputs of the Child Protection Programme,
as well as inter-linkages with Policy and Public Finance for Children, education, health and
nutrition, and WASH through the joint work such as positive discipline in schools, child
protection service delivery in the health system and communication for development.
UNICEF Cambodia Child Protection Programme 2019 -2023: Outcome Evaluation 21
The evaluation drew on a variety of evidence sources to answer evaluation questions pertaining to the relevance,
effectiveness, efficiency, and sustainability of UNICEF’s child protection work, as well as to cross-cutting
questions of gender, equity and human rights. Evidence gathered includes extensive qualitative data collection
in Phnom Penh, Battambang, Kandal, Oddar Meancheay, Pursat, Ratanakiri and Siem Reap, representing a
wide variety of beneficiaries and stakeholders, along with a quantitative stakeholder survey.
On the basis of the activities set out above, this report sets out: relevant information on context, including
an overview of the Cambodian child protection system and the environment relevant to child protection
in Cambodia; a review of the ‘object of the evaluation’ or what has been delivered under UNICEF’s Child
Protection Programme since 2019; the overall purpose, objectives and scope for the evaluation; criteria and
evaluative questions; methodology including ethical guidelines; findings and preliminary conclusions; lessons
learned; final conclusions and recommendations.
© UNICEF Cambodia/2018/Antoine Raab
22 UNICEF Cambodia Child Protection Programme 2019 -2023: Outcome Evaluation
CONTEXT OF
THE EVALUATION
Cambodia has a population of around 15.55 million (7.57 million male and 7.98 million female), with a median age
of 27.3 Approximately 39.4 per cent live in urban areas and 25 per cent of Cambodia’s 3.55 million households
are female headed. Children under age 5 years amount to 9.3 per cent of the total population (approximately
1.44 million), while 4.56 million (29.4 per cent) are under the age of 15 years. Youth aged 15-24 account for 17.2
per cent of the population.4 Ethnically, 98 per cent of Cambodians are Khmer, though there are eight officially
acknowledged ethnic minorities and 17 recognized indigenous groups. The indigenous groups are generally
located in Cambodia’s North-eastern provinces where socio-economic disadvantage is concentrated.5
The development landscape in Cambodia is evolving rapidly with the combined impact of climate change
and COVID-19 presenting structural and financial challenges. These changes are causing increased economic
hardship at the household level. The frequency and intensity of extreme weather events are increasing,
including the severity of droughts and floods, such as those experienced in October 2020. Further, Cambodia
has recently transitioned to a lower-middle-income economy.6 Understanding these challenges is critically
important for managing programming risks and assumptions and for harnessing potential opportunities that
these challenges will bring. For example, in 2018, Cambodia had one of the fastest growing economies in the
world. The pandemic has put an end to this growth, at least in the short term.
Child protection situation
The current Child Protection Programme was designed in 2018 in response to the then child protection situation
as documented in several sources, the main one being A Statistical Profile of Child Protection in Cambodia,7
published by UNICEF Cambodia and the UNICEF Division of Data, Research and Policy, New York. The data in
the Statistical Profile is still the most current for the majority of child protection issues, where reliable data is
available.
3 Kingdom of Cambodia, National Institute of Statistics, Ministry of Planning, General Population Census 2019, National Report on Final Census Results,
Phnom Penh, October 2020, pp. x-xi.
4 Kingdom of Cambodia, National Institute of Statistics, Ministry of Planning: National Report on Final Census Results, Phnom Penh, October 2020, p. x.
5 Minority Rights Group International, World Directory of Minorities and Indigenous Peoples, November 2017. Available
at: https://minorityrights.org/country/cambodia/
6 World Bank: Available at: https://datahelpdesk.worldbank.org/knowledgebase/articles/906519-world-bank-country-and-lending-groups,
accessed 15 February 2023
7 UNICEF Cambodia and Division of Data, Research and Policy, A Statistical Profile of Child Protection in Cambodia, 2018.
UNICEF Cambodia Child Protection Programme 2019 -2023: Outcome Evaluation 23
Violence against children
The most definitive source of data on violence against children remains the 2013 Cambodia Violence
Against Children Survey (CVAC), which is almost a decade old. The CVAC revealed that 53 per cent
of females and 54 per cent of males aged 18–24 reported at least one incident of physical violence
prior to age 18. 25 per cent of children reported having been subjected to emotional abuse, with one
in 20 children having been sexually assaulted.8 According to a more recent survey in five provinces
only, approximately eight per cent of children aged 13–17 years reported having experienced physical
violence.9 Violence and its transmission from one generation to the next continues to limit the rights
of women and children. In 2014, half of all girls and women believed a husband was justified in
beating his wife under certain circumstances, compared to around one in four men and boys.10
According to the Cambodian Demographic and Health Survey (CDHS) for 2021-2022,11 a significant
proportion of children aged 1–14 years experienced physical punishment and/or psychological
aggression by caregivers in the past month. Overall, 66 per cent of children aged 1–14 have
experienced violent discipline with only 23 per cent of children experiencing nonviolent discipline.
In addition, 59 per cent of children experienced psychological aggression, 43 per cent experienced
any type of physical punishment, and five per cent experienced severe physical punishment such as
being ‘hit on the face or head.’12
Children in residential care institutions and alternative care
In 2016, around 16,500 children were living in 406 residential care institutions across the country.13
In addition, one in ten children were not living with their biological parents even though they had at
least one living parent. In 2021, MoSVY published a report on the implementation of the 5-year action
plan for improving childcare, showing the overall number of children in residential care institutions
had been reduced by 59 per cent while the overall number of actual institutions had been reduced by
43 per cent.14 The RGC and UNICEF have now shifted their investments in care reform from seeking
to reduce the number of institutions and the number of children in them, to ensuring that all children
in residential care have care plans to support deinstitutionalisation, which also means ensuring that
there are a sufficient number of social workers and allied workers with the necessary capacity to
not only prepare the care plans but also to monitor and support their implementation. This is part of
broader efforts to improve child protection service provision.
8 Kingdom of Cambodia, Steering Committee on Violence Against Children, Findings from Cambodia’s Violence Against Children Survey 2013, October
2014, pp. 20-21.
9 Kingdom of Cambodia, National Institute of Statistics and UNICEF, Baseline for the Regular Survey to Monitor Violence Against Children in five target
provinces 2017, p.5.
10 UNICEF Cambodia and Division of Data, Research and Policy, A Statistical Profile of Child Protection in Cambodia, 2018, p. 39.
11 Kingdom of Cambodia, National Institute of Statistics (NIS) and Ministry of Health (MoH), Cambodia Demographic and Health Survey 2021–22: Key
Indicators Report, 2022.
12 Kingdom of Cambodia, National Institute of Statistics (NIS) and Ministry of Health (MoH), Cambodia Demographic and Health Survey 2021–22: Key
Indicators Report, 2022, p. 39.
13 UNICEF Cambodia and Division of Data, Research and Policy, A Statistical Profile of Child Protection in Cambodia, 2018, p. 43
14 Country Programme Full Approved Report: Cambodia Country Programme (2019-2023). Outcome 0660/AO/06/883 CHILD
PROTECTION, Reporting Year: 2021, p. 98
24 UNICEF Cambodia Child Protection Programme 2019 -2023: Outcome Evaluation
In addition to residential care institutions, there are other forms of alternative care for children including
kinship care, foster care, group homes, transit homes, faith-based care and boarding schools.
A 2018 study on the use of alternative care in the community, including pagoda-based
care, found that:
“The total number of children in Cambodia who are cared for by somebody other than a
parent is not known. Further, there is little evidence on the number of children in kinship care
or foster care, though there is evidence of various foster care services across the country, run
mainly by NGOs, many of whom belong to the 3PC Partnership.”15
The study noted that there was a ‘desperate need’ for social workers at the sub national level, for
better case management practices and for better regulation of the various forms of care systems.
© UNICEF Cambodia/2022/Youra Soeum
15 Kingdom of Cambodia, Ministry of Social Affairs, Veterans and Youth Rehabilitation, Study on Alternative Care Community Practices for Children, 2018,
p. 15-16. The Partnership Programme for Protection of Children (3PC) is a collaboration between the government UNICEF and NGOs for the provision of
prevention and response child protection services.
UNICEF Cambodia Child Protection Programme 2019 -2023: Outcome Evaluation 25
Child marriage and teenage pregnancies
The 2014 CDHS revealed that nearly one in five women aged 20 to 24 were married or living with
a partner before age 18. It appears that childbearing among girls aged 19 is on the rise, especially
among those who are poor, those who have no education or only a primary school education and
those who live in rural areas.16 Although over the long term, child marriage in Cambodia has been
in decline, progress in reducing child marriage has recently stalled. Child marriage is concentrated
among certain ethnic groups and in certain parts of the country, including in Ratanakiri province. A
baseline study of child marriage in Ratanakiri found that: “… many girls are still marrying in adolescence
in Ratanakiri province. One in nine female adolescents aged 12-17 years are married. Adolescents in
the 15–17-year bracket show a higher rate of marriage than the younger 12-14 years group, which is
19 per cent and 3 per cent respectively.17
The baseline study made two key recommendations to improve the implementation of the Provincial
Action Plan to Prevent Child Marriage and Teenage Pregnancy. First, the Action Plan should have a
greater focus on prevention amongst younger age groups given that adolescent girls are more likely
to have partners (married or in union) and give birth as their age increases. Secondly, the Action Plan
should provide tailored support to the estimated 884 children aged 12-14 and 15-17 who are already
married.
At a national level, of particular concern is that even if the rate of decline in child marriage doubled
over the next decade, around one in 10 women would still be married during childhood.18
Children and adolescents in conflict with the law
In 2016, new juvenile justice legislation was signed into law. Its objectives include to improve
access to child-friendly justice for children who come into contact with the law, for example through
the provision of diversion and by providing specialized legal aid for children. A detailed three-year
operational plan was commissioned to guide the implementation of the law. However, despite this
new law, the number of children in detention has increased. In 2017, there were 907 children in
detention.19 By October 2021, the number had risen to 1,420.20 In contrast, between 2010 and 2014,
there was a 56 per cent decrease in the number of children in detention.21 On a positive note,
the percentage of children who are subject to a diversion order and other non-custodial measures
increased from 17 per cent in 2019 to 20 per cent by September 2022.22
16 UNICEF Cambodia and Division of Data, Research and Policy, A Statistical Profile of Child Protection in Cambodia, 2018, p. 43.
17 Kingdom of Cambodia, Provincial Administration of Ratanakiri, Baseline Study on Child Marriage and Child Mothers among
Girls aged 12-17 Years in Ratanakiri, 2019, p. 6.
18 UNICEF Cambodia and Division of Data, Research and Policy, A Statistical Profile of Child Protection in Cambodia, 2018, p. 11.
19 UNICEF Cambodia and Division of Data, Research and Policy, A Statistical Profile of Child Protection in Cambodia, 2018, p. 29.
20 Data provided by UNICEF Cambodia: Number of Children in Detention as of 10 October 2021 (Annex 1.4).
21 UNICEF Cambodia and Division of Data, Research and Policy, A Statistical Profile of Child Protection in Cambodia, 2018, p. 29.
22 Country Programme Full Approved Report: Cambodia Country Programme (2019-2023). Outcome 0660/AO/06/883 CHILD
PROTECTION, Reporting Year: 2021, p. 93.
26 UNICEF Cambodia Child Protection Programme 2019 -2023: Outcome Evaluation
Children and young people who end up in detention raise significant concerns. In preparation for the
Cambodian launch of the United Nations Global Study on Children Deprived of Liberty,23 a coalition
of networks and organisations24 consulted with children and adolescents who had previously been
deprived of their liberty and submitted a statement outlining their concerns. A key concern was the
lack of access to academic materials in the facilities, along with the poor quality of programmes. Other
key concerns included a lack of sufficient and nutritious food, inadequate sanitation and healthcare
services. Children and young people reported that in detention they: “… suffer from mental health
complications, including emotional distress, depression, trauma, and even suicidal thoughts.”25
Child labour
According to available data (2018), one in nine children between the ages of five and 17 were engaged
in child labour’ more than half of whom worked in hazardous conditions.26 In Cambodia, hazardous
work includes work done on construction sites and in factories where their is little oversight or
regulation.
Online sexual exploitation and abuse
A 2022 study27 found that children in Cambodia are spending more time online, accelerated by
COVID-19 and related lockdowns and other restrictions on social movement and interaction. The study
found that more than 80 per cent of girls and boys aged 12 to 17 had used the internet in the previous
three months with no reported difference between genders and only minor differences between
urban and rural children.28 It found that 11 per cent of internet-using children aged 12 – 17 years had
been subjected to acts of online sexual exploitation and abuse in the past year. This included children
who were blackmailed into engaging in sexual activities, had their sexual images shared without their
permission, or were coerced into engaging in sexual activities through promises of money or gifts.29
According to this survey, the most common platforms for experiencing online exploitation and abuse
among children were social media and communications platforms (FaceBook / FaceBook Messenger
and WhatsApp). Offenders were people already known to the child, including family members, adult
friends, peers or romantic partners. Persons unknown to the child were responsible for around one
in five instances of online exploitation or abuse.30
23 Committee on the Rights of the Child. Available at: https://www.ohchr.org/en/treaty-bodies/crc/united-nations-global-study-children-deprived-liberty, 2019,
accessed on 10 November 2022.
24 The statement was issued by the Adolescent and Youth Reference Group (AYRG), Child Advocate Network (CAN), and Cambodian Children and Young
People Movement for Child Rights (CCYMCR), with the support of the Child Rights Coalition Cambodia (CRC-Cambodia).
25 Committee on the Rights of the Child. Available at: https://www.ohchr.org/en/treaty-bodies/crc/united-nations-global-study-children-deprived-liberty, 2019,
annex 8, pp. 18-20, accessed on 10 November 2022.
26 UNICEF Cambodia and Division of Data, Research and Policy, A Statistical Profile of Child Protection in Cambodia, 2018, pp. 21-22.
27 ECPAT, INTERPOL, and UNICEF, Disrupting Harm in Cambodia: Evidence on online child sexual exploitation and abuse, 2022, Global Partnership to End
Violence Against Children.
28 ECPAT, INTERPOL, and UNICEF, Disrupting Harm in Cambodia: Evidence on online child sexual exploitation and abuse, 2022, Global Partnership to End
Violence Against Children, p .6.
29 ECPAT, Interpol and UNICEF. Disrupting Harm in Cambodia: Evidence of online exploitation and abuse. 2022. Global Partnership to End Violence Against
Children.
30 Ibid.
UNICEF Cambodia Child Protection Programme 2019 -2023: Outcome Evaluation 27
Child protection system structure
In Cambodia, there are several agencies with a mandate for coordination of the child protection system but
no one agency responsible for providing the overall structure or coordination functions of the system. In broad
terms, these agencies are often referred to as the National Child Protection Coordination Mechanism (NCPCM).
Members include the Cambodia National Council for Children (CNCC); National Committee on Child Labor
(NCCL); Women and Children’s Consultative Committees (WCCC); National Committee for Counter Trafficking
(NCCT); Cambodia Human Rights Committee (CHRC) and the National Committee against Torture, Violence,
Inhumanity, Persecution or Punishment (NCATVIP), amongst others.31 There is also a national coordinating and
advisory mechanism for persons with disabilities, the Disability Action Council (DAC).
Cambodia’s child protection system is currently governed by a series of laws that are primarily under the
jurisdiction of the MoSVY. Within MoSVY, the Department of Child Protection (previously called the Department
of Child Welfare) is the lead for child protection, and there are several other departments with mandates for
specific aspects of child protection. These include the departments for inter-country adoption; people with
disabilities; and youth rehabilitation (juvenile justice), amongst others. Sub-Decree No. 94 (May 2022) re-
structured MoSVY and created a new Department of Family Affairs and Department of Victim Protection.
At the provincial level, the Provincial Offices of Child Welfare play a lead role in child protection, along with the
Ministry of Interior (MOI). In addition, Child Protection Technical Working Groups (TWG) are being established
in all 25 provinces to ensure better coordination, comprised of key government officials and local civil society
organisations. Twenty TWGs had been established by the end of 2022.
As part of decentralization process, child protection functions have been devolved to the districts and
communes, which are under the MOI. The MOI is responsible for public administration at the national and sub-
national levels. Specific activities to strengthen coordination between MoSVY and MOI have been included
in the Child Protection Sector Strategic Implementation Plan, which was co-signed by MoSVY and MOI on 29
November 2022.
Cambodia has made notable progress in putting into place key elements of the child protection system;
however, significant gaps remain in terms of financing and staffing of the system. Further, there is no
overarching legislation establishing the architecture of the system (though a legal framework is currently in
development). There is also very limited capacity to implement the system in terms of human and financial
resources, and there is still no specific government budget for child protection for individual government
agencies or for cross-sectoral child protection activities, such as the multi-sectoral Steering Committee on
Violence Against Children.
31 Kingdom of Cambodia, Cambodia National Council for Children Baseline Study on Child Protection Mechanism at National and Sub-National Level, Final
Draft, 2018. p. 1.
28 UNICEF Cambodia Child Protection Programme 2019 -2023: Outcome Evaluation
OBJECT OF
THE EVALUATION
Conceptual framework and structure
Protecting girls, boys and adolescents from violence, exploitation, abuse, neglect, and harmful
practices is central to UNICEF’s global mandate and a pillar of the UNICEF Cambodia Country
Programme. In Cambodia, the Child Protection Programme is designed to ensure that girls and boys,
including adolescents, living with family and outside of family care are increasing free from violence
and the threat of violence in their homes, schools, communities, and institutions. The initial projected
budget for the current five-year programme is USD$ 22.8 million dollars.32
The Child Protection Programme is aligned to the achievement of several Sustainable Development
Goals (SDGs), including SDG 5 (gender equality), SDG 8 (decent work and economic growth) and
SDG 16 (peace, justice and strong institutions). It also engages SGD 4 (quality education) and SDG 17
(partnerships for achieving the goals). The Programme is also aligned to Goal Area 3 within UNICEF’s
global Strategic Plan 2022-202533 which seeks to ensure that every girl and boy is protected from
violence and exploitation, in both humanitarian and development contexts. This includes all forms of
violence, including gender-based violence (GBV), trafficking, sexual exploitation and abuse. The duty
to protect children from violence and exploitation is enshrined in numerous articles of the Convention
on the Rights of the Child, including articles 19, and 34 to 38.
As noted earlier, Cambodia has made notable progress in establishing a child protection system, and
the key elements of a system are in place, yet despite this progress, Cambodia’s child protection
system is still underfunded and understaffed. While there have been significant improvements in
establishing systematic coordination mechanisms in preventing and responding to the need of the
vulnerable children who are at risk, these systems are still at basic and initial level.
The Programme has one outcome and three outputs.
Table 1: Child Protection Programme outcome and outputs
Outcome: By 2023, girls and boys including adolescents, living with families and outside of
family care are increasingly free from violence and exploitation and from the threat of violence
and exploitation in their homes, schools and communities and in institutions, including during
humanitarian situations.
32 United Nations, Economic and Social Council, United Nations Children’s Fund Executive Board, Second regular session 2018, Country Programme
Document, Cambodia, 12–14 September 2018, p. 14.
33 United Nations, Economic and Social Council, United Nations Children’s Fund Executive Board, Second regular session 2021, 7–10 September 2021, p. 14.
UNICEF Cambodia Child Protection Programme 2019 -2023: Outcome Evaluation 29
Output 1: By 2023, Output 2: By 2023, the Output 3: By 2023,
national and subnational broader child protection parents, teachers, religious
authorities have the workforce in the spheres leaders, communities
knowledge, tools, of social work, welfare, and adolescents have
resources and authority justice, health and enhanced knowledge,
they need to formulate and social protection, has skills and attitudes to
implement the institutional the knowledge, tools, protect girls and boys from
and legal frameworks to resources and authority violence and exploitation
strengthen child protection it needs to identify through the scaling up of
prevention and response vulnerable children and positive discipline, positive
interventions in a more provide child prevention parenting and Cambodia
enabling legislative, policy and protection services PROTECT child protection
and financing environment. to reduce violence and programmes.
exploitation and enhance
children’s access to justice
with priority accorded to
urban poor communities
and rural poor centres.
These three outputs – further detailed below – are situated within a system building framework: all are key
components or elements that need to be in place to ensure that children are increasingly free from violence
and exploitation in all contexts, through a comprehensive child protection system. There are four standard
indicators and four additional indicators for measuring progress for this outcome.34 Please see Annex 2 for a
description of the indicators for the outcome and each output.
The logic underpinning the Programme is that interventions aimed at strengthening the functioning of the
child protection system will result in reduced levels of violence, abuse and exploitation of children. This logic is
embedded within UNICEF’s global approach to child protection programming, which shifted towards a system
strengthening approach in 2008, in recognition that this approach avoids the fragmentation and inefficiency
of an ‘issue-based’ approach and instead aims at achieving sustainable coverage of child protection at scale,
leading to a more effective and comprehensive approach for children exposed to violence, abuse, neglect and
exploitation (see information box, below).35
Information box: UNICEF Child protection systems building approach
Historically, UNICEF focused on protecting at-risk and vulnerable child populations, such as displaced
children, children in street situations or children in the worst forms of child labour. From 2000, UNICEF
accepted that focusing on particular issues rather than building a holistic child protection system led
to fragmentation, the development of parallel systems for protecting children and failed to address
the needs of all children suffering violence, abuse, neglect and exploitation.
34 See the Evaluability Assessment for the list of outcome and output indicators and an assessment of their relevance and evaluability.
35 Wulczyn, et. al., ‘Adapting a systems approach to child protection: Key concepts and considerations, 2010, UNICEF New York.
30 UNICEF Cambodia Child Protection Programme 2019 -2023: Outcome Evaluation
This acceptance led to a change of approach, reflected in UNICEF’s 2008 Child Protection Strategy
(the 2008 Strategy), which has remained the overarching strategic framework driving UNICEF’s
child protection programming globally. Rather than focussing on issue-based programming (e.g.,
programmes to address child labour, child trafficking, etc.), the strategy promoted child protection
system strengthening.36 According to this approach, a child protection system is composed of seven
elements: Legal and policy framework; Governance and coordination structures; A continuum of
services; Minimum standards and oversight mechanisms; Human, financial and infrastructure
resources; Mechanisms for child participation and community engagement; and Data collection and
monitoring systems.
UNICEF’s Child Protection Programme Strategy Note37 sets out in detail the programme structure, rationale,
theory of change, key deprivations and priority interventions to improve the protective environment for children
in Cambodia. At its core, the Programme seeks to address the weak and underdeveloped nature of the child
protection system itself, and secondly, to address the problematic trends which expose children to violence
/ place them at risk.
The programme’s results framework (Annex 2) sets out indicators corresponding to outcome and output
statements. Where relevant, indicators also include baseline and target figures. These indicators have, where
necessary, been further developed, in order to inform the analytical framework and measurements for the
evaluation.
Theory of change
The Theory of Change lists the following main deprivations:
1
Children living with families are exposed to violence and severe discipline/corporal
punishment in home, school and other settings;
2 Large numbers of children are deprived of their right to family-based care through
abusive institutionalization and children outside of family care are exposed to high levels
of violence and exploitation, including trafficking, sexual abuse, online sexual exploitation
and forced begging; and
3
Children in contact with the law do not have access to child-friendly justice procedures.
36 UNICEF, Child Protection Systems Strengthening: Approach, Benchmarks, Interventions, September 2021.
37 UNICEF Cambodia, Child Protection Programme Strategy Note (Final), 2019-2023, May 2019.
UNICEF Cambodia Child Protection Programme 2019 -2023: Outcome Evaluation 31
The drivers for these deprivations are listed as ‘intergenerational transmission of violence against both
women and children, discriminatory gender norms, the social exclusion of children with disabilities and
the undervaluing of adolescents as potential partners in national development.’ Identified bottlenecks
include:
• No child protection law to inform and guide the child protection response;
• Limited prevention and response services (quality, reach, access) for vulnerable children and
families, country wide;
• Limited efforts to scale-up existing interventions;
• Lack of social workers and limited capacity of the broader social services workforce; and
• Limited skills and knowledge about violence against children among service providers; and
limited knowledge on positive parenting among caregivers.
These bottlenecks are aligned to the child protection systems building approach (see discussion above), as
each bottleneck addresses different essential components of a system.
In summary, the child protection theory of change is that girls and boys including adolescents, living with
families and outside of family care will increasingly be free from violence and exploitation and from the threat
of violence and exploitation in their homes, in their schools, in their communities and in institutions: if there are
coordinated national efforts to scale up existing set of interventions and if services reach the most vulnerable;
and if parents and communities increasingly demand protection and justice services; and if programming
with and for adolescents aims to reduce vulnerability to violence and exploitation; and if gender responsive
programming is resourced and implemented; and if quality Government oversight of the alternative care
sector including kinship care, fostering and adoption continues; and if Government invests in child protection,
including human resource planning for social work; and if formal agreements are reached between the welfare
and social protection sectors to identify children at risk of harm; and finally, if collaboration with UN, donors
and development partners is strengthened. A schematic diagram of the theory of change is attached (Annex
3). For an expanded analysis of the theory of change, including the evaluability of the programme logic, please
refer to the Evaluability Assessment (Annex 4).
Strategies and interventions
Output area 1: Enabling policy and legal environment
The first stream of work (Output 1) is primarily designed to strengthen the structure, functions,
capacities and accountability of the child protection system at both the national and sub-national
levels. Specifically, it seeks to ensure that key duty bearers have the knowledge, tools, resources and
authority they need to formulate and implement the institutional and legal frameworks to strengthen
child protection prevention and response interventions in a more enabling legislative, policy and
financing environment. The intermediate outcome statement linked to this output is: “Girls, boys and
adolescents are more protected from violence because the legal, policy and financing environment
enables and efficient and effective child protection response for all children, everywhere.”
32 UNICEF Cambodia Child Protection Programme 2019 -2023: Outcome Evaluation
To achieve this output, UNICEF is investing in a range of projects and activities:
Table 2: Output 1 System-based Projects and Activities
Child Protection System Projects and Activities
Components
Functions and structure • Child Protection Law and Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs).
(a legal and regulatory • Child Protection Sector Strategic Implementation Plan with
framework and costings.
governance structures) • Provincial Child Protection Plans and Technical Working Groups.
• Prakas (regulations) and Procedures on foster care and kinship
care.
• Guidelines on diversion of children in conflict with the law and on
child friendly justice procedures.
• Pilot Project for reintegrating of children with disability from
residential care institutions to family-base care.
• Integration of child protection in police academy curriculum.
• Revised Policy on Alternative Care for Children.
• Alternative Care Reform Plan 2023 – 2027.
• Guidelines on reintegration, transition, and closure of residential
care facilities.
• Guidebook on the implementation of sub-decree 182, 183, 184 and
34.
• Guidelines on the roles and responsibilities of social workers of
Municipal, Districts, and Khans.
• Assignment of 204 district social affair staff to perform roles of
child protection.
• Coordination of VAC Action Plan and support for key interventions.
Capacity (Human, • Primero (a digital case management system).
financial and infrastructure • Social workers (final stage of recruitment by the government) and
resources) district civil servants assigned to perform child protection related
functions.
• Mainstreaming of disability in the Standard Operating Procedures
(SOPs), Child Protection Law, Alternative Care Policy, CPIMS and
Primero.
• Appointment of social agent (1 in each province) to handle juvenile
justice cases and support capacity building of the sector.
UNICEF Cambodia Child Protection Programme 2019 -2023: Outcome Evaluation 33
Accountability (minimum • Code of Ethics for social service workforce.
standards, data collection • CPIMS Strategic Plan for 2023-2027.
and oversight) • Strengthening of mechanisms to guide the inspection of residential
care facilities
• Country-led Evaluation of the Action Plan to Prevent and Respond
to Violence Against Children 2017-2021 (VAC-AP) in Cambodia.
Child Protection in • Child Protection in Humanitarian Action (COVID-19, floods, etc.),
Humanitarian Action including Guidelines on Case Management during COVID-19.
• MoSVY’s Child Protection in Emergency Contingency Plan 2020-
2021.
• Planning on integration of climate change in relevant child
protection work.
Outcome area 2: Child protection services and workforce
The second stream of work (Output 2) is primarily designed to strengthen the capacity of the child
protection system by ensuring that the child protection workforce (social work, welfare, justice,
health and social protection), has the required ‘knowledge, tools, resources and authority’ to identify
and support vulnerable children. Specifically, the goals of these capacity building efforts are to reduce
violence and exploitation of children and to improve children’s access to justice with an emphasis
on children living in economically deprived urban and rural settings. The intermediate outcome
statement linked to this output is: “Girls, boys and adolescents outside of family care or living in
multi-dimensional poverty have increased access to age, ability and gender appropriate services and
protection. This includes children on the move, children in street situations, and children vulnerable
to institutionalisation, trafficking and sexual exploitation, including online sexual exploitation.”
To achieve this output, UNICEF is investing in a range of projects and activities.
Table 3: Output 2 System based Projects and Activities
Child Protection System Projects and Activities
Components
Capacity (human, financial • Enhancing skills and capacity of the social service workforce.
and infrastructure • Strategic plan for training of social service workforce.
resources) • Training curriculum and development of modules, with integration
of cross-sectoral areas including child protection in emergency,
IECD, GBV, MHPSS and disability.
34 UNICEF Cambodia Child Protection Programme 2019 -2023: Outcome Evaluation
• Training of social workers, including on Primero.
• Capacity building of health practitioners on the clinical handbook.
• Business Plan on Investing in Social Service Workforce Cambodia
(2021).
• Strategic Plan on Social Service Workforce (2022-2031).
• Mentoring services for government social service workforce
through a partnership with Social Services of Cambodia (SSC).
Continuum of services • Service provision government agencies and the 3PC Partnership
(spanning prevention and Programme for Protection of Children but also others.
response at the primary, • Expansion of the Partnership Programme for Protection of Children
secondary and tertiary (3PC) to increase provision of MHPSS service as part of child
levels) protection in humanitarian action and legal aid services to children
in contact with the law.
• Partnership with Child Helpline Cambodia for MHPSS services
and educational information to prevent VAC.
© UNICEF Cambodia/2018/Chansereypich Seng
UNICEF Cambodia Child Protection Programme 2019 -2023: Outcome Evaluation 35
Outcome area 3: Child protection attitudes and behaviours
The third programme stream (Output 3) is primarily designed to strengthen the demand side of the
child protection system, including the capacities of children, adolescents, parents and those with
a duty of care for the protection of children such as teachers and health workers. Specifically, it is
designed to ensure that parents, teachers, religious leaders, communities and adolescents have
enhanced knowledge, skills and attitudes to protect girls and boys from violence and exploitation
through the scaling up of positive discipline, positive parenting and Cambodia PROTECT child
protection programmes. The intermediate outcome statement linked to this output is: “Girls and
boys of all ages are nurtured in families that increasingly use positive parenting, attend schools that
increasingly apply positive discipline and thrive in communities that increasingly adopt norms that
strengthen protective practices.”
To achieve this output, UNICEF is investing in a range of projects and activities.
Table 4: Output 3 System-based Projects and Activities
Child Protection System Projects and Activities
Components
Functions and structure • Coordination of VAC Action Plan and support for key interventions.
(a legal and regulatory • Provincial Action Plan to Prevent Child Marriage and Teenage
framework and governance Pregnancy in Ratanakiri 2017-2021.
structures) • Child Protection in School Action Plan 2019-2023.
• Action Plan to prevent and respond to online sexual exploitation
and abuse 2021-2025.
Child and adolescent • Cambodia PROTECT, behaviour change campaign.
participation and • Positive parenting.
community engagement • Positive disciple in schools.
• Adolescent engagement and participation.
• Online safety campaigns.
• Mine risk reduction.38
• National digital campaign on adolescent mental health.
Accountability (minimum • Pagoda Child Safeguarding Policy.
standards and oversight) • Country-led Evaluation of the Action Plan to Prevent and Respond
to Violence Against Children 2017-2021 (VAC-AP) in Cambodia.
The campaign was expanded to include other key protection concerns such as child marriage, child online
protection, mental health and psychosocial support, and gender-based violence risk mitigation.
38 UNICEF Cambodia ended its mine action engagement in 2021 due to the success of previous sustained multi-year programming. National authorities
and civil society partners will now continue this work.
36 UNICEF Cambodia Child Protection Programme 2019 -2023: Outcome Evaluation
UNICEF partners
To deliver the outcome and three outputs, UNICEF collaborates with the Ministry of Veterans and
Youth Rehabilitation (MoSVY) and the following government partners: the Ministry of Cults and
Religion (MoCR); the Ministry of Interior (MoI); the Ministry of Justice (MoJ); the Ministry of
Women’s Affairs (MoWA); the Ministry of Education, Youth and Sports (MoEYS); and the Ministry
of Post and Telecommunications (MoPTC). Other key partners and networks include the following:
Child Helpline Cambodia; Child Fund Cambodia; Family Care First; Friends-International, Plan
International; the Partnership Programme for the Protection of Children (3PC), Save the Children,
World Vision International, Improving Cambodia’s Society through Skilful Parenting (ICS-SP); Social
Services Cambodia, CRC Cambodia; and Action Pour Les Enfants (APLE) Cambodia.
Strategic changes to the Child
Protection Programme
As a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, children around the world are facing an increased risk of
abuse, violence, exploitation and neglect that are unprecedented in their global reach. Evidence from
this pandemic, as well as from previous infectious disease outbreaks such as Ebola, shows that in
these situations existing child protection risks are exacerbated, and new ones emerge, from both the
disease and from the prevention and control measures put in place to contain it.39
The closure of schools and childcare facilities, increased caregiver stress, and crowded living spaces
where families are confined, are contributing to children’s heightened risk of violence, neglect, and
exploitation. Further, some children are experiencing the death of their caregiver while others are
being separated from their families for multiple reasons, including COVID-19 related public health
containment measures. As these risks are often hidden within communities, it can become even
more difficult to identify vulnerable children without visits or other forms of follow-up by caseworkers
under COVID-19-related social distancing measures. Children’s sources of support outside of the
family, including child protective services, health services and school, are likely to be out of reach for
extended periods of time.
Fit for purpose programme review
In response to the ongoing impact of COVID-19 on children, families and communities and the
burden it was placing on the delivery of essential services, UNICEF Cambodia undertook a review
of all its programmes, including child protection to assess their ‘fit for purpose’40 in the context of
the pandemic.
39 UNICEF, ‘Access to Justice for Children in the era of COVID-19: Lessons from the Field’, New York, 2020, p. 7-8.
https://www.unicef.org/media/92261/file/Access-to-Justice-COVID-19-Learning-Brief-2021.pdf.
40 UNICEF Cambodia, Reflection on UNICEF Cambodia Child Protection Programme to be ‘fit for Purpose,’ December 2020/January 2021.
UNICEF Cambodia Child Protection Programme 2019 -2023: Outcome Evaluation 37
For the Child Protection Programme, the purpose of the exercise was to:
“… guide the process of reviewing the current UNICEF Cambodia Child Protection programme
and define key adjustments required to reprioritize and reorientate the programme for the
period 2021-2023 in a way that the programme will be COVID-19 responsive, more efficient
in responding to the pandemic’s impact and able to accelerate results in key priority areas
as well as building and nurturing strategic partnerships and collaboration with relevant
stakeholders for amplification of results.”41
The exercise also provided the opportunity for the Child Protection Programme to reflect on its current
approach to child protection systems strengthening (CPSS) in light of the new UNICEF HQ global
guidance on CPSS, and in particular to more clearly articulate the changes it wanted to see at each
level or component of the child protection system. It also provided the opportunity to reorganise the
management of several outputs.
Table 5: Child Protection Programme Review
# System UNICEF Cambodia Priority interventions for the period
Components 2021-2023
1 Legal, regulatory • Support the development, finalisation and approval of the Law on
and policy Child Protection;
• Finalisation and approval of revised alternative care policy and
procedures/regulations for kinship care, foster care and domestic
adoption.
2 Governance • Finalise the development of the child protection sector national
strategic plan and provincial plans for all 25 provinces in Cambodia;
• Establish more effective coordination mechanisms at national at
sub-national level for child protection services as well stronger
collaborations with NGOs and donors and with other sectors,
particularly education, health, justice and social protection;
• Strengthen coordination and capacity for emergency preparedness
and response.
41 UNICEF Cambodia, Reflection on UNICEF Cambodia Child Protection Programme to be ‘fit for Purpose,’ December 2020/January 2021, p. 1.
38 UNICEF Cambodia Child Protection Programme 2019 -2023: Outcome Evaluation
3 Services • Support the rollout of Primero nationwide;
• Case management collaboration with NGOs social workers (3PC)
to build the role of government social workers;
• Support the government to test and implementation of Standard
Operating Procedures for child protection services and referrals,
with the aim of improving the access and quality of child protection
services and continuum of services across Social Welfare, Justice,
Health and Education;
• Define more systemic and sustainable approach for child helpline/
hotlines.
4 Standards and • Support the development, finalisation, testing, approval and roll
oversight out of Standard Operating Procedures for the delivery of Child
Protection services and referrals;
• Support establishment of clear mechanisms for supervision of
social service workforce.
5 Resources and • Support comprehensive workforce strengthening initiatives,
capacity including the approval of job description for social workers at
provincial and district level, development of social work capacity
building strategy and curricula and provision of training for child
protection service providers and staff;
• Shift focus from ad-hoc to a more coordinated/institutional capacity
building of Social Services Workforce.
• Finalisation of Code of Ethics and National Strategic Plan for social
service workforce;
• Advocacy for increased government budget investment in child
protection also through costing and financing of child protection
key areas, with particular focus on social service workforce
strengthening, case management system and scale up of positive
parenting and behavioural change campaigns, foster care and
diversion/rehabilitation services.
6 Participation • Support child and family participation and community engagement
(also involving monks and teachers) through Cambodia PROTECT;
• Support and promote platforms for children’s and adolescents’
empowerment;
• Advocate for and support the establishment of complaints
mechanisms for children;
• Support parents and caregivers engagement through positive
parenting,
• Support and promote private sector engagement to tackle child
online sexual exploitation and abuse.
UNICEF Cambodia Child Protection Programme 2019 -2023: Outcome Evaluation 39
7 Data • Support launch and roll out of Child Protection Information
Management System (CPMIS), with focus on strengthened data
governance (coordination, oversight and secure management);
• Advocate and support inclusion of child discipline modules and
questionnaires in Cambodia DHS and other relevant data collection
plans and mechanisms; support research on factors that affect
child protection (prevention and response).
As part of the fit for purpose exercise, a number of actions were proposed to streamline several
standalone projects into larger programming responses.
Table 6: Child Protection Programme Review: Fit for Purpose
# Intervention Standalone activities proposed to be streamlined into other
programmes
1 Implementation of • Link to the development and implementation of the Standard
the Clinical Handbook Operating Procedures for child protection services, in order to
for Health Workers strengthen the referrals between child protection and health
for Survivors of services.
Sexual Violence
2 Prevention of child • Include as part of a key area in the national Child Protection
marriage Strategic Sector Plan and provincial plans;
• Mainstream into the Cambodia PROTECT, the behavioural change
campaign; the positive parenting programme; in engagement
with adolescents and youth; and through collaborations with the
education sector.
3 Pagoda Programme • Involve Monks in community engagement activities as part of
Cambodia PROTECT and build their capacity as agents for change;
• Include Pagodas as part of the referral mechanisms for child
protection services and in the development and roll out of SOPs.
4 Mine Risk Education • End financial investments in Mine Risk Education and only provide
Programme technical support.
Many of the proposed actions highlighted above were approved by UNICEF and the RGC at
the programme review discussed below.
40 UNICEF Cambodia Child Protection Programme 2019 -2023: Outcome Evaluation
Programme review
In mid-2021, UNICEF and the RGC proposes a series of strategic changes to the Child Protection
Programme as part of the Programme Review of the Royal Government of Cambodia – UNICEF
Country Programme of Cooperation (2019-2023). The Programme Review noted that while COVID-19
had delayed programme progress in some areas, it had highlighted the critical role of social workers
in supporting children and adolescents in times of emergency, particularly in terms of: “helping to
strengthen the national social service workforce and increase delivery of child protection services to
vulnerable children.”42 Despite this positive development the Programme Review noted that there
was a need to strengthen the humanitarian-development nexus in response to emergencies to
ensure greater sustainability of child protection initiatives. In addition, a greater focus was needed on
documentation and advocacy for scaling up of good practices at subnational level. Looking forward
the Programme Review highlighted several continuing and emerging child protection priorities.
This included the need to continue to focus on child protection system strengthening and sustainability,
particularly the legal, institutional and organization framework workforce and service delivery. In
particular, greater advocacy efforts were required for the RGC to increase budget investments
and to scale up social service workforce strengthening, capitalising on recent developments in the
region. The ASEAN Road Map for the Implementation of the Hanoi Declaration on Strengthening
Social Work for Cohesive and Responsive ASEAN Community.43 The vision of the Declaration is:
“The Ha Noi Declaration on Strengthening Social Work for Cohesive and Responsive ASEAN
Community sets a clear vision for empowering peoples of ASEAN through building comprehensive
social work and delivering multidisciplinary, inclusive and quality social services.”44
The Programme Review also identified the need for a more systematic response to the protection of
children online. This would include forging partnership with the private sector; supporting increased
access to quality services for victims of abuse online; promoting increased reporting of cases;
strengthening law enforcement’s ability to bring perpetrators to justice; while conducting victim-
focused investigations and empowering children, adolescent and young people to gain the knowledge
and skills to protect themselves. Other proposed strategic shifts in programming included fostering
greater collaboration between the Child Protection, Gender Based Violence and Mental Health and
Psychosocial Support; promoting a more integrated and collaborative approach to address violence
against children/adolescents (VAC) and violence against women (VAW) based on the evidence of the
VAC Action Plan evaluation and the regional study on VAC/VAW intersections.
42 UNICEF Cambodia, Report of the Programme Review of the Royal Government of Cambodia – UNICEF Country Programme of Cooperation (2019-2023),
September 2021, p. 22.
43 Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN), ASEAN Road Map for the Implementation of the Hanoi Declaration on Strengthening Social Work for
Cohesive and Responsive ASEAN Community, 12 November 2020.
44 Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN), ASEAN Road Map for the Implementation of the Hanoi Declaration on Strengthening Social Work for
Cohesive and Responsive ASEAN Community, 12 November 2020, p. 6.
UNICEF Cambodia Child Protection Programme 2019 -2023: Outcome Evaluation 41
© UNICEF Cambodia/2018/Todd Brown
PURPOSE, OBJECTIVES
AND SCOPE OF
THE EVALUATION
Purpose and objectives
The main purpose of the outcome evaluation is to assess the relevance, coherence, effectiveness,
impact, efficiency and sustainability of the Child Protection Programme in terms of its achievement
of results, as well as its contribution towards meeting UNICEF’s priorities in knowledge-generation
and lessons learned. The purpose of the evaluation is also to inform UNICEF’s future strategies and
programme development in child protection.
As stated in the TOR (Annex 1), the five objectives of the evaluation are to:
1
Review the theory of change of UNICEF’s Child Protection Programme including the
interlinkages among the Programme outputs and provide an assessment of how far they
are based on evidence from programme experiences and approaches that have proven
effective in protecting girls and boys in the current country context.
2
Examine the results achieved by UNICEF’s Child Protection Programme, enabling and
disabling factors, considering aspects of both prevention and response, including capacity
development of government institutions at national and sub-national levels, international
and national NGOs, development partners as well as the voices of children, adolescents,
families and communities.
3
Assess UNICEF’s leadership, comparative advantage, ability to leverage resources and
partnerships for strengthening the RGC child protection system at national and sub- national
levels through advocacy and policy influencing, including utilising knowledge management
and evidence-generation to inform policy decisions;
4
Assess the opportunities for further accelerating action on child protection in Cambodia
with the RGC and partners; and
5
Examine the existing linkages between the outputs of the Child Protection Programme,
as well as inter-linkages with Policy and Public Finance for Children, education, health and
nutrition, and WASH through the joint work such as positive discipline in schools, child
protection service delivery in the health system and communication for development.
UNICEF Cambodia Child Protection Programme 2019 -2023: Outcome Evaluation 43
The knowledge, data and information generated through the outcome evaluation will support learning
and decision-making. This in turn will support more sustainable child protection outcomes for
children in the future. Further, the evaluation will help to clarify the degree to which the Programme
has contributed to changes for children vulnerable to violence, abuse, exploitation and neglect,
particularly historically excluded and marginalised groups of children. At the same time, it will help
determine whether UNICEF is making the right strategic choices to ensure that children vulnerable
to harm in Cambodia are able to claim and enjoy their rights to protection as enshrined in international
conventions and related instruments and in national child protection related legislation and policy.
The evaluation is intended to provide specific and actionable, evidence-based recommendations,
based on a detailed analysis of the findings of the evaluation, along with the identification of good
practices and lessons learned. The evaluation is a mid-term evaluation and as such, final programme
results will not be measured; though the findings will be useful in assessing outcomes achieved so
far and will be aimed at generating findings that will be useful in informing how the Programme can
work to achieve its end-term results.
The Child Protection Programme’s target population is set out in the programme’s key outcome:
girls and boys including adolescents, living with families and outside of family care, who experience
violence or who are threatened by violence, in their homes, in their schools, in their community and
in institutions. Other programme target populations, who receive capacity building and technical
support through the Programme are set out in the Programme’s Results Framework (Annex 2). These
include:
Output 1: National and sub-national authorities;
Output 2: The broader child protection workforce (social work, welfare,
justice, health and social protection); and
Output 3: Parents, teachers, religious leaders, communities and adolescents.
Key users and intended use of the
evaluation
The primary users of the evaluation are UNICEF Cambodia, including senior management and the
Child Protection team; RGC line ministries such as the Ministry of Social Affairs, Veterans and Youth
Rehabilitation, the Ministry of Interior and the Ministry of Justice; Ministry of Education, Youth and
Sports; the Ministry of Women’s Affairs; central agencies such as the Ministry of Planning; multisectoral
mechanisms such as the Steering Committee on Violence Against Women and Violence Against
Children; NGOs and coalitions such as the Partnership for the Protection of Children (3PC); and the
UNICEF East Asia and Pacific Regional Office (EAPRO). The RGC, line ministries and implementing
partners are the key duty bearers. Secondary users are the UN agencies working in child protection
and violence against women, justice and labour and partners such as Universities, thinktanks and civil
society organisations.
44 UNICEF Cambodia Child Protection Programme 2019 -2023: Outcome Evaluation
Donors and international development partners include USAID and the Displaced Children and
Orphans Fund; the Government of Japan, the Global Partnership for Ending Violence Against Children;
UNICEF National Committees in Australia, Germany, and Japan.
The intended use of the evaluation is to inform decision making and provide accountability and
learning.
Scope of the evaluation
As per the TOR, the Programme will be evaluated against the strategic intent laid out in the UNICEF
Cambodia CPD, 2019-2023, and through a review of its theory of change.
In addition, the evaluation will focus on the linkages with the other elements of the Child Protection
Programme, while looking at linkages with other parts of the country programme. Specifically, how
the Child Protection Programme links to the policy and public finance for children, education, health
and communication for development (C4D). For example, the Programme works closely with the
Health Programme in the implementation of the Clinical Handbook for Health Practitioners on violence
against children. The Programme also works closely with the Education Programme to scale up the
Positive Discipline Programme and to rollout the Child Protection Policy in schools. These linkages
are important in ensuring a multi-sector approach to child protection, engaging the necessary key
government partners and other stakeholders and ensuring mutually reinforcing and efficient results.
Geographic scope
The geographic scope of the evaluation covers the Programme’s work at national, subnational and
community levels. Upstream work is undertaken at the national level and centres around child
protection systems strengthening, including legislative and policy reform, knowledge generation
and planning for service delivery. Midstream protection work is undertaken at the subnational level
covering provinces and districts. Downstream protection work is at the community level and includes
parents, caregivers, service providers, children, and adolescents.
At the sub-national level, the evaluation will cover six locations (at the Province and District level),
including four programme locations and two comparator locations as detailed in section 7.3.1, below
(sampling).
Time scope
The time scope for the evaluation is the start of the current country programme in 2019 to mid-2022,
while also considering the evolution of the Programme since the previous country programmes as
well as the formative evaluation published in 2018.
UNICEF Cambodia Child Protection Programme 2019 -2023: Outcome Evaluation 45
© UNICEF Cambodia/2022/Bunsak But
EVALUATION CRITERIA
AND QUESTIONS
Evaluation questions
The evaluation was designed to respond to the following key evaluation questions and sub-questions
which were developed to meet the aims outlined above (section 5). These questions were drawn from
the TOR, though with some adjustments in order to make the sub-questions more comprehensive
and inclusive of the main questions (changes from the original questions in the TOR are italicised in
the table below).
Table 7: Evaluation Questions
Key evaluation questions Sub-questions
Relevance How relevant and • How relevant and appropriate has the
consistent has the Child Child Protection Programme been to the
Protection Programme Agenda 2030, and should it been adjusted
been to national and to align with the SDGs?
international priorities and • How relevant is the Child Protection
commitments of UNICEF Programme to the priorities and needs
in considering aspects of national and sub-national Government
of violence prevention stakeholders, including those set out in
and response as well key national policies, strategies and action
as to the needs of the plans? [additional question]
most vulnerable girls and • How relevant and appropriate has the
boys in Cambodia? Did Child Protection Programme been
the programme retain to the priority and conditions set by
relevance during the development partners, especially donors?
COVID-19 pandemic? • To what degree is the Child Protection
Programme aligned with the new UNICEF
Strategic Plan 2022-2025 and the new
UNICEF Child Protection Strategy 2021-
2030?
UNICEF Cambodia Child Protection Programme 2019 -2023: Outcome Evaluation 47
• How has the Child Protection Programme
ensured that the voices of girls and boys
are heard and reflected throughout?
• How relevant is the Child Protection
Programme to the Cambodia context,
including the evidence base on key
deprivations and needs of children?
• (How) has the Child Protection
Programme retained its relevance to
changing contextual factors, including
COVID-19 in particular? [additional
question]
• To what extent are the results and
indicators used for measuring outcomes
relevant to addressing the needs and
priorities of children?
Effectiveness To what degree has • To what extent has the Child Protection
UNICEF’s Child Protection Programme contributed to a strengthened
Programme contributed child protection system in Cambodia? To
to the creation of positive what extent have planned results been
conditions and changes for achieved?
keeping vulnerable girls and • To what degree has the National Child
boys in families, supporting Protection System been able to respond
their safe reintegration into to the needs of vulnerable girls and boys,
family care, and protecting especially the most marginalized, that
them from violence were at risk of being separated or being
in all settings through exposed to violence?
institutional and legislative • How satisfied have children and
frameworks, quality adolescents, and their parents/caregivers,
services, promotion of been with the quality of prevention and
positive social and gender response services they have received?
norms, and a supportive • How effective have behavioural change
community environment? campaigns been designed to prevent and
to respond to violence and unnecessary
family separation (including empowering
children and adolescents to demand their
rights)? How effective has the positive
discipline in schools programme been
improving prevention of and response to
VAC in schools? How effective has the
positive parenting programme been in
changing the knowledge, attitudes and
behaviours of parents / caregivers towards
the use of violent discipline?
48 UNICEF Cambodia Child Protection Programme 2019 -2023: Outcome Evaluation
• To what degree and how appropriately
have partnerships been mobilized in a
manner that contributes effectively to the
Child Protection Programme?
• To what degree has UNICEF’s Child
Protection Programme contributed to
supporting the safe reintegration of
children into family care, and protecting
them from violence?
• To what degree was the programme
effective in addressing child protection
issues during COVID-19? To what
extent was the programme able to
mitigate the impact of the pandemic
on the programme and to capitalize on
opportunities that arose?
• To what degree has the Child Protection
Programme integrated UNICEF’s
commitment to equity, gender equality
and human rights, as well as resilience
throughout the Programme cycle, and
what results have been achieved in
relation to these commitments?
• Has sufficient attention been given to
measuring, monitoring and reporting
results? Has sufficient investment
been made/progress been made in the
generation of data and evidence that
support monitoring of results? How
effectively has evidence been used
to inform programmatic changes and
adjustments?
• What are the major factors that
have influenced the Programme’s
effectiveness? Which strategies have
been most effective in achieving positive
results under the Child Protection
Programme? [additional question]
• Which factors have impeded
effectiveness of the Programme?
[additional question]
UNICEF Cambodia Child Protection Programme 2019 -2023: Outcome Evaluation 49
Efficiency To what extent and how • To what extent did the actual and
has UNICEF mobilized and expected output and outcomes justify the
used its resources (human, expenditure?
technical and financial) and • How successful have UNICEF’s efforts in
improved coordination to advocacy and policy influencing been in
achieve its planned results leveraging resources and partnerships?
for Child Protection? Have they encouraged and contributed to
a greater collaborative effort towards child
protection?
• To what extent have UNICEF resources
(human, technical, financial) been
sufficient in managing the Child Protection
Programme? How adequate are the
capacities of UNICEF’s implementing
partners?
• How effectively have coordination
mechanisms been working between
UNICEF’s Child Protection Programme
and other programme outcomes to create
and sustain linkages across sectors, and
between child protection actors, as a
result of UNICEF’s investments?
Coherence / To what extent are there • To what extent does the Child Protection
connectedness synergies and interlinkages harmonised and coordinated with other
between the Child actors’ interventions in the same context,
Protection Programme and including complementarity, harmonization
other interventions carried and co-ordination with others, and the
out by Government, other extent to which the intervention is adding
key development partners value while avoiding duplication of effort?
(Save the Children, Plan [Additional question]
International, World Vision • Are there differences in coordination at
etc.) as well as UNICEF? national or sub-national levels?
• Is there evidence of formation of strategic
partnerships between key stakeholders
and has this led to increased capacity to
achieve results?
50 UNICEF Cambodia Child Protection Programme 2019 -2023: Outcome Evaluation
Impact To what extent has • To what extent has the Child Protection
the Child Protection Programme led to a reduction in violence,
Programme led to positive abuse, neglect and exploitation of children
changes in the lives of in Cambodia?45
children, their families • To what extent has the programme
and communities? reduced family separation and
institutionalisation of children?
• To what extent has the Child Protection
Programme increased access to
appropriate systems, services and
support for children exposed to violence,
abuse, neglect or exploitation?
• To what extent has the Child Protection
Programme increased access to child
friendly justice for children in conflict with
the law?
• To what extent has the Child Protection
Programme achieved a reduction in
harmful beliefs, attitudes, norms and
practices that support VAC?
[Additional questions]
Sustainability To what extent are the • To what extent has the Programme
benefits and achievements achieved government buy in, ownership and
of the UNICEF- accountability at national and sub-national
supported programme levels, including through engagement
likely to continue after throughout the design and implementation of
the programme has the Programme?
ended through national • To what extent has the implementation of
ownership, changes at the Child Protection Programme thus far
family and community contributed to the generation of sustainable
level, and scalability and capacities at the national and sub-national
use of partnerships for levels?
sustainability? • To what extent had investment and progress
in strengthening the child protection system
ensured it was able to respond to the
demands during COVID-19?
• What would be the resource implications to
scale-up the Child Protection Programme,
particularly social service workforce
strengthening, child protection system
strengthening and priority strategies to end
violence?
45 It is noted that the ability to provide robust findings in relation to this question will be dependent on availability of existing administrative and survey data.
UNICEF Cambodia Child Protection Programme 2019 -2023: Outcome Evaluation 51
• What are the enabling as well as constraining
factors that are likely to influence replication
and sustainability?
Gender, To what extent were • To what extent were gender, age,
equity and gender, equity and disability, ethnicity and other background
human rights
human rights principles characteristics were considered in the
integrated into the design, design and implementation the child
implementation and protection programme? [Additional
monitoring of the Child question]
Protection programme?46 • To what extent did children from
marginalized communities, children with
disabilities, girls and other disadvantaged
groups benefit from the child protection
programme?
Evaluation matrix
An evaluation matrix was developed (Annex 5), which contains the evaluation questions and sub-
questions, and sets out corresponding key indicators, data collection methods, and means of
verification for each. The evaluation matrix informed the development of the methodology for the
evaluation and guided the analysis. Specifically, the evaluation matrix contains:
• The research questions the evaluation will attempt to answer (across the evaluation criteria of
relevance, coherence, effectiveness, efficiency, impact (outcomes), sustainability and gender,
equity and human rights);
• Qualitative and quantitative indicators which emerge from / relate to the evaluation questions,
and are informed by the Programme’s results framework;
• Data sources for answering research questions and measuring indicators; and
• Any limitations in data or the ability of researchers to analyse it.
46 This question is overarching / cross-cutting and we suggest that relevant findings and analysis be integrated throughout the evaluation report to avoid
repetition and enrich analysis.
52 UNICEF Cambodia Child Protection Programme 2019 -2023: Outcome Evaluation
METHODOLOGY
Overall methodological approach
The evaluation applied the standard Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development
(OECD)/Development Assistance Committee (DAC) criteria of relevance, impact, effectiveness,
efficiency and sustainability. As requested in the TOR (Annex 1), the evaluation assessed coherence
/ connectedness between UNICEF’s Child Protection Programme and other programmes, priorities
and cross-cutting areas, as well as programmes by Government and development partners. It also
examined the Programme’s gender-sensitivity and equity dimensions, as set out in the TOR. The
evaluation methodology was developed according to the UNEG Norms and Standards for Evaluation
(2016) and it also incorporated UNICEF’s guiding principles on gender equality, equity, and human
rights. The evaluation was equity and rights-based, rooted in the UN Convention on the Rights of
the Child (UNCRC), the Convention on the Elimination of all forms of Discrimination Against Women
(CEDAW), the Convention on the Rights of People with Disabilities (CRPD) and other key international
standards.
Theory-based approach
The evaluation was theory-based and non-experimental. A theory-based approach was considered
appropriate, given the need, as set out in the TOR, to assess the Child Protection Programme
against the strategic intent laid out in UNICEF’s Country Programme for Cambodia 2019 – 2023,
through its theory of change. A theory-based approach was also considered appropriate given the
complexity and multi-component nature of the Programme, including the multiple partners working
on the programme, and the need to examine linkages with other Programme areas. It is also noted
that the overall aim was not to generate robust findings on the impacts of specific interventions on
individuals; it was rather to assess the outcomes of the programme overall, making a theory-based
(as compared to, for instance, an experimental design) most suitable.
A critical component of the theory-based approach to evaluation is the establishment of a theory
of change. This is important as it articulates the ‘logic model’ for how programme activities and
strategies will lead from the current situation (‘the problem’) to the key outcome through a series
of steps and enables us to identify the assumptions that the logic model is based on and whether
they hold true. As set out above (section 3.4), UNICEF’s Child Protection Programme was developed
on the basis of a theory of change, which reflects UNICEF’s approach to child protection systems
building in the current programme cycle (section 4.2).
UNICEF Cambodia Child Protection Programme 2019 -2023: Outcome Evaluation 53
The theory of change sets out a logic model for the Programme, which articulates how programme
interventions and strategies are expected to achieve outputs and outcomes, and ultimately
contribute to a broader vision for change in line with the overall outcome: that by 2023, girls and
boys including adolescents, living with families and outside of family care are increasingly free from
violence and exploitation and from the threat of violence and exploitation in their homes, schools
and communities and in institutions, including during humanitarian situations.
The programme’s theory of change was subject to an analysis as part of an evaluability assessment
that the team carried out to inform the development of the evaluation framework and methodology
(Annex 4). This enabled the team to examine the logic and coherence of UNICEF’s programme
design from an evaluability perspective, including the clarity of intent of the programme and
the theoretical coherence of its results chain logic. The evaluability assessment found that the
Programme’s existing theory of change is sound. In summary, the theory of change adheres to the
general guidance provided by UNICEF for the development of a theory of change and is embedded
within UNICEF’s global child protection systems strengthening framework, which is well articulated
globally. The results framework of the programme is clearly articulated, and the outputs and impacts
follow a results chain logic. The theory of change articulates risks and assumptions, including actions
to mitigate the risks and to fortify the assumptions. The outcomes are clear and realistic, and the
proposed programme activities, if implemented effectively and efficiently, should lead to the stated
outcome and impact.
Focusing on the logic model set out in the theory of change therefore enabled the team to examine
causal links between programme strategies and consequent outputs and outcomes; interrogate
the mechanisms, assumptions, risks and (changes in) context that may have supported or hindered
progress; and verify the relevance and coherence of the theory itself.
Rights-based and equity informed approach
The evaluation utilised a rights-based framework, which enabled an analysis of the Programme’s
outcomes in terms of their progress toward the realisation of children’s rights. This approach also
incorporated equity and gender considerations, which are crucial to a rights-based approach. This
helped to ensure that the country programme was comprehensively assessed in terms of its
achievement in addressing gender and inequalities and in ensuring outcomes benefit all rights-
holders, particularly those that have been ‘left behind.’
Systems framework
Given the centrality of systems thinking to the UNICEF Cambodia Child Protection Programme
(and the key framework for UNICEF’s child protection programming globally), a child protection
systems framework was applied to interpreting knowledge, data and information generated through
the research. A systems approach recognises that programming toward building and strengthening
the child protection system as a whole is crucial to the protection of children and adolescents from
violence, abuse, neglect and exploitation, rather than shorter-term projects or narrow policy changes
that do not contribute to strengthening the child protection system itself.
54 UNICEF Cambodia Child Protection Programme 2019 -2023: Outcome Evaluation
As concluded in the evaluability assessment (Annex 4), the Child Protection Programme’s logic
model broadly sits within a systems-building framework.
Figure 1: Theory based, outcome harvesting, systems and rights-based approaches
Contribution Extent to which How were outcomes
of outcomes to outcomes achieved (against
Outcomes
child protection fulfilled child TOC logic)? Identity
achieved (and
system rights (human of specific UNICEF
extent)
strengthening rights, gender interventions
and equity)
Mixed methods design
The evaluation employed a mixed-method approach to data collection, including both quantitative and
qualitative methods. A mixed methodology was used to draw from the strengths of both qualitative
and quantitative methods; to gather data that is rich, accurate and measurable; and, to improve the
validity of results through triangulation. A mixed method approach enabled the evaluation team to
collect high quality data that is both in-depth and comprehensive, conduct meaningful analysis, and
ultimately, render the study of greater use for informing future programming developments.
Quantitative data was used to provide an overall description and numerical measure of programme
characteristics and results, and of the context in which the programme operates. Quantitative data
sources included:
• Existing (published) collated administrative and survey data to examine the programme context
which will be particularly relevant to evaluation questions focusing on relevance and establish
outcomes;
• Raw or collated administrative data from programmes supported by UNICEF during the
programming phase, which will be used to assess whether outputs have been achieved and the
extent to which programme outcomes have been achieved (i.e., have key targets been met?).
This was particularly relevant to evaluation questions focusing on effectiveness and impact; and
• Primary survey data collected by the team from UNICEF Programme staff and partners and
beneficiaries in order to triangulate data from KIIs and FGDs and allow for the provision of
feedback in a robust and confidential way.
Disaggregated quantitative data is (where possible) presented to enable a gender and equity
sensitive analysis.
UNICEF Cambodia Child Protection Programme 2019 -2023: Outcome Evaluation 55
Quantitative data was used to provide deep, explanatory analysis in relation to the evaluation
questions. Given the need to engage in a process of critical reflection and learning about the
relevance, coherence, effectiveness, impact, efficiency and sustainability of UNICEF’s strategies,
qualitative data was particularly useful. Qualitative research methods have greater interpretative and
explanatory potential than quantitative approaches and provide the best opportunity for exploring
how and why particular strategies or approaches have, or have not, worked in the Cambodian
context. In particular, qualitative data included:
• Key informant interviews with a range of stakeholders (UNICEF, partners, service providers –
see discussion on sampling below);
• In-depth interviews with beneficiaries and rights holders;
• Focus groups discussions with service providers; and
• Case file reviews.
Participatory approach
The evaluation aimed to ensure a consultative and participatory approach with UNICEF, stakeholders,
and rights holders. The evaluation team integrated consultations, participatory evaluation techniques
and validation sessions throughout the methodology in order to ensure that evaluation methods
and outputs were context-appropriate and high quality, and that stakeholders had overall ownership
of the process and outputs. It is noted that particular attention was paid to engaging users of the
evaluation – UNICEF country and regional offices, key stakeholders, national government ministries
and departments, representatives at national and sub-national level, and other UN organisations
working in Cambodia.
The evaluation process and outputs were overseen by an Evaluation Reference Group, comprised
of the UNICEF Child Protection Chief and Evaluation Specialist; representatives from MoSVY; donor
representatives (from USAID, Government of Japan, and the UNICEF Australia National Commission);
along with at least two adolescent representatives from the Adolescent Youth Reference Group, in
order to ensure the meaningful engagement of adolescents not only as research participants, but
also at the broad level of overseeing and steering the evaluation process and outputs.
Data sources and data collection methods
The evaluation drew upon a range of data sources and data collection methods to ensure the
reliability of results, promote impartiality, reduce bias, and ensure that the evaluation is based on
the most comprehensive and relevant information possible. This included a review and analysis of
secondary data (desk review) and the collection and analysis of primary data using both qualitative
and quantitative methods. The data collection methods set out below were developed to achieve
data required to answer the evaluation questions, and measure particular indicators set out in the
evaluation matrix (Annex 5).
56 UNICEF Cambodia Child Protection Programme 2019 -2023: Outcome Evaluation
Desk review
The team carried out a review of programming documents and other research material. This included,
in particular: UNICEF Country Strategy and associated reports (such as the Situation Analysis Report,
Gender Programmatic Review, Country Programme Document, Programme Strategy Notes, Annual
Management Plan, etc); progress reports; UNICEF’s Enterprise Resource Planning System reports;
mid-year and end-year reviews and annual reports; evaluations; third party monitoring; reports
from research and studies undertaken; and the Programmatic Review report. The desk review also
included a review of key government documents (laws, policies and action plans) including: the
Cambodia National Strategic Development Plan (NSDP) 2019-2023, and key sectoral and thematic
action plans relating to VAC and child protection.
The desk review also involved an analysis of existing data sources / databases that contain data on
indicators relevant to UNICEF’s Child Protection Programme, including baseline, mid-line and endline
monitoring reports for particular interventions; service user monitoring data (including (anonymised)
case data from Primero); reports and other data records for tracking cases.
In addition, the team has carried out a review of existing administrative and survey data, studies
and reports, policies and laws relating to child protection in Cambodia to examine the context for
the Child Protection programme, which is particularly important in ensuring a robust assessment
of the Programme’s relevance and coherence. This included a review of CDHS and CVACS data
to measure broad outcomes, according to the indicators largely drawn from the CP Programme’s
results framework. The survey data was used to provide important contextual information about
child protection risks and needs; numbers and types of child protection cases being addressed;
types of interventions pursued; outcomes of cases disaggregated by age, gender and other factors,
which was useful in assessing the Programme’s relevance in particular.
Key informant interviews
Much of the data for the evaluation was collected through in-person and remote (Zoom) key
informant interviews of stakeholders at both national and sub-national levels. The aim of these
interviews was to obtain detailed and specific information from experts or key informants who have
in-depth knowledge in a particular area/s relevant to the evaluation. Individual interviews allowed
respondents to engage with evaluators in a private and confidential setting where they were likely
to feel more comfortable sharing their experiences and views than they would in a group setting. A
semi-standardised approach was adopted, guided by a structured tool, but allowing for a participant
and response-directed interaction. The selection process for key informants is set out below (section
7.3). In summary, key informants included UNICEF programme staff (in child protection and also
those with aligned programmes or working on relevant cross-cutting issues, such as adolescence,
risk and gender), officials and practitioners in the child protection and child justice systems (social
services workforce, Police, Prosecutors and Court personnel involved in child protection work),local
government officials, implementing partners, other NGOs and community-based organisations
(CBOs) working on child protection, donors, and community leaders.
Group interviews were held in some cases, where it was felt that this would increase the comfort
of respondents and enrich the interaction.
UNICEF Cambodia Child Protection Programme 2019 -2023: Outcome Evaluation 57
Case studies
In order to gain a concrete understanding and to examine, in an in-depth manner, the results or
impacts of UNICEF interventions in the programming areas, a number of child protection and child
justice ‘wrap around case studies’ were carried out. This enabled the team to understand, in a
concrete and applied way, how the child protection programme has supported case management
and child protection service delivery. This enabled the generation of robust findings through
triangulation with data collected through KIIs and in-depth interviews. The aim was to select diverse
case studies from the full range of UNICEF interventions in each research location. A number of
child protection and child justice case studies were also carried out in non-intervention research
locations (see section 7.3 below), in order to compare the process and isolate outcomes in child
protection case management and service delivery associated with programme interventions.
The case studies will involve a review of the child’s file and a selection of interviews with stakeholders
involved in the case. The following methods will be used:
In-depth individual interviews with children and their parents / carers
In-depth life history interviews were carried out with children whose cases have been subject to a
child protection or child justice intervention by social workers (MoSVY/DoSVY and / or NGO social
workers; MoSVY/DoSVY and / or MOI district level social workers), police or other service providers.
The team aimed to include a range of case ‘types,’ for instance: children who have been exposed
to violence, abuse or neglect in the home; children who have been exploited (e.g. victims of sexual
exploitation or trafficking); children in Residential Care Institutions (RCIs); children who have been
reintegrated from residential care; children who have been abandoned or separated; children in
conflict with the law who have been subject to diversion; and COVID-affected children.
In-depth interviews with social workers and service providers
The key / allocated MoSVY or NGO social workers were interviewed about the case, including on the
process, decision-making, case management and case outcomes, along with questions designed to
identify outcomes of the particular inputs provided by UNICEF under its Child Protection Programme
and the contribution of these inputs to any changes in case processing.
Question schedules were developed to guide these interviews; however, interviews were semi-
structured, in order to ensure that they were participant-led.
Case file reviews
The evaluation team triangulated information gathered from child protection practitioners and
clients, through reviewing a sample of files kept by MoSVY / MoSVY social workers concerning
individual child protection cases that have been serviced by the child protection system, involved in
child protection proceedings, reunified with their families and communities or involved in diversion.
58 UNICEF Cambodia Child Protection Programme 2019 -2023: Outcome Evaluation
This was done by a read-through of the physical file by a researcher, facilitated by a prompt (question
guide) to pull out key information. The aim was to provide a sense of the types of cases which are
being brought to or picked up by the case management system, and the response that is being
implemented, and to allow the team to examine the implementation of case management systems
in a concrete way and assess any changes in practice on the ground, as a result of UNICEF’s
programme interventions.
Observation file reviews
In order to assess the implementation and operationalisation of Primero in the research locations,
researchers carried out a physical read-through of a sample of files logged into the Primero system
(in addition to the in-depth case study files reviews mentioned above) at MoSVY / DoSVY offices. The
purpose of the file reviews was to examine quality of case file management / data collection along
with quality of case management and child protection processes. This also enabled the triangulation
of data collected through KIIs with social workers and other key stakeholders. A checklist was
developed in order to achieve a systematic file review process.
Participatory focus group discussions with parents and
adolescents (prevention-focused)
A series of focus group discussions (FGDs) were carried out with parents / caregivers and adolescents
who received prevention-focused interventions under UNICEF’s Child Protection Programme. FGDs
were considered appropriate for prevention-focused initiatives, as data collection did not require an
in-depth life-history approach which is needed to collect data in relation to intensive and individual
tertiary / response services (see section Case studies above).
Survey of UNICEF staff and implementing partners
A short, primarily quantitative survey of stakeholders was developed for those directly involved
in the implementation of UNICEF’s Child Programme (staff members, former staff members,
implementing partners – Government and NGO – at the national level47). The survey, which was
completed on an anonymous basis, enabled the collection of broad, objective data on stakeholders’
perceptions of the Child Protection Programme’s relevance, effectiveness of programme delivery,
enabling factors and barriers to effective implementation and ultimate sustainability of interventions.
It also enabled triangulation of data collected through KIIs, and possibly encouraged more open
and authentic feedback, given that data was collected on an anonymous basis. The survey was
developed and disseminated online using Survey Monkey.
47 This was necessary as the survey focused on overarching and broad areas, requiring respondents who have a ‘birds eye’ view of the CP Programme.
UNICEF Cambodia Child Protection Programme 2019 -2023: Outcome Evaluation 59
Sampling
Selection of research locations
Data collection was carried out at the national level, with national level stakeholders, and the sub-
national level (provincial and district), in a diverse selection research locations that include provinces
in which UNICEF have had high, moderate and low / no engagement as part of its Child Protection
Programme.
In order to select specific research locations, the team developed detailed criteria which aimed at
identifying a diverse mix of locations involving different types of interventions carried out under the
Child Protection Programme. The mix included locations that had received high, medium and low
numbers of UNICEF interventions. While it was not possible to select comparator sites in which
UNICEF had not intervened (given that Programme interventions included national-level actions,
including national roll outs of the Primero child protection case management system, and national
legal developments), the selection of locations by intervention types or degrees was done to enable
researchers to isolate specific programme interventions and use a comparative analysis to measure
the effects of these interventions. The criteria also aimed to include at least two locations in which
there has been a deliberate focus on cross-thematic work (i.e., with other UNICEF programme
teams) or cross-cutting work (e.g., adolescence, climate etc.) work.
The research location selection also aimed to achieve diversity of location type (locations with
different demographic characteristics – relatively deprived; non-deprived; mix of livelihoods; ethnic
composition etc.), in order to ensure an inclusive sample of participants and to assess the extent to
which UNICEF’s interventions achieved particular outcomes across different settings. The selection
criteria and selected locations are summarised below in figure 2.
Figure 2: Research locations selection criteria and selected locations
Banteay Meanchey
Ratanakiri
Siem Reap
Battambang
Intervention province
Control province
Pursat
Kampong Cham
Kampong Speu
Phnom Penh
Kandal
Svay Rieng
Takeo
Preah Sihanouk
60 UNICEF Cambodia Child Protection Programme 2019 -2023: Outcome Evaluation
Table 8: Table of research locations and selection criteria
No. Type of research Selection criteria Proposed Province/ Reasoning
location District/ Commune
1 National National level (Phnom Penh) (Phnom Penh)
stakeholders
2 Intervention One province and Battambang Full range of
province 1 one urban district / Province CP Programme
Intervention communex within (Battambang interventions
district / this province, with Municipality) 3PC partners.
commune 1 full range of UNICEF Battambang has
CP interventions cross-sectorial work
ongoing (positive
parenting + positive
discipline in schools).
Alternative care also
here.
3 Intervention One province and Ratanakiri Province Full range of CP
province 2 one rural district / (O’Chum district) Programme
Intervention commune within interventions
district / this province, with Government partners
commune 2 full range of UNICEF and NGO partners.
CP interventions Full range of CP
Programme
interventions
Government partners
and NGO partners.
Alternative care
present though not
the strength/focus
(recent) Ethnic
minorities and
geographic spread,
integrated early
childhood
development focus,
cross-sectoral work.
UNICEF Cambodia Child Protection Programme 2019 -2023: Outcome Evaluation 61
4 Intervention One province and Kandal Province Alternative focus.
province 3 one urban district (Takmao 3PC partner
Intervention / commune within municipality) programming.
district / commune this province, with
3 most UNICEF
CP interventions
(alternative care
focus)
4 Intervention One province and Kandal Province Alternative focus.
province 3 one urban district (Takmao 3PC partner
Intervention / commune within municipality) programming.
district / commune this province, with
3 most UNICEF
CP interventions
(alternative care
focus)
5 Intervention One province and Siem Reap Most programme
province one rural district / Province components
4Intervention commune within (Pouk district) (including alternative
district / this province, with care), though no
commune 4 most UNICEF CP positive discipline
interventions (VAC focus. Government
focus) and NGO partners.
Cross-sectoral
work (adolescent
development and
participation focus).
6 Comparator One province and Pursat Province Limited
province 1 one urban district (Pursat Town) interventions:
Control district / / commune within Primero rollout
commune 1 this province, with to districts and
no / very limited provincial DoSVY
range of UNICEF office, RCI-
CP interventions; inspection, intake
comparable to an registration of
intervention location children in RCIs.
in context (location;
demographic profile
etc.)
62 UNICEF Cambodia Child Protection Programme 2019 -2023: Outcome Evaluation
7 Comparator One province and Oddar Meanchey Limited
province 2; one rural district / (Samrong district) interventions:
Control district / commune within Primero rollout
commune 2 this province, with to districts and
no / very limited provincial DoSVY
range of UNICEF office, RCI-
CP interventions; inspection, intake
comparable to an registration of
intervention location children in RCIs.
in context (location;
demographic profile
etc.)
Selection of respondents
Given the qualitative nature of the majority of the data collection methods, the sampling strategies
for the selection of participants was primarily purposive and non-random. Purposive sampling
prioritised diversity so that respondents of diverse backgrounds and with diverse perspectives are
included in the evaluation.
Key informantion sampling
The sampling strategy for key informants was purposive and included key stakeholders at both
national and sub-national (provincial, district, commune) level who play a role in the implementation
of UNICEF’s Country Programme and children’s rights in Cambodia more broadly. The purpose of
this selection is to obtain particular knowledge, expertise and accurate information in relation to
indicators in the evaluation framework from stakeholders with in-depth knowledge of UNICEF’s
Child Protection Programme and other related programmes (e.g., education, social policy, health).
At the national level, the technical leads in each team / agency / department were selected for the
interviews. In selecting particular professionals to be included in the research at the sub-national
level, the team aimed to select the professional who was specially designated as the professional to
work with child or families, and if more than one, the professional who had been with the relevant
institution for the longest period of time (and was therefore more likely to have a stronger / more
accurate understanding of how child protection cases are handled, along with any changes over
the period of implementation of UNICEF’s child protection programme). A detailed list of research
participants is contained in Annex 6 and summarised below (Table 9 and Figure 3).
UNICEF Cambodia Child Protection Programme 2019 -2023: Outcome Evaluation 63
Table 9: Research participants (key stakeholders)
Stakeholder type Selection criteria Number of interviews
UNICEF and other UNICEF Cambodia: Child Protection team 14 KIIs with 14 UNICEF
key UN agencies members; cross-cutting leads / specialists in participants (including
adolescent participation and development, current and former) (10
gender, disability; communication for male, 4 female).
development; cross-sectoral programme
1 KII with 1 other UN
lead/s in Education (integrated early childcare
participant (female).
and development; parenting).
UNICEF EAPRO: Child protection specialist
Other UN agencies who work in partnership
with UNICEF Child Protection team: Resident
Coordinator’s office; UNFPA, WHO; ILO;
OHCHR; UN Women.
National National representatives (relevant leads in 10 KIIs with 13
Government child protection / child justice) of: Ministry national government
partners of Social Affairs, Veterans and Youth participants (9 male,
Rehabilitation; Ministry of Education, Youth 4 female).
and Sports; Ministry of Health; Ministry of
Women’s Affairs; Ministry of Interior; Ministry
of Justice; Ministry of Cults and Religion;
the General Secretariat of the National Social
Protection Council; Cambodia National
Council for Children; Ministry of Post and
Telecommunications; and the National
Institute of Statistics.
NGO service National lead / coordinator of 3PC; child 14 KIIs with 14 NGO
providers protection leads in NGO implementing participants (7 male,
(national level) partners with national-level focus / 7 female).
coordination function (including Friends-
International).
Other NGOs working in child protection
implementation areas: Save the Children; Plan
International; World Vision.
64 UNICEF Cambodia Child Protection Programme 2019 -2023: Outcome Evaluation
Provincial and Province level government service providers: 33 KIIs with 54
district / commune District Office of Social Affairs, Veterans and government service
service providers Youth Rehabilitation; Provincial Department providers (20 male, 34
(Government and of Women’s Affairs; Office of Anti-Human Female)
NGO) Trafficking and Juvenile Protection; Provincial
9 KIIs with 15 NGO
Commissariat; provincial police; Residential
service providers
Care Institution directors; social workers;
(7 male, 8 female)
Provincial Council for Women and Children.
District / Commune level government service
providers: Women and Children’s Consultative
Committee; Office of Social Affairs, Veterans
and Youth Rehabilitation; social workers (if
available); District / Commune Council for
Women and Children; commune police.
NGO partner service providers present in each
research location.
Donors USAID; UNICEF National Commission of 1 KII with 1 donor
Australia; Government of Japan. (male).
Figure 3: Research participants (key stakeholders), by gender
5
UNICEF and other key UN agencies
10
4
National Government partners
9
7
NGO service providers
7
34
Province level government service providers
20
8
District / Commune level government service providers
7
0
Donors
1
0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40
Female Male
UNICEF Cambodia Child Protection Programme 2019 -2023: Outcome Evaluation 65
Sampling for case studies
For case studies, a ‘typical case sampling’ approach was used and the team aimed to conduct three
case studies in each of the six research locations. Cases were selected from monitoring data (e.g.,
from Primero and from 3PC’s / NGO’s database) held by implementing partners to represent typical
child protection cases (e.g., where children have received prevention and response services through
UNICEF’s programme). Implementing partners were asked to consider what criteria they associated
with a ‘typical’ child protection case, for example in terms of how the case was referred, the type of
child protection case, and the type of service or intervention received and what the outcomes of the
case were. Cases meeting these criteria were selected with a view to achieving diversity in terms
of demographic characteristics, such as gender and age, as well as the type of child protection
case and the type of service or intervention received. Case studies were unable to be carried out in
comparator provinces due to limitations in identifying cases (see limitations section, below).
In total, five case studies were completed involving 12 participants (8 rights holders / beneficiaries
and 4 service providers), as follows:
Table 10: Case study research participants
1 Battambang In-depth interview with caretaker (grandmother);
In-depth interview with child (12 year old boy); and
Key stakeholder interview with NGO social worker.
2 Battambang In-depth interview with parents (mother and father); and
Key stakeholder interview with District Social Services staff.
3 Rattanakiri In-depth interview with caregiver (grandmother); and
Key stakeholder interview with member of CCWC.
4 Siem Reap In-depth interview with caregiver (grandmother); and
Key stakeholder interview with District Social Services staff.
5 Siem Reap In-depth interview with parents (mother and father).
File reviews (Primero)
Cases for file review were selected on a random basis (every tenth case in the system, starting
from the most recently entered case). The reason for this is that the quality review needed to rely
on a random selection of cases in order to reduce selection bias. The team aimed to carry out a
review of five files per location, including for intervention sites and comparator sites; however, it
was not possible to review the Primero files in the two comparator provinces, owing to limited staff
availability and limited ability of staff to open and use the system (please see findings section below
for more detail).
66 UNICEF Cambodia Child Protection Programme 2019 -2023: Outcome Evaluation
Sampling for focus group discussions (FGDs) with parents / caregivers
Parents / caregivers were recruited through UNICEF implementing partners for the participatory
FGDs both in intervention and comparator provinces. Participants from intervention provinces
included parents who had received Positive Parenting training and community behaviour change
messaging. In comparator provinces, participants had not received Positive Parenting training. While
the team aimed to include a roughly even gender mix within the sample, this was not possible in
practice (particularly as the Positive Parenting training has only been delivered to women). In total,
10 FGDs were carried out, two in each province (it was not possible to carry out FGDs in Kandal
province as participants were unavailable due to seasonal work commitments). In total, the FGDs
included 12 men and 70 women participants.
Sampling for UNICEF and partner survey
Sampling for the survey was purposive on the basis of the individual having a role within the design
or implementation of the Child Protection Programme. This included UNICEF staff members and
Government / NGO implementing partners at national level. The team disseminated surveys to
stakeholders (through emailing a link to the survey and also by emailing a paper survey in Khmer
where required). Responses were closely followed up. In total, 33 responses were received
(including 20 from within UNICEF and 13 from outside of UNICEF). Unfortunately, the response
rate among national Government stakeholders was very low. Figures 14 and 15 summarise the
characteristics of survey respondents.
Figure 4: Survey respondents by category and gender (n = 33)
NGO 8 7
Government 1 0
Other UNICEF 2 1
Cross cutting team 2 2
Child protection team 9 2
0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16
Male Female
UNICEF Cambodia Child Protection Programme 2019 -2023: Outcome Evaluation 67
Figure 5: Survey respondents by age (n = 33)
65+ 1
55 - 64 3
45 - 54 9
35 - 44 18
25 - 34 2
0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20
Data analysis
A systematic review and analysis of all data was conducted, identifying key themes, patterns,
discourses, relationships and explanations relevant to the research questions and indicators set out
in the evaluation matrix. The evaluation matrix was used as a framework to organise data and guide
analysis.
Thematic analysis of qualitative data
All raw qualitative data was reviewed and coded according to themes that corresponded with the
evaluation questions. The thematic analysis focused on understanding how the child protection
system functions to prevent and respond to violence and child protection violations, and the role of
UNICEF’s programme within that. The analysis sought to identify both anticipated and unanticipated
results of programming, good practices, challenges, levels of capacity and areas where improvements
can be made.
Analysis of quantitative data
Quantitative data from the stakeholder survey was collated using open-source Survey Monkey.
Analysis included a descriptive profile of results and the identification of relationships between
key variables (e.g., type of respondent / satisfaction ranking of Child Protection Programme). Initial
analysis will produce descriptive statistics on the composition of the sample and the overall results,
disaggregated by factors of interest.
68 UNICEF Cambodia Child Protection Programme 2019 -2023: Outcome Evaluation
Content analysis
Content analysis of laws, policies, plans etc. developed as part of the Child Protection Programme
against relevant international standards was carried out, as identified in the evaluation matrix (Annex
5). This was considered important to enable quality assessments of programme interventions and
outcomes.
Data triangulation
Different types of data and different data sources were triangulated with one another in order to
identify any inconsistencies in information, as set out through section 7.2 above. Triangulation helped
to ensure the accuracy of findings, analysis and interpretation: drawing on different methods helped
evaluators overcome any biases or weaknesses associated with a particular method.
Human rights-based and gender sensitive focus
As previously mentioned, the evaluation applied a human rights lens to data analysis, considering
all evaluation findings from a conceptual framework which is normatively based on human
rights standards and laws. This entailed the consideration of inequalities and structural forms of
discrimination, and the power dynamics that drive these, within the analysis of people’s ideas and
experiences of the child protection and child justice systems. All data generated was disaggregated,
including by gender, ethnicity, age and disability (where this data is available) and a gender and
equity sensitive analytical lens was applied to all evidence.
Validation and oversight
The Evaluation Reference Group provided oversight at strategic points in the evaluation process, this
included a paper review of the evaluation methodology and a hybrid (in-person / zoom) presentation
and workshop to the Reference Group, which elicited important feedback and helped shape the
methodology and data collection plan.
The findings and draft recommendations from the evaluation were presented to the Evaluation
Reference Group at a virtual workshop in April 2023. Feedback was elicited from participants and
incorporated into this final version of the report. Written comments were also provided on the first
draft of the report from UNICEF Cambodia and UNICEF East Asia and Pacific Regional Office and
incorporated into this final version.
UNICEF Cambodia Child Protection Programme 2019 -2023: Outcome Evaluation 69
Ethical considerations
The evaluation was carried out in line with the UNEG Ethical Guidelines and the Ethical Principles of
Research Involving Children,48 along with Coram International’s own ethical guidelines. A tailored
and detailed ethical protocol was developed, and tools, including information sheet, consent forms
and checklists and child protection referral protocols were also developed. This protocol and the
methodology and tools for the study were submitted to Coram’s independent Research Ethics
Committee, with approval granted prior to the commencement of data collection. The ethical
protocol and tools are attached at Annex 7. In summary, the following principles were applied, in
order to adhere to the overarching ‘do no harm’ principle:
Voluntary participation
Participation in the research was undertaken on a voluntary basis, with researchers explaining to the
participant in clear, age-appropriate language that participants are not required to participate and that
they may stop participating at any time without negative consequences.
Managing expectations
Researchers carefully explain the nature and purpose of the study to participants, and the role that the
data will play in the research project. Participants were informed that the purpose of the participant’s
engagement is not to offer direct assistance in order to avoid raising unfounded expectations.
Informed consent
Research participants were informed of the purpose and nature of the study, their contribution, and
how the data collected from them will be used in the study, through an information and consent
form, which was provided in Khmer and English. Researchers explained the contents of the consent
form in age-appropriate language, to study participants before commencing the interview. In Focus
Group Discussions (FGDs), participants were advised verbally of the purpose of the study and their
contribution and verbal consent was provided and recorded before the commencement of the FGD.
Where possible, consent was also obtained from the child’s parent or caregiver.
Anonymity and confidentiality
Ensuring confidentiality and anonymity is of the upmost importance. The identity of all research
participants was kept confidential throughout the process of data collection as well as in the analysis
and writing up study findings. Strict data protection and storage protocols were followed to protect
the confidentiality of research participants and data.
48 UNICEF Office of Research. 2013. Ethical Research Involving Children.
https://childethics.com/wp-content/uploads/2013/10/ERIC-compendium-approved-digital-web.pdf
70 UNICEF Cambodia Child Protection Programme 2019 -2023: Outcome Evaluation
Child safety and protection
A tailored child protection and safeguarding protocol and tools were developed to support the
identification and referral of child protection concerns, and all researchers were trained on the
protocol. All team members had expertise in carrying out research with a range of stakeholders,
including children, young people and vulnerable groups. All the international researchers had been
criminal-record checked within the UK through the Disclosure and Barring System.
Consideration of potential constraints
and mitigating strategies
Access to respondents
The evaluation relied on the participation of a number of stakeholders and programme rights holders
/ beneficiaries. While the research team, with the assistance of UNICEF and UNICEF’s implementing
partners, were able to identify the required number and type of respondent as set out in the study’s
methodology, there were nonetheless some challenges. In particular, access to children and parents
/ caregivers and professionals who were able to be identified for inclusion in individual case study
research was limited, particularly in the comparator provinces (Oddar Meancheay and Pursat), due to
limited case work being carried out in these locations, limited use of the child protection information
management system and limited number of NGO implementing partners. Also, for these reasons,
the file review of Primero cases was unable to be carried out in these locations. In Kandal, access
to participants for the case studies and FGDs was limited due to seasonal work commitments. In
these locations, the team relied on other sources, including key informant interviews, focus group
discussions and file reviews (Kandal).
Reporting bias:
The evaluation addressed sensitive issues which involved evaluating professionals’ work. Given
these sensitivities, it was likely that the evidence gathered may have been affected by a degree of
reporting bias. Respondents may have been reluctant or unwilling to share sensitive and personal
information either about traumatic events in their lives (children and adults) or about aspects of
their professional experience which they may have feared might reflect badly either on them or on
UNICEF. To mitigate against reporting bias, evaluators carefully explained to all respondents that
this is a learning-based exercise, explained that their anonymity will be protected, and no negative
personal or professional consequences will result from the information they share. Multiple data
sources were used and triangulated (as set out above, section 7.2), in order to identify and mitigate
reporting bias.
UNICEF Cambodia Child Protection Programme 2019 -2023: Outcome Evaluation 71
Recall bias
In addition, given that the evaluation involved speaking with respondents about past experiences,
it was likely that the evidence may also be affected by recall bias. This may have potentially led to
some inaccuracies where respondents have forgotten or misremembered events that happened
previously; and respondents’ ideas about when, where how and why such events took place may
have been coloured by subsequent events. Evaluators were careful to consider the impact of
recall bias in the analysis and interpretation of research data. Evaluators also triangulated objective
information through the assistance of other sources of information and documentation (e.g., files,
reports, etc.).
© UNICEF Cambodia/2018/Antoine Raab
72 UNICEF Cambodia Child Protection Programme 2019 -2023: Outcome Evaluation
FINDINGS
Relevance
Key research question: How relevant and consistent has the Child Protection Programme (CP
Programme) been to national and international priorities and commitments of UNICEF in considering
aspects of violence prevention and response as well as to the needs of the most vulnerable girls and
boys in Cambodia? Did the programme retain relevance during the COVID-19 pandemic?
Summary of findings on relevance
• The CP Programme was found to be highly relevant to Cambodia’s global development
commitments and, in utilising a strong systems building framework, was also found to be
relevant to UNICEF’s global frameworks and priorities. The three output areas of the Programme
were found to respond well to existing gaps and needs within the child protection system.
• The CP Programme’s multi-tiered approach, involving interventions aimed at strengthening the
system at both the national and sub-national levels, responds well to the programming context
and the engagement with new stakeholders, in particular, the MOI, was found to be highly
relevant to the new decentralised system for social welfare / child protection service delivery.
• While the Programme was found to be highly relevant to national Government policies,
plans and commitments, substantial capacity gaps at the sub-national level meant that some
interventions were not fully operationalised, owing to existing capacity gaps at the sub-national
level, indicating that more attention should have been given to the phasing and complementarity
of the Programme’s interventions at the sub-national level.
• While there is an evidence base to support the incorporation of certain issues within the CP
Programme, including in particular, adolescent and youth engagement, child marriage and online
child protection and stakeholders were clearly supportive of these initiatives, there is a need to
link these initiatives to the systems strengthening framework, otherwise there is a risk of the
CP Programme becoming too ‘issue focused’ and fragmented.
UNICEF Cambodia Child Protection Programme 2019 -2023: Outcome Evaluation 73
• With its focus on addressing violence, abuse, neglect and exploitation of children, the
Programme was found to be highly relevant to the evidence base on the protection risks and
needs of children in Cambodia; however, there was limited systematic engagement of children
in adolescents in the programme design and review.
• While some measures were taken to integrate gender and equity into the Programme
design, these measures were found to be insufficient, and there is a need to engage more
comprehensively with the gender dimensions of child protection issues and more effectively
address the protection needs of children with disabilities, in particular.
• The CP Programme was found to have retained its relevance in the changed context brought
about by the COVID-19 pandemic.
Relevance of the Programme to the global development agenda
(e.g. SDGs) and UNICEF global frameworks and priorities
The CP Programme is very well aligned to Cambodia’s global development commitments, and
to UNICEF’s global frameworks and priorities. In particular, the focus of the programme on violence,
abuse, neglect and exploitation of children (VAC) is well aligned with SDG 16.1 (significantly reduce
all forms of violence and related deaths rates everywhere), 16.2 (end abuse, exploitation, trafficking
and all forms of violence against and torture of children), 5.1 (end all forms of discrimination against
all women and girls everywhere) and 5.2 (eliminate all forms of violence against all women and girls
in the public and private spheres, including trafficking and sexual and other types of exploitation).
The Royal Government of Cambodia (RGC) has expressed strong commitment to the SDGs, which
have been integrated into the country’s National Sustainable Development Plan 2019 – 2023. The
RGC has also developed a Voluntary Review Process for reporting progress against the SDGs; its
first review was submitted in 2019 (with its second review due to be submitted in 2023).49
The CP Programme is also well aligned to the Global Partnership to End Violence Against
Children and INSPIRE – a set of seven evidence-based strategies initiated by the World Health
Organisation (WHO) for countries and communities working to eliminate violence against children.
The CP Programme is aligned to the seven evidence-based strategies, including in particular
‘Implementation and enforcement of laws’ (Output areas 1 and 2), ‘Norms and values’ (Output area
3), ‘Parent and caregiver support’ (Output area 3) and Response and support services (Output area
2). The Cambodian Government has indicated strong commitment to the Global Partnership and
INSPIRE by becoming a pathfinding country in 2019.
49 UNDP, Orientation workshop for the preparation of the 2023 Voluntary National Review, 27 December 2022, available at:
https://www.undp.org/cambodia/speeches/orientation-workshop-preparation-2023-voluntary-national-review
74 UNICEF Cambodia Child Protection Programme 2019 -2023: Outcome Evaluation
As part of the process for becoming a pathfinding country, the RGC (MoSVY) made the following
commitments, which align with the CP Programme objectives: (1) strengthen laws, policies and
regulatory framework and ban all forms of violence against children (Output area 1); (2) Strengthen
child protection data and monitoring (Output area 1); (3) Strengthen evidence-based strategies,
support parents and caregivers to keep children safe and make schools safe, non-violent and
inclusive (Output areas 2 and 3); and (4) Make the internet safe for children (as noted above, this is
an emerging area which has been incorporated into the CP Programme after its commencement).
There was general agreement among qualitative research participants with knowledge in
this area that the CP Programme was well aligned to Cambodia’s international development
goals, and that its systems-based framework was relevant to the Cambodian context, in which gaps
and weaknesses in prevention and response systems contribute to violence, abuse, neglect and
exploitation of children and impairs the ability for the RGC to address the needs of children exposed
to violence in all settings. Respondents to this question in the stakeholder survey also felt that the
CP Programme was relevant to Cambodia’s international development commitments: 21 out of
23 respondents felt that the Programme was ‘mostly’ (9 out of 23) or ‘completely’ (12 out of 23)
relevant to Cambodia’s international development commitments.
The CP Programme also largely aligns with UNICEF’s global frameworks and priorities in
child protection, in particular the systems strengthening approach that has explicitly guided
UNICEF’s child protection programming since 2008 (see above, section 4.1). The Theory of Change
and results framework for the current Programme (2019 – 2023) is based on the assumption that
improving the enabling environment and responses to VAC, along with community support for
minimising VAC (e.g., through improved parenting and a reduction in corporal punishment) will lead
to a reduction in rates of VAC.
Within the systems building approach, the evaluation found that the Programme is largely
responsive to the key gaps in the child protection system and the broader enabling environment
for child protection, which drive different forms of VAC in the country.
In terms of output area 1 (legal frameworks):
One of the core gaps in Cambodia’s child protection system is the lack of a comprehensive
law and operating procedures to provide a framework for the system. Currently, child
protection-related provisions are spread through different laws, guidance, sub-decrees and Prakas
(regulations), leading to gaps and inconsistencies. In the qualitative research, this was noted
by research participants who have experience in this area, for instance, according to a national
government stakeholder:
2 This could be guided by recommendations in UNICEF EAPRO, UNFPA Asia and Pacific Regional Office and UN Women Asia and Pacific Regional Office,
Ending violence against women and children in Cambodia: Opportunities and challenges for collaborative and integrative approaches, 2020.
UNICEF Cambodia Child Protection Programme 2019 -2023: Outcome Evaluation 75
“
“There is no specific law in place on child protection. Child protection issues are
scattered through many laws – this regulation, that regulation. It is in the Criminal
Code, Civil Code and other laws. It means that child protection remains fragmented
here and there in different regulations and instruments. So, we needed to prepare
a specific law with a specific focus on this particular matter – the issue of child
protection…To have the Child Protection Law approved and promulgated is really
important. It will protect children in a comprehensive manner.”50
In terms of output areas 1 and 2 (operational frameworks and human
resources):
Another critical gap in the system is the limited operational frameworks, including key
human and financial resources required to implement the system. For instance, the Child
Protection Statistical Profile (mentioned above, section ) recorded that in 2012, there were only 917
government social welfare workers for children and other vulnerable populations; the majority of
whom had no formal training in social work.51 A multicounty review of the social services workforce,
including in Cambodia, reported that there were nearly 4,000 social work positions required in
the governmental workforce with around 3,400 national and international agencies involved in
the provision of social services in 2014.52 According to this review, “The social service workforce
would be enhanced by the development of a national strategic plan prioritizing the adoption of
professional standards for social work; introduction of a normative framework defining roles and
responsibilities and a common accountability framework to increase efficiency and effectiveness;
increasing governmental resource allocation for the social services workforce; and strengthening
and development of officially recognized, certified in-service and pre-service training.”53
According to the qualitative data, capacity limitations, particularly at the provincial, district and
commune levels are a critical gap that impede the ability of Cambodia to implement an effective
child protection system. The limited number of social services personnel and their limited knowledge
and skills, along with very limited operational budgets are clearly areas of need for a fully functioning
system.
50 KII with national government stakeholder in child protection (online), 25 November 2022.
51 UNICEF Cambodia and Division of Data, Research and Policy, A Statistical Profile of Child Protection in Cambodia, 2018, p. 30.
52 UNICEF East Asia and the Pacific Regional Office and the Global Social Service Workforce Alliance, The Social Service
Workforce in the East Asia and Pacific Region: Multi-Country Review, 2019, p. 25.
53 UNICEF East Asia and the Pacific Regional Office and the Global Social Service Workforce Alliance, The Social Service
Workforce in the East Asia and Pacific Region: Multi-Country Review, 2019, p. 30.
76 UNICEF Cambodia Child Protection Programme 2019 -2023: Outcome Evaluation
In terms of output area 3 (Social norms and practices):
Social norms, behaviours and practices, including violent forms of discipline, have been
found to have a significant impact on rates of violence against children. For instance, as
noted above, according to the CDHS (2021/22),54 66 per cent of children aged 1–14 experienced
a violence discipline method with only 23 per cent of children experiencing nonviolent discipline.
Of this, 59 per cent of children experienced psychological aggression, 43 per cent experienced
any type of physical punishment, and five per cent experienced severe physical punishment such
as being ‘hit on the face or head.’55 A 2019 baseline survey for Cambodia PROTECT conducted
in six implementation provinces recommended that more work was required to “explore barriers
to implementing practices to prevent VAC and unnecessary family separation. For example, many
respondents reported knowing the importance of positive parenting skills, but only 40 per cent
practiced them. Understanding reasons for the discrepancy between knowledge and practices
could help to address these issues more effectively.”56
The focus on addressing harmful social norms, behaviours and practices was, according to the
qualitative data, highly relevant and crucial. For example, according to research participants from
UNICEF and from government:
“
“In Cambodia, social norms are everything. They really do dictate how communities
deal with issues. There was an informal social norm that RCIs were an appropriate
place for kids, and this dates back to the rule of Monks, Pagodas and so on…
also, the norm that you have to discipline your kids by beating them…Parenting
is something we learn from our parents, and this all got all messed up during the
Khmer Rouge time. So we thought we needed a proper strategy to build positive
norms and positive parenting – Cambodia PROTECT was built around that.”57
“
“Positive parenting is very important in Cambodia currently and in the future.
According to our studies and research, we have seen that domestic violence still
happens and we have many modules on positive parenting in order to educate
parents and also to change the attitudes of parents and caregivers. Regarding
violence, we have found that parents and caregivers are the first ones who
commit violence against children. So, this programme is very important…all of our
target provinces have requested the Ministry [of Women’s Affairs] to expand the
programme to other provinces as well, because they acknowledge that positive
parenting is very important and a good practice to eliminate violence against
children.”58
54 Kingdom of Cambodia, National Institute of Statistics (NIS) and Ministry of Health (MoH), Cambodia Demographic and Health Survey 2021–22: Key
Indicators Report, 2022.
55 Kingdom of Cambodia, National Institute of Statistics (NIS) and Ministry of Health (MoH), Cambodia Demographic and Health Survey 2021–22: Key
Indicators Report, 2022, p. 39.
56 UNICEF Cambodia and Angkor Research and Consulting Ltd, Baseline Survey for ‘PROTECT: Communication Strategy to End Violence against Children
and Unnecessary Family Separation in Cambodia (Cambodia PROTECT), September 2019, p. 29.
57 KII with a Former Chief of Child Protection, UNICEF Cambodia (online), 29 November 2022.
58 KII with two representatives of Ministry of Women’s Affairs (online), 12 December 2022.
UNICEF Cambodia Child Protection Programme 2019 -2023: Outcome Evaluation 77
“
“Positive discipline is very important in Cambodia and needed. In older times
– e.g., when I was a child, a student, I was hit by my parents and teachers.
Old people believed the young ones, to be a good person, they needed to be
published to make them behave in a good way. It was not thought of as violence.
When we give training on positive discipline, they try to change the stereotype of
teachers and parents.”59
While the CP Programme is clearly embedded within the child protection systems building
framework, it should be noted that UNICEF’s systems strengthening approach to child protection
programming has recently been further clarified and elaborated, based on a global evaluation of
UNICEF’s approach to systems strengthening. A suite of tools has been developed to support
enhanced systems strengthening programming. The fit for purpose programme review carried out
in 2021 (see above, section 4.4.1) considered the structure of the CP Programme in light of this
revised and elaborated global CPSS guidance.
It is recommended that UNICEF’s next CP Programme explicitly align to the new global
Child Protection Systems Strengthening articulated by UNICEF HQ in 2021, following a
robust systems diagnostic to ensure that the Programme focuses on the areas in which
there are clear gaps in the system. The global CPSS Framework provides an evidence-
based and well-articulated structure for UNICEF’s systems strengthening approach,
along with diagnostic tools and monitoring frameworks. These materials would provide
very useful in planning the next CP Programme in Cambodia and ensuring that it is
embedded within a strong systems strengthening framework.
Relevance of the Programme to the needs and priorities of
Government stakeholders and development partners
National government priorities
It is clear that UNICEF’s CP Programme engages very well with national partners, through
quality partnerships with key stakeholders, and this has helped to ensure the alignment
of the Programme to national Government priorities. The CP Team actively engaged national
stakeholders during the design of the Programme and has maintained positive relationships with
these stakeholders, as illustrated by one key stakeholder:
59 KII with representative of Ministry of Education, Youth and Sports (online), 1 December 2022.
78 UNICEF Cambodia Child Protection Programme 2019 -2023: Outcome Evaluation
“
“We had a very fruitful workshop in Kampot where we invited all MoSVY people
to talk about the project, their plan etc. We got a lot of input on that. The project
responded to what is needed. Not just the dreaming of the proposal writer. The
project design is based on what we need, and funding is going to support the
right activities.”60
The current CP Programme also builds on momentum from the previous Programme, which
focused heavily on systems strengthening in the context of children in residential care
institutions. Following the decentralisation of child protection service delivery, UNICEF has worked
to engage new key stakeholders in addition to MoSVY, in particular the MOI. This is highly relevant
to the context: the MOI has responsibility for overseeing the District Offices of Social Welfare and
engaging with this Ministry to strengthen child protection service delivery has been crucial.
According to the stakeholder survey, perceptions of stakeholders are that the CP Programme
is very well aligned to national government needs and priorities and written responses in the
survey attributed this to alignment with specific government policies and strategies (these are
summarised in information box below) and good working relationships with government partners.
In particular, UNICEF continues to work with the government to support the implementation of the
country’s Action Plan to Prevent and Respond to Violence Against Children (2017 to 2021), which
has been extended to 2029 (NAPVAC). The NAPVAC has been described in a recent evaluation as
a ‘consensus document’ that brought together and reflects a wide range of actions and priorities
under a single document. Careful consideration was given, in the NAPVAC planning phase, to ensure
its alignment to sector actions and priorities, national planning and child protection more generally.
Information box 1: Alignment of CP Programme with key national Government strategies and plans
Rectangular Strategy for Growth, Employment, Equity, and Efficiency: Building the
Foundation Toward Realising the Cambodia Vision 2050, Phase IV: ‘Side 4, Rectangle 1’
of the Rectangular Strategy focuses on ‘improving gender equity and social protection’ and
this explicitly includes addressing trafficking of and violence against women and children.
National Sustainable Development Plan 2019 – 2023: The Plan contains actions relating to
prevention of and response to VAC and VAW, along with actions that address the risk factors
to violence (poverty, health, gender inequality, education access and public safety); a focus
on addressing the needs of persons with disabilities; and improving justice systems and
youth rehabilitation.
National Action Plan to Prevent and Respond to Violence Against Children 2019 – 2022
(now 2029): The NAPVAC sets out a range of actions under five strategic priority areas:
coordination and cooperation; primary prevention; multi-sectoral child protection response;
law and policy formulation; and monitoring and evaluation.
60 Add
UNICEF Cambodia Child Protection Programme 2019 -2023: Outcome Evaluation 79
Three technical working groups are in place to steer actions under these strategic areas
(Awareness raising and prevention of VAC; Services provision and law enforcement; and
Legal and regulatory review, monitoring and reporting), and these groups align strongly with
the CP Programme priority areas, indicating a high degree of relevance of the Programme to
the structure supporting operationalisation of the NAPVAC.
Child Protection and Schools Policy 2019 – 2023: The Policy explicitly references the need
for ‘child safe environments’ and ending VAC in schools.
National Social Protection Policy Framework 2016 – 2025: This over-arching social
protection strategy includes action aimed at linking social protection programmes to
child protection programming, including in terms of shock-responsive social protection,
strengthening families and integrated service delivery.
Cambodia Digital Government Policy 2022 – 2035: This Policy aims to “establish a digital
government to improve the citizens’ quality of life and build their trust through better public
service provision”, including through the development use of digital government infrastructure.”
This Policy signals a commitment to the development and use of digital governance systems,
which provides evidence of relevance of the CP Programme’s implementation of digital case
management systems (Primero) and digital data collection and monitoring systems (CPMIS).
However, it appears that, at times, rather than aligning with existing or emerging Government
priorities, UNICEF’s ability to advocate for particular priorities with government meant
that issues on the global (and perhaps donor) agenda were prioritised without necessarily
considering whether and how these issues and interventions should be prioritised in the
Cambodian context. This may have consequences for the ownership, buy in and ultimately the
sustainability of the CP Programme.
An example given by one stakeholder included the issue of online violence and exploitation, which
was incorporated into the CP Programme following it emerging as a priority globally and among
donors. While it is an issue that does affect children in Cambodia (and also one that has been picked
up by the Ministry of Post and Telecommunications (MoPT), it is to be questioned whether this issue
should be prioritised considering that the CP Programme utilises a systems building framework (that
is, it may be considered a more ‘issue based’ priority, rather than contributing to strengthening the
overall child protection system).
2 This could be guided by recommendations in UNICEF EAPRO, UNFPA Asia and Pacific Regional Office and UN Women Asia and Pacific Regional Office,
Ending violence against women and children in Cambodia: Opportunities and challenges for collaborative and integrative approaches, 2020.
80 UNICEF Cambodia Child Protection Programme 2019 -2023: Outcome Evaluation
While there is an evidence base to support the incorporation of certain issues within the CP
Programme, including in particular, adolescent and youth engagement, child marriage and online
child protection and stakeholders were clearly supportive of these initiatives, there is a need to link
these initiatives to the systems strengthening framework, otherwise there is a risk of the CP
Programme becoming too ‘issue focused’ and fragmented.
Sub-national government priorities
UNICEF’s CP Programme aimed at strengthening the child protection system at national and sub-
national levels, with interventions targeting national stakeholders, along with stakeholders at the
provincial, district and commune levels. This multi-tiered approach is highly relevant to the
Cambodian context and responds well to administrative restructuring within the country,
which has seen responsibility for social welfare services being devolved down to the sub-national (in
particular, district) levels pursuant to Sub-Decrees 183 and 184. This multi-tiered design also responds
well to the recommendations that arose out of the 2018 Formative Evaluation of the (former) Child
Protection Programme. This evaluation recommended shifting the focus of the Programme towards
supporting implementation and building a government-owned child protection process at the sub-
national levels. It summarised the challenge as follows:
“
“Despite ratifying the CRC [UN Convention on the Rights of the Child] 26 years ago,
the Government has yet to develop a fully functioning child protection system…
Cambodia’s child protection system remains under-funded and under-staffed. In
addition, the Government has yet to pass primary legislation on child protection
and, as a result, there continues to be a reliance on secondary legislation in the
form of various Sub-Decrees.”61
In terms of service delivery, the evaluation went on to note that:
“
“Whilst it may be unrealistic for government to provide social work services in
child protection cases in the short-term, it is important to establish a government-
owned social work case management system that takes responsibility for basic
child protection functions, with cases referred to NGOs for specialised services
as necessary.”62
61 Promoting and Protecting the Rights of Children: A Formative Evaluation of UNICEF’s Child Protection Programme In Cambodia, Final Report – Volume I,
August 2017 – September 2018, Cambodia, p. 5.
62 Promoting and Protecting the Rights of Children: A Formative Evaluation of UNICEF’s Child Protection Programme In Cambodia, Final Report – Volume I,
August 2017 – September 2018, Cambodia, p. 63.
UNICEF Cambodia Child Protection Programme 2019 -2023: Outcome Evaluation 81
The current Child Protection Programme is designed to overcome these challenges, as explained
by a stakeholder from UNICEF during the qualitative interviews: “These Decrees (183 and 184) are
about decentralisation. When the government tried to merge all different offices into the district
office, it meant having the district office as the main service provider for child protection. We tried
to align a lot of our work with this. Interestingly, this fitted with what the 2018 evaluation found: that
capacity building should focus on the district level.”63
This approach was clearly appreciated by stakeholders who were involved in the qualitative research.
For example, as illustrated by a Government and NGO stakeholder:
“
“The thing is that UNICEF doesn’t just help at the central [national] level, but also
at the sub-national level. The programme covers implementation of the national
strategic plan and the Ministerial strategic plan…in the process of delegation to
the sub-national level, we need UNICEF to work with us and build capacity and
ensure we have human resources and that they can implement their roles at the
grass roots level.”64
“UNICEF work not only at the national level, but also at the grass roots level. So
they have good information from all levels and it’s holistic, considering where the
gaps are for child protection.”65
While the multi-tiered approach is highly relevant to the Cambodian context, there appears
to be a disconnect in the CP Programme logic (and in practice) in terms of how the national
system (and interventions focused on strengthening the national system) connects to the
sub-national programmes and processes. This is compounded by the different Government
accountabilities for child protection at the national and sub-national levels, with the national system
and provincial systems led by MoSVY, while at the point of service delivery – which now rests largely
at the district government level – the system is led by the MoI. As noted by a key stakeholder at
UNICEF: “we are good at planning and visioning. But I wonder how our vision actually trickles down,
especially to the sub-national level. How do we maintain that vision in the work we do, especially at
the grass roots level, because that is where the system starts?”66
Given the decentralisation of social welfare / child protection services and, within this, the importance
of provincial, district and commune / village bodies, a focus on building the system at the sub-national
level is clearly relevant to the Cambodian context. However, the perceptions of stakeholders as
to the relevance of the CP Programme to the sub-national context was mixed. According to
the stakeholder survey, the CP Programme was perceived to be less well aligned to sub-national
government needs and priorities. According to this survey, all respondents agreed that the CP
Programme mostly or completely aligned with the needs and priorities of national government
stakeholders, while slightly less agreed with this statement in relation to sub-national stakeholders.
63 KII with Child Protection Specialist, UNICEF Cambodia (online), 14 November 2022.
64 KII with two representatives of the Ministry of Social Welfare, Veterans and Youth Rehabilitation, Phnom Penh (zoom), 28 October 2022.
65 KII with Deputy Director of Damnok Teok (online), 7 November 2022.
66 KII with member of Child Protection Team, UNICEF Cambodia, Phnom Penh, 19 October 2022.
82 UNICEF Cambodia Child Protection Programme 2019 -2023: Outcome Evaluation
Figure 6: Survey responses to the question ‘To what extent does the UNICEF Child Protection Programme
2019 – 2023 align with the needs and priorities of national v sub-national government stakeholders?’
(n = 24)
18
16
16
14
14
12
10
8
5 10
6
3
4
2
0
0
Subnational National
Completely Mostly Moderately
While stakeholders in some research locations felt that the Programme responded well to the local
context, others felt that the Programme did not respond to the capacities and existing systems
on the ground. One of the themes that emerged from the qualitative research was that, while it
was considered crucial to focus on capacity building at the sub-national (particularly district) level,
the particular CP Programme interventions were introduced at a time in which there was
insufficient capacity (in terms of the number and skills of the social services workforce) to
absorb the interventions. For instance, the introduction of Primero was considered by some
participants as not being well aligned to the realities at the district level. This theme emerged particularly
strongly in the comparator districts, in which Primero was introduced before implementing more
general capacity building initiatives aimed at the social welfare workforce. It also appears to have
disconnected the introduction of Primero from more general case management capacity building
initiatives, undermining the effectiveness of Primero as a case management tool (see section on
effectiveness for more detail).
It is recommended that the next CP Programme continue to use a multi-tiered approach
that is focused on both the national and sub-national levels in order to provide a
comprehensive systems building framework. When the Child Protection Law and
Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs) are adopted, the Programme should shift its
focus to supporting national and sub-national duty bearers to implement the Law and
SOPs. Consideration should also be given to the role of communes and village leaders
and how UNICEF can support their role in the system. The Programme logic should
articulate how the Programme will ensure vertical coordination of child protection
services and how national programme interventions link to sub-national interventions.
It should also consider the phasing of interventions at the sub-national level and in
particular, how more general capacity building interventions can be more effectively
joined up with the Primero case management tool.
UNICEF Cambodia Child Protection Programme 2019 -2023: Outcome Evaluation 83
Relevance to the needs of boys and girls, including the most
vulnerable
The CP Programme, with its strong focus on VAC, is grounded in a solid evidence base and
robust understanding of the key deprivations and needs of programme right holders (including
girls and boys who are at risk of or have experienced any form of violence, and their parents /
caregivers). According to the evidence (which is set out above in section 3), children in Cambodia are
routinely exposed to violence, abuse, neglect and exploitation, unnecessary family separation and,
in some locations (e.g. Ratanakiri), to child marriage and adolescent pregnancy.
Stakeholders involved in the research felt that the Programme was highly relevant to the
needs of children in Cambodia. For instance, the vast majority of respondents to the stakeholder
survey felt that the CP Programme was relevant to child protection needs in Cambodia: 83 per cent of
respondents felt that the CP Programme mostly (16 out of 24) or completely (4 out of 24) ‘addressed
the most pressing child protection needs in Cambodia.’ This was attributed to the development of a
robust evidence base, prioritisation exercises, strong partnerships and the adaptability / flexibility of
the CP Programme to changing external factors.
However, though various initiatives have been developed to engage adolescents with some
aspects of the Programme, there has been no systematic, meaningful engagement of children,
adolescents or parents / caregivers at key points of planning, limiting the extent to which the
Programmes can demonstrate relevance and responsiveness to the needs of rights holders.
UNICEF supports the Adolescent and Youth Reference Group (AYRG) – a group of youth and
adolescents who are supported through a national NGO (CRC Cambodia) to engage in government
law and policy development. The AYRG was involved in various consultations around the design of
the current CP Programme, but this engagement appears to have been quite limited and ad hoc.
Further, there do not appear to be any records of the results of this engagement and therefore no
transparency in relation to the extent to which and how feedback from the adolescent and youth
engagement initiatives were incorporated into the programme design. The Programme also did not
appear to deliberately facilitate the engagement of adolescent and youth in vulnerable situations
in consultations relating to the Programme design (such as adolescents / youth with disabilities,
LGBTQI+ adolescents / youth, adolescents / youth who had experience of out of home care and so
on).
In addition, there does not appear to be any systematic or routine mechanisms to engage adolescents
and youth in review and adjustment of the CP Programme at key points in the implementation phase
of the Programme. This limits the ability for the Programme to be responsive to the needs and
situation of adolescents and youth. Among research participants, adolescent and youth engagement
in the CP Programme was frequently described as ‘ad hoc’ and not particularly meaningful and
systematic. For example: “It happens sometimes, but on an ad hoc basis. We want to do this in a
more systematic way…if we want the input of young people at the moment, it would be done in a
one-off consultation.”67
67 KII with Child Protection Specialist, UNICEF Cambodia, Phnom Penh, 19 October 2022.
84 UNICEF Cambodia Child Protection Programme 2019 -2023: Outcome Evaluation
Respondents to the stakeholder survey also expressed limited agreement that the CP Programme
effectively ensured the meaningful engagement of children and youth. Just over 50 per cent of
respondents (only 13 out of 24) ‘completely’ or ‘mostly’ agreed that the CP Programme ensured the
meaningful engagement of children and youth in its design and review, and five respondents felt
that the Programme either ‘did not at all’ or only ‘somewhat’ ensured their meaningful engagement
(a further six ‘moderately’ agreed). Written responses mentioned that adolescents and youth were
not effectively engaged at the programme review stage and that there was a need to engage with
a more diverse group of adolescents / youth.
It is recommended that, in the next CP Programme, a mechanism such as a youth advisory
board, is developed to engage adolescents and youth in the design of the Programme
both routinely (e.g. through a quarterly forum) and at key point in the Programme’s life
cycle (e.g. fit for purpose reviews, mid-term evaluation / assessments etc.). Adolescents
and youth could be recruited through the AYRG (as CRC Cambodia supports the AYRG
in developing skills and confidence in adolescent and youth participation). It is also
important that UNICEF ensure that the advisory board represents a diverse range of
adolescent and youth voices from a range of different provinces and that it reserves
spaces on the advisory board for adolescents and youth who are in vulnerable situations.
UNICEF could consider more innovative ways of engaging with members of the AYRG
and beyond (e.g. through UReport communications). Consideration should also be
given to extending these youth engagements to cover the whole Country Programme.
Gender and equity
It was found that the CP Programme structure does not fully capture and reflect the gender
and equity dimensions of child protection and the intersecting vulnerabilities of children; the
way that these vulnerabilities compound child protection risks could be better conceptualized to
ensure that the Programme is relevant to the needs of different groups of children.
It was found that the CP Programme design incorporates gender, though only to a limited
extent. UNICEF Cambodia has mainstreamed gender across the Country Programme and has
appointed a gender focal point, who sits within the education team, though also works office-wide
to ensure that gender is incorporated into Programme outputs and monitoring and reporting. The
current Country Programme was also the subject of a gender review. UNICEF’s gender focal point
also sits on a UN-wide gender team, which promotes a more joined up approach to gender across
the different UN agencies. The current Programme explicitly incorporates gender into its outputs and
results framework, though only to the extent that it disaggregates ‘girls and boys’, where relevant,
in stating outcomes and in monitoring results. The Programme also works explicitly on gender in its
child marriage programme under output area 3.
UNICEF Cambodia Child Protection Programme 2019 -2023: Outcome Evaluation 85
Another way that the CP Programme has incorporated the gender dimensions of child
protection (and violence against children / violence against women) in its Positive Parenting
Programme, which incorporates sessions on adult relationships as well as relationships between
parents and children. To this end, placement of the Positive Parenting Programme with the Ministry
of Women’s Affairs lends the Programme to an integrated approach in which VAC interventions are
able to incorporate issues of violence against women in a comprehensive, holistic way.
While these measures are important, the design of the CP Programme does not adequately
engage with or incorporate the gender dynamics of child protection issues. This is a critical gap,
given the prevalence of domestic violence in Cambodia, which often includes co-occurring instances
of violence against children and violence against women.68 For instance, the CP Programme does not
address social norms that place responsibility on women for raising children and compound structural
gender inequalities that are a core driver of violence against women and children. An example of this
is that the Positive Parenting Programme appears to have had very limited engagement with fathers
/ male caregivers. While the Programme incorporates gender dynamics and addresses domestic
violence, not engaging with fathers greatly reduces the ability for this Programme to address family
violence effectively and to contribute to challenging harmful gender norms. For example:
“
“When we delivered community education session, the participants were mainly
women. Men often thought that they could do other important things than
attending the session. They especially went to their rice field. Well, men tend to
think that women and children’s issues are women’s things. As a man, they don’t
have anything to do with this.”69
The limited focus on gender dynamics in the design of the Programme has also limited the
way that gender is addressed in programme and service delivery, with implementing partners
tending to take a ‘gender-blind’ approach to service delivery that does not address the different
needs of boys and girls. It was clear from the qualitative data that implementing partners equated
gender equality with treating children ‘the same / equally,’ rather than engaging more fully with
gendered dynamics of child protection risks. For example:
“
“The support that we receive is not necessarily differentiated specifically for the
needs of girls or boys. It is neutral and applicable for all children. We only look at
their vulnerability level. For example, related to sexual abuse, we look for legal
support, health care, and nutrition support for the victims etc.”70
“We do not discriminate against girl or boy. So, our interventions are for both girls
and boys.”71
69 KII with CCWC representative, Paoy Commune, Ratanakiri Province, 2 November 2022.
70 KII with representative of DoSVY, Ratanakiri Province, 1 November 2022.
71 KII with CCWC representative, Paoy Commune, Ratanakiri Province, 2 November 2022.
86 UNICEF Cambodia Child Protection Programme 2019 -2023: Outcome Evaluation
There is a need for the CP Programme to support a more nuanced and in-depth approach to
gender, including in the Programme design, interventions and monitoring and results frameworks.
It is recommended that a thorough gender analysis be carried out to inform the
development of the next CP Programme to ensure that the gender dynamics of child
protection issues are more fully incorporated into the Programme. This should involve
a consideration of the ways in which violence against children and violence against
women intersect and the ways that child protection programming could incorporate
VAW prevention and response initiatives.72 Efforts should be made to engage in
collaborative work with UNFPA and UN Women on the gender dimensions of the CP
Programme.
The evaluation also found that the CP Programme does not adequately respond to the needs of
some vulnerable groups of children and in particular, to the needs of children with disabilities.
According to the stakeholder survey, while most respondents agreed that the CP Programme was
relevant to the needs of children in Cambodia, the strength of agreement that the CP Programme
responded to the protection needs of vulnerable children (e.g. children with disabilities) was less.
Seven (out of 24) respondents agreed that the Programme only moderately addressed the needs of
the most vulnerable groups (e.g., children with disabilities). In the survey, this was attributed to the
very limited focus of the Programme on government service delivery for children with disabilities
and limited commitment of key government Ministries, including MoSVY.
Some limited work on disability has been carried out under the current CP Programme. For instance,
the Programme has supported the inclusion of disability in Primero and in the Child Protection
Law and SOPs. Technical assistance on integrating a disability lens into the CP Programme has
been provided through the UNICEF Australia National Commission, which is one donor to the CP
Programme. However, research participants mentioned the limited work on disability as one of the
critical gaps in the CP Programme, given the very limited commitment at all levels of Government
to address the protection needs of children with disabilities adequately and the very limited services
available at sub-national levels. The gaps in the child protection system for children with disabilities
were noted by participants at the sub-national level in particular. For example, according to NGO
implementing partners:
“
“We face many challenges with children with disabilities; there is no NGO that
we can refer a child to. This year, we only referred children to the rehabilitation
centre…DoSVY has only one option – to send child to rehabilitation centre.”73
72 This could be guided by recommendations in UNICEF EAPRO, UNFPA Asia and Pacific Regional Office and UN Women Asia and Pacific Regional Office,
Ending violence against women and children in Cambodia: Opportunities and challenges for collaborative and integrative approaches, 2020.
73 KII with representative of SKO (Phnom Penh) (online), 3 November 2022.
UNICEF Cambodia Child Protection Programme 2019 -2023: Outcome Evaluation 87
“
“It’s still a challenge for children with disabilities. It is still very, very challenging.
There are not many services available, especially long-term support. There needs
to be ‘whole life support’, not just for a few years. Some need 24-hour care, which
is long term and is very expensive. It is for the whole life, and we need to have
very strong foster families that can support them - those kind of things. It is still
very, very limited in Cambodia…Currently, to be honest, in our programme we
have two children with disabilities that we cannot find any options for. Now we
keep them in foster care, and they are healthy and happy but we worry that one
day if the programme collapses – how will they be? We don’t know. That is what
we worry about.”74
It is recommended that the CP Programme explicitly integrate the needs of children
with disabilities into the next CP Programme, including through a specific sub-output
/ result that is focused on improving services and services delivery for children with
disabilities (e.g. within an overall output of strengthening services) and capacity building
of government and NGO service providers in this area, both in terms of advocating for
improved services for children with disabilities at the national level and also through
capacity building of service delivery at the sub-national level.
UNICEF Cambodia could also improve the way that disability is mainstreamed effectively
office-wide. This could include through integrating disability in routine office-wide
approval forms etc. to ensure that Programmes systematically consider the needs of
children with disabilities in decisions relating to partnerships, design of interventions
and implementation of specific initiatives.
Many research participants, including government and NGO stakeholders at national and sub-
national levels, also mentioned children affected by migration, in particular, those children who
remain behind when their parents migrate (typically to Thailand) for work as requiring more focus in
the CP Programme. It was mentioned, for instance, that many families are at risk of unsafe migration
– even if they know the risks, they have no choice as there are such limited economic opportunities
for them in Cambodia. Service providers at the sub-national level reported that they would like to the
tools to be able to support these families better and how to provide for children who remain behind
when their families migrate. For example, according to stakeholders from MoSVY:
“
“Lots of Khmer children are working and begging in Thailand. We want UNICEF to
coordinate to provide for those children – UNICEF Thailand and UNICEF Cambodia
should find a way to collect these children – referral, repatriation and provide
services to the family after they return to Cambodia.”75
74 KII with Director of Kaliyan Mith, Siem Reap, 26 October 2022.
75 KII with two representatives of the Ministry of Social Welfare, Veterans and Youth Rehabilitation, Phnom Penh (zoom), 28 October 2022.
88 UNICEF Cambodia Child Protection Programme 2019 -2023: Outcome Evaluation
It appears that some programmes do not adequately incorporate the needs of children who remain
behind. For example, the positive parenting programme works with parents, and does not include
grandparents (who commonly care for children who remain behind when parents migrate) as
beneficiaries.
It is recommended that the next CP Programme consider how it can apply in the context
of children who remain behind, and how particular programme interventions can be
adapted. For example, consideration should be given to the delivery of the positive
parenting programme to grandparents / other caregivers, rather than restricting this
programme to parents (mothers).
Adaptability of the Programme and relevance to changing
contextual factors (e.g., COVID-19)
The evidence indicates that the CP Programme remained relevant in the context of external
challenges, including in particular, the changing context brought about by the COVID-19
pandemic. The COVID-19 pandemic substantially altered the programming landscape for much
of 2020 and 2021 in Cambodia, where routine lockdowns and restrictions on movement had a
significant impact. This is likely to have resulted in increased exposure to VAC/VAW in the home
and it also cut children off from systems and services (e.g., schools, child development centres,
healthcare facilities etc.) that could support them. Against this backdrop, UNICEF country offices
adapted their programme interventions to address the impact of COVID-19 on children.6 There was
strong consensus among stakeholders involved in the qualitative data that the Programme adapted
very well to the COVID-19 context. There was also strong agreement in the stakeholder survey: 21
out of 23 respondents agreed that the CP Programme ‘mostly’ (11) or ‘completely’ (10) adapted to
the changing context brought about by COVID-19. This was attributed to strong technical assistance
from UNICEF which enabled partners to adapt work methods and modalities to remote ways of
engaging rights holders and to flexibility in terms of budget utilisation. For example, as illustrated
by an NGO implementing partner: “For me, with UNICEF funding, we [are always able to] use all
the funding and we are happy with it. We used to get funding from other donors and other projects,
like during COVID, we had one donor and they did not allow us flexibility. So, we returned 20 –
30% of funding to them as we could not do anything.”77 More detail is provided in the section on
effectiveness – see section 8.3.
76 UNICEF Child Protection’s adaptive programming was used as a case study on programme pivot in response to COVID 19 See:
https://www.unicef.orgeap/not-going-back?fbclid=IwAR3g2q9fz4vEHxVL3taYF1YTQZfjLNY1BTdJiVx30XOWnedOiwAX3S9aXvw
77 KII with Director of Kaliyan Mith, Siem Reap, 26 October 2022.
UNICEF Cambodia Child Protection Programme 2019 -2023: Outcome Evaluation 89
Coherence / connectedness
Key research question: To what extent are there synergies and interlinkages between the CP
Programme and other interventions carried out by Government, other key development partners
(Save the Children, Plan International, World Vision etc.) as well as UNICEF?
Summary of findings on coherence / connectedness
• The CP Programme worked effectively in coordinating the different interventions of development
partners, including government and NGO partners through supporting the Child Protection Forum
at the national level. The Child Protection Forum brings together UN agencies, Government
stakeholders and NGOs to coordinate their work in child protection systems strengthening.
• At the sub-national level, UNICEF ensured the effective coordination of child protection service
delivery primarily through the 3PC network, which is a collaboration between the government,
UNICEF and NGOs for the provision of prevention and response child protection services.
• The development and maintenance of respectful, open and enduring strategic partnerships
was a key factor in UNICEF’s ability to achieve coherence between the Programme goals and
outputs and the work of other agencies.
• However, it was found that work is needed to ensure more effective coordination of interventions
by different UN agencies, such as UN Women.
Extent of coherence / harmonisation of the Child Protection
Programme to other interventions in the same context
The UNICEF CP Programme has ensured good coordination among different stakeholders, and
this has been achieved through the development and support of the Partnership Programme
for the Protection of Children (3PC) and the forging of good relationships with the Family
Care First network (along with support to Government-led coordination mechanisms - this is
discussed in detail below under ‘effectiveness’).
90 UNICEF Cambodia Child Protection Programme 2019 -2023: Outcome Evaluation
These networks coordinate interventions of different NGOs to ensure absence of overlap and good
coordination at the level of service delivery. The network was highly regarded among stakeholders at
national and sub-national levels, and it appears to be a crucial way to coordinate efforts of different
actors toward an overall systems strengthening framework and common goals. At the national
level, UNICEF also supports the Child Protection Forum, which meets every two months, along
with technical working groups to guide specific activities, such as the development of the Child
Protection Law, bringing UN agencies, Government stakeholders and NGOs together to coordinate
their work in child protection systems strengthening.
At the sub-national level, coordination of development partners and Government service
providers is largely achieved through the 3PC network, which works to coordinate the activities
and services of different NGOs to ensure that a comprehensive range of services are available
for children and also to limit the degree of overlap and inefficiency, for example, by coordinating
the particular districts in which NGOs work. For example, as reported by an NGO stakeholder in
Battambang:
“
“UNICEF also provides funding to other NGOs and government. But it is not
overlapping – there is no double service to the cases since we have devised the
implementation mechanism – Child Futures International in particular districts,
other organisations in other districts. So it’s not like a double service…we can give
full support to children (though coordination with other NGOs).”78
There was also strong support among respondents to the stakeholders survey for the assertion
that UNICEF’s CP Programme harmonised and coordinated with other development partners –
seven and 14 respondents agreed that UNICEF either completely or mostly harmonised with other
development partners working in child protection (out of 24 responses).
The evaluation found, however, that coordination among different UN agencies could be
improved. For example, in terms of the Positive Parenting Programme, it was reported that UN
Women also implement a parenting programme, and it seems quite distinct and disconnected from
the UNICEF programme. It uses a different, but similar, modality: UNFPA’s Parenting Programme
is based on ‘SASA!’ which is a community mobilization intervention that seeks to achieve primary
prevention of family violence through building communication and relationship skills, while UNICEF’s
Parenting Programme is based on Parenting for Lifelong Learning programme – an evidence-based
open source parenting programme.
It is recommended that UNICEF improve coordination with different UN agencies to
ensure that programme outputs utilise and align work already being carried out by
other UN agencies to avoid duplication and inefficiencies.
78 KII with Technical Director, Children’s Future International (Battambang) (online), 10 November 2022.
UNICEF Cambodia Child Protection Programme 2019 -2023: Outcome Evaluation 91
Formation of strategic partnerships
The evaluation found that very good partnerships have been established under the CP
Programme, and this has clearly helped align the activities of UNICEF’s CP Programme to
the broader systems strengthening agenda in Cambodia. It has also been a crucial factor in
the Programme’s effectiveness (see section 8.3 for more details). UNICEF works strategically
with a range of partners at the national and subnational levels.79 UNICEF works with MoSVY on
the development of the Child Protection Law, the Child Protection Strategic Sector Plan, provincial
plans, the CPIMS, Primero, and on social service workforce strengthening. UNICEF works with MoI
on the development of the Child Protection SOPs, the assignment of district social welfare workers
for child protection, the provision of services, and contributions to the CPIMS (which involves 14
Government Ministries). UNICEF also supports MOI to provide oversight of district offices of social
welfare. UNICEF works with MOWA on the implementation of rollout of the Positive Parenting
programme and with the MOE on the making classrooms safer for children. UNICEF works with
the Partnership Programme for the Protection of Children (3PC) on service delivery, SOP testing,
provincial plan development, Open Source Case Management and Record Keeping (OSCaR) and
interoperable with Primero where possible. UNICEF works with Family Care First Cambodia on
the development of provincial plans for child protection, and integration of OSCaR with Primero.
The partnerships with religious leaders have also been key to its work under output 3 in addressing
harmful social norms and behaviours (this is discussed further in section 8.3).
At both the national and sub-national levels, stakeholders tended to express their relationship
with UNICEF as a ‘partnership,’ within which they were able to help shape priorities and have
a meaningful dialogue about institutional needs, which has helped ensure alignment between
UNICEF’s CP Programme and the priorities and needs of Government and NGO stakeholders.
However, a minority of Government stakeholders expressed the view that UNICEF tend to dominate
the child protection agenda in Cambodia, which has at times, undermined productive relationships
with Government partners and perhaps ‘steps on’ the roles of some stakeholders. For example,
according to one national stakeholder:
“
“UNICEF is very powerful and can delegate the role of stakeholder [to another
institution], rather than to the Government. UNICEF should realise the work of
other stakeholders as well…UNICEF is part of the UN and have power and money
and the budget, but they do not respect other stakeholders in performing their
role.”80
However, it should be noted that this view was expressed by a small minority of
research participants.
79 UNICEF Cambodia, UNICEF UMBRELLA AGREEMENT-II7200GH21IO00004, Six Month Update (UNICEF Cambodia- USAID), August 2022, p. 4.
80 KII with representative of UNICEF Australia National Commission (online), 25 November 2022.
92 UNICEF Cambodia Child Protection Programme 2019 -2023: Outcome Evaluation
According to the qualitative research, UNICEF’s respectful and enduring relationships with
key government partners is a factor to achieving positive outcomes under the CP Programme.
For instance, according to one of UNICEF’s donors, the main factor contributing to successful
outcomes under the CP Programme is:
“
“The persistence of UNICEF – not giving up in the relationship [with government
partners]; understanding the local dynamics and manoeuvring through the
complexities of working with government... In the Cambodia setting, you have to
do back door negotiations and working, there has to be the persistence of always
being there. Changing norms within government, for example in relation to RCIs
– it’s about slowly chipping away over time to change norms and attitudes. It’s not
an event, but a bit by bit, gradual chipping away that you can only achieve with a
good relationship.”
Effectiveness
Key research question: To what degree has UNICEF’s Child Protection Programme contributed to
the creation of positive conditions and changes for keeping vulnerable girls and boys in families,
supporting their safe reintegration into family care, and protecting them from violence in all settings
through institutional and legislative frameworks, quality services, promotion of positive social and
gender norms, and a supportive community environment?
Summary of findings on effectiveness
• The CP Programme has been mostly effective in achieving results aimed at strengthening
the legal and operational environment for child protection (output 1), in particular through the
development of the Child Protection Law and Standard Operating Procedures and establishment
of a social service workforce.
• However, while the roll-out of Primero (the Child Protection case management system) has
contributed to some positive outcomes including improving coordinated case management,
organisation, data security / privacy and information management, the operationalisation and
use of Primero as a case management system has been hampered by insufficient capacity at
the sub-national levels.
2 This could be guided by recommendations in UNICEF EAPRO, UNFPA Asia and Pacific Regional Office and UN Women Asia and Pacific Regional Office,
Ending violence against women and children in Cambodia: Opportunities and challenges for collaborative and integrative approaches, 2020.
UNICEF Cambodia Child Protection Programme 2019 -2023: Outcome Evaluation 93
• The evaluation found that that outcomes in relation to the strengthening of the social welfare
workforce and child protection service delivery (output area 2) was mainly positive, though
critical challenges remain which have reduced the overall effectiveness of interventions. Case
management and service delivery appears to be functioning to a reasonable standard in the
‘intervention’ research locations, particularly in contrast to practices in the ‘comparator’ research
locations, with increased government ownership and improved service delivery achieved through
training, coaching and case collaboration processes which pair government social services staff
with NGO social workers to build capacity in government case management systems. Service
delivery was also improved through UNICEF’s efforts in increasing coordination among different
government and NGO service providers.
• However, critical gaps remain in child protection service delivery at the sub-national level,
including the limited capacity and skills of the social services workforce, lack of operational
budgets and limited services in some areas (in particular, mental health services).
• Some positive outcomes were reported in terms of addressing harmful community beliefs and
practices (output area 3), particularly in relation to improved parenting practices and a reduction
in the use of violence discipline by parents. However, this evidence was largely anecdotal and
there are limited data to establish the outcomes or impacts in terms of attitudinal and behaviour
change.
• The CP Programme was effective in adapting to the COVID-19 context through support in
providing emergency packages for vulnerable families affected by COVID-19 and technical
support to government and NGO service providers in changing to remote working modalities
during COVID-19. Other interventions included mental health and psychosocial support though
community campaigning and messaging.
Extent to which and how results have been achieved and
contributed to a strengthened child protection system in
Cambodia
The effectiveness and impact of the CP Programme are considered in light of the progress in
implementing the Programme outputs, along with the outcomes derived from these programme
outputs in terms of their contribution to strengthening the child protection system.
94 UNICEF Cambodia Child Protection Programme 2019 -2023: Outcome Evaluation
Output area 1: Enabling legal and operational environment
The CP Programme has been mostly effective in achieving results aimed at strengthening
the legal and operational environment for child protection.
Progress / outputs
According to the desk review, progress in relation to this output area is largely on track. Key progress
from 2019 to 2021 included the launch of the Child Protection Information Management System
(CPIMS) dashboard. The dashboard enables the various coordination mechanisms at national and
sub national levels to track key indicators and interventions. Measurable progress was made in
the development of the Child Protection Law and Standard Operating Procedures. This law will
provide the architecture for the national child protection system. In addition, existing district level
civil servants of social welfare and social affairs were designated as ‘social service workers’ and
appointed in all 204 districts. Specific job descriptions have been developed for these positions.
Child protection plans were developed in ten provinces to bring a unity of purpose to the disparate
child protection activities in those provinces.
In 2021, UNICEF supported the mainstreaming of disability inclusion in all new legal and policy
documents, such as the child protection law, alternative care policy and as part of Primero, the digital
case management system. In the area of children’s access to justice, the guidelines on diversion and
child-friendly justice procedures were developed and approved by the Minister of Justice.
Table 11 summarises the evidence on the outputs of the CP Programme according to the programme
results framework. Evidence includes that collected by UNICEF for its programme monitoring and
reporting requirements.
© UNICEF Cambodia/2018/Antoine Raab
UNICEF Cambodia Child Protection Programme 2019 -2023: Outcome Evaluation 95
Table 11: Summary of outputs against indicators in CP Programme’s results framework: Output 1
Output indicator Evidence from desk review
Country has a functioning, Child protection coordination mechanisms are operational in
national, multi-sectoral, 20 provinces. UNICEF has reported that the establishment of
multistakeholder coordination the national coordination mechanism has been postponed until
mechanism tasked with after the launch of the Child Protection Sector Strategic Plan,
overseeing national plans which is scheduled later in 2022.82
or strategies to prevent and
respond to violence against
children and adolescents,
with child and adolescent
participation (quantitative).
Existence of procedures and The existence of procedures and services for children in contact
services for children in contact with law that are applied and delivered in line with international
with law that are applied norms, primarily includes the guidelines on diversion of children
and delivered in line with in conflict with the law and child- friendly procedures. These
international norms (qualitative). have been endorsed by the Deputy Prime Minister-Minister
of Interior and they have been disseminated nationwide by
Ministry of Interior, Ministry of Justice and MoSVY.83 As of
December 2022, the guidelines on diversion and child-friendly
procedures were being implemented in four provinces.84
Development and adoption of A draft Child Protection Law was completed in 2022 and
Child Protection Law and extent submitted to the Council of Jurists and the RGC (the Inter-
of compliance with international Ministerial Technical Working Group) endorsed the Standard
standards (qualitative). Operating Procedures (SOPs). The Law and SOPs are
comprehensive and, as evidenced through the development of
a comparative matrix,85 consistent with international child rights
standards. The SOPs are currently undergoing a piloting phase
before they are finalised.
82 UNICEF Cambodia: 2022 UNICEF Mid-year Assessment Presentation Section: Child Protection, Cambodia Country Programme 2019-2023, slide 4.
83 UNICEF Cambodia, ‘RAM Report: Outcome: 0660/ A0/06/883 CHILD PROTECTION, 2021, p. 103.
84 UNICEF Cambodia, , ‘RAM Report: Outcome: 0660/ A0/06/800 CHILD PROTECTION, 2022, p. 92.
85 Internal document sighted by the author.
96 UNICEF Cambodia Child Protection Programme 2019 -2023: Outcome Evaluation
Quality inter-operable In 2020, the baseline was that routine data collection system on
information management violence, exploitation and abuse of children were not in place.
system supports and tracks By the end of 2021, there was an operational database of child
case management, incident protection issues operation through CPIMS and the annual
monitoring, and programme CPIMS Data forum conducted and CPIMS dashboard being
monitoring and extent of cases updated with 2019 and 2020 data, to be completed by end of
properly entered into the 2021.86
system (qualitative).
Primero has been rolled out to all Provinces; however, the
system is not yet being fully utilised in all Districts.
Degree of Development of The key measures for this indicator are the mechanisms for
the Quality Assurance System licensing and registration, defined in both Business Case on
for Social Work (qualitative). Social Service Workforce which was endorsed by Minister, and
in the National Strategic Plan for Strengthening Social Service
Workforce.87 This is part of larger effort to strengthen the SSW.
For example, the Business Case on Investing in SSW and
Strategic Plan on SSW in Cambodia 2022-2031 provided the
framework for the MoSVY to assign civil servants to undertake
child protection work. It has also contributed to the process
for establishing a Human Resource Information Management
System (HRMIS).88
An alternative care policy in line At the end of December 2021, UNICEF was reporting that the
with the 2009 Guidelines for revised Alternative Care Policy had been drafted and was being
the Alternative Care of Children reviewed to ensure full alignment with the draft law on Child
is available in the country Protection and related SOPs before being submitted for final
(qualitative). review by the government in 2023.89
86 UNICEF Cambodia, ‘RAM Report: Outcome: 0660/ A0/06/883 CHILD PROTECTION, 2021, p. 100.
87 UNICEF Cambodia, ‘RAM Report: Outcome: 0660/ A0/06/883 CHILD PROTECTION, 2021, p. 101.
88 UNICEF Cambodia, UNICEF UMBRELLA AGREEMENT-II7200GH21IO00004, Six Month Update
(UNICEF Cambodia- USAID), August 2022, P. 2.
89 UNICEF Cambodia, ‘RAM Report: Outcome: 0660/ A0/06/883 CHILD PROTECTION, 2021, p. 101.
UNICEF Cambodia Child Protection Programme 2019 -2023: Outcome Evaluation 97
Outcomes: Law and policy framework
The development of the Child Protection Law and the Standard Operating Procedures
(SOPs) are a key achievement of the CP Programme. The introduction of the Law and SOPs,
when adopted, will fill a critical gap within the child protection system and provide the overarching
framework for the system and its operationalisation. It is also an enduring achievement: the Law
and SOPs will remain in place after UNICEF ceases to support their development. Stakeholders
involved in the qualitative research tended to express very strong support for the Law and SOPs; and
saw these developments as necessary elements in strengthening the child protection system and
a development that brought together and built consensus among a range of different government
and NGO stakeholders. For example, according to representatives of MoSVY, the Law will provide
a strong architecture for the system, and will lead to the allocation of key human and financial
resource commitments required to ensure the system functions effectively: “We have a draft child
protection law and when the law is endorsed, the law will be the top guidance; there will be more
allocation of human resources and budgets to ensure that we implement this law. So that is another
thing to be optimistic about in the future.”90
Among respondents to the stakeholder survey, there was strong agreement that the CP Programme
has been successful in contributing to a strengthened child protection law and policy framework at
the national level (see Figure 7, below). However, stakeholders were slightly less supportive of the
assertion that the Programme has made a positive contribution to strengthening laws and policies
at the sub-national level. At the national level, 20 respondents out of 22 agreed that the Programme
had either mostly (14) or completely (6) contributed to a strengthened legal and policy framework.
At the sub-national level, while 18 respondents (out of 22) agreed that the Programme either mostly
or completely contributed to strengthened legal and policy frameworks, five respondents felt that
UNICEF had only been ‘somewhat’ (2) or ‘moderately’ (3) successful.
Figure 7: Survey responses to the question ‘To what extent has UNICEF’s Child Protection Programme
2019 – 2023 contributed toa strengthened legal and operational framework for child protection
in Cambodia at the national v sub-national level?’ (n = 22)
16
14 14
14
12
10
8
6
6
4
4
3
2 2
2
0
0
Subnational National
Completely Mostly Moderately Somewhat
90 KII with two representatives of the Ministry of Social Welfare, Veterans and Youth Rehabilitation, Phnom Penh (zoom), 28 October 2022.
98 UNICEF Cambodia Child Protection Programme 2019 -2023: Outcome Evaluation
However, some concerns were expressed that the current draft of the Child Protection Law,
while comprehensive, contains some gaps, for example relating to child witnesses. It was also
felt by a small number of stakeholders that the Law was not yet adequately adapted to suit the
Cambodian context. For example, according to one stakeholder:
“It seems like the current draft of the Law has taken a model of the law from the west, so it could
be a little hard to implement here in our country. For instance, in the case of parents who fail to send
their children to school, they will be criminalised or punished in by the Law…so it will be hard for
poor parents who already can’t send their children to school.”91
It should be noted though, that the Child Protection Law is based on international child rights
standards and evidence of good practice, as indicated in the matrix accompanying the development
of the Law. It was also developed through a process of collaboration with a wide range of key
Government stakeholders in order to ensure that it was properly contextualised.
Outcomes: Operational frameworks
The CP Programme has made substantial progress in operationalising the child protection system
at the national and sub-national levels, though some challenges remain. One of the biggest
achievements was the development and professionalisation of social workers and the development
of a social services workforce. This was made possible after long-term advocacy, investment
support, capacity building and through the development of a business case on investing in a social
services workforce.92 In 2021, social service workers with clear job descriptions were appointed
in all 204 districts and child protection plans were developed in 10 provinces.93 A Strategic Plan on
Social Service Workforce in Cambodia (2022 – 2031) was approved by MoSVY in March 2022 and the
Strategic Plan for Training the Social Service Workforce focusing on Child Protection (2021 – 2025)
was signed by MoSVY in February 2021. These developments followed initial investments made
under the previous Programme to support the social services workforce to carry out family- and
community-based reintegration of children from residential care. Later, their roles were expanded to
address other child protection concerns in their communities, including responding to those affected
by COVID-19. According to stakeholders who participated in the qualitative research, the recognition
of the need for social workers and developments aimed at professionalisation of the social welfare
workforce were major achievements. For example, according to two representatives from MoSVY:
91 KII with national Government stakeholder in child protection (online), 25 November 2022.
92 UNICEF Cambodia, Child Protection Quarterly Report, October - December 2021, pp. 1-2.
93 UNICEF New York, GOAL AREA 3, Every child is protected from, violence and exploitation, Global Annual Results Report 2021, p. 44.
UNICEF Cambodia Child Protection Programme 2019 -2023: Outcome Evaluation 99
“
“There is now recognition of the role and function of the social welfare workforce.
Before, we had no idea of what the social work workforce really was and why it
is important. Now there is recognition of its importance – there’s been a lot of
support at national and sub-national levels to strengthen this workforce. We now
have laws, guidelines and policy – we are starting to recruit existing officers [from
other areas] to become part of the social welfare workforce.”94
As set out below (in relation to output 2), the designation of social welfare staff in each district
was highly valued by stakeholders and has supported improved child protection identification and
service delivery at the provincial and district levels (though with some significant remaining gaps as
discussed below). For example, as explained by a representative at DoSVY in Siem Reap:
“
“One of the biggest issues we faced before the UNICEF Child Protection
Programme [in 2019] was that we already had a plan, but it was only on
paper, there was no action. There was no technical support. We didn’t have
professional social workers, we were just learning by doing…we needed
certified, qualified social workers, but we didn’t have that. Now, social workers
can be efficient, and they know what to do. Without this, we could not achieve.
The extent to which we could work was limited – we could only do lower-level
work.”95
Another achievement of the CP Programme was the establishment, in collaboration MoSVY,
14 other government ministries and NGO networks, of the Child Protection Information
Management System (CPIMS). It provides data on 50 indicators, including the situation of highly
vulnerable groups, such as children living in poverty.96 This addresses one of the critical bottlenecks
to the effective operation of the child protection system - the lack of robust data collection systems.
The roll-out of the Primero – the digital child protection case management system – was
another major output of the CP Programme, though results from the Primero roll-out
were mixed. While some stakeholders recognised the benefits of Primero in terms of improving
coordinated case management, organisation, data security / privacy and information management,
there were found to be many bottlenecks to its effective use within the child protection system.
This appears to have stemmed largely from the system being rolled out at a time in which there
was insufficient capacity at the sub-national (district and provincial) level to absorb the new system
effectively. Insufficient numbers of social welfare staff, inadequate case management skills and
high staff turnover, including the designation of very inexperienced staff as ‘social welfare workers,’
impeded the uptake of the system. In all research locations, it appears that Primero is mainly being
used quite narrowly as an information management system, rather than for its intended use, which
is to support improved, coordinated and holistic case management practices.
94 KII with two representatives of the Ministry of Social Welfare, Veterans and Youth Rehabilitation, Phnom Penh (zoom), 28 October 2022.
95 KII with representative of DoSVY, Siem Reap Province, Siem Reap, 25 October 2022.
96 Kingdom of Cambodia, MoSVY. Available at: https://cpims.mosvy.gov.kh/post/a4c9f2fa-d357-46b9-98cd-1d44513a7eed
100 UNICEF Cambodia Child Protection Programme 2019 -2023: Outcome Evaluation
The Primero system clearly has advantages in Cambodia. The move from paper to digitalisation
is in line with the RGC’s commitment to moving to a digital service delivery model. It also is more
scalable than the paper-based system, with changes / adjustments easier to scale. It ensures
increased data protection (compared to paper-based files, which may be difficult to keep secure)
and it facilitates more efficient case referrals, particularly between districts and provinces. It also
helps to ensure government ownership over child protection cases, and follows the model proposed
in the 2018 Formative Evaluation which recommended that case management should be owned
by government service providers, who could engage NGOs to deliver particular services where
required. It also helps to standardise systems and integrates different types of cases into one case
management system. Stakeholders frequently reported that they valued Primero as a system, which
they recognised as a quality case management system. For example:
“
“In the past, all work was paper based. Now all work is digitised, we have a
database and system available at the sub-national level. Everyone inputs the data,
we can quickly get information, manage cases better and do interventions easier
and faster. It makes the work easy and fast, the move to the digital system.”97
“The Primero system is…helpful and modern. Before, we had hard copies and we
sent it on, but now we can see in real time when cases are entered. The system
is modern but social workers are not modern.”98
However, many stakeholders expressed the view that the implementation of Primero is very
challenging in the Cambodian context, given limited case management and technical skills
among the social welfare workforce. For example:
“
“A lot of people [in the social services workforce at local level] don’t even know how
to turn on a tablet, let alone fill in a form. There are internet connectivity issues,
limited electricity. With Primero, it has to be contextualised, not just country to
country, but to each single province and district…The bottom line is – there is a
barrier that is partly linked to the technical part. Another barrier is related to case
management capacity. That is why we keep training on case management.”99
“Because the capacity of DoSVY is very limited – some are just new and some of
them are just doing their work on paper still. Sometimes, they don’t know how to
use computers, how to access the system and use Primero. Some MoSVY staff
provide training and orientation on using the Primero system, but the capacity and
ability of DoSVY is not really capable to do it.”100
97 KII with two representatives of the Ministry of Social Welfare, Veterans and Youth Rehabilitation, Phnom Penh (zoom), 28 October 2022.
98 KII with representative of DoSVY, Siem Reap Province, Siem Reap, 25 October 2022.
99 KII with member of Child Protection Team, UNICEF Cambodia, Phnom Penh, 19 October 2022.
100 KII with representative of SKO (Phnom Penh) (online), 3 November 2022.
UNICEF Cambodia Child Protection Programme 2019 -2023: Outcome Evaluation 101
“
“It’s not really used effectively. I can say the Primero system is a very good system,
and I see this – because I have training jointly with government staff. They provide
Primero training from MoSVY and it is very clear and easy to use. For referrals
and also for referring to partners for services. But even though the system is very
good, if the people are not really using it properly, it is no good. So I see that, even
though they have training, during the training they say ‘yes we can do this’ – they
understand. But when it comes to the practice, they are feeling confused. They
need more training. They still have limited capacity to use Primero.”101
Particularly at the district level, limitations in technical capacity were typically attributed to the
merging of personnel from other offices into the District Offices of Social Welfare which meant that
a lot of persons with very limited or no knowledge and skills in child protection or social welfare
have been appointed to do social services work. This, in practice, means that Primero was rolled
out to personnel who did not have the required skills in case management practices. Technical
barriers were also reported, including that the system being difficult to use for persons with limited
technical skills, problems with internet connectivity, and that it does not synch properly when going
offline to online.102
Other stakeholders mentioned a range of technical challenges that hindered their use of
Primero, including internet connectivity issues, data being ‘wiped’ in the process of reconnecting
to the internet and also technical issues with the tablets used to enter data into the system.
As illustrated by one stakeholder involved in a case study:
“
“To use Primero, it is problematic. It mainly relies on the internet connection.
Sometimes, we entered all the information and data through phone or tablet.
Then when the network disconnected, we needed to do everything all over again.
The tablet’s sensor is not well functioned. Only entering through data through
a computer is smooth. Working on Primero is a waste of time for us and the
victims. Primero freezes often when we are entering information. The current
update version is better but still problematic.”103
Delays in MoSVY granting approval for the case data entered into the Primero system also caused
challenges in Siem Reap.104
According to the review of Primero files in the research locations (which involved a review of five
randomly selected files that had been entered into Primero),105 it is clear that Primero is not yet
being used effectively as a case management tool. There was very limited data on each case and
only basic information was entered (on the child, referral, sometimes their family situation). Where
risk assessments were completed, risk was categorised but not explained.
101 KII with Technical Director, Children’s Future International (Battambang) (online), 10 November 2022.
102 KII with Child Protection Officer, Siem Reap Field Office, UNICEF Cambodia, Siem Reap, 24 October 2022.
103 KII with District Social Services Officer, Siem Reap, date.October 2022.
104 KII with District Social Services Officer, Siem Reap, date.
105 This involved selecting every tenth file starting from the most recently entered. It should be noted that it was not
possible to review Primero files in the two comparator locations – Oddar Meancheay and Pursat.
102 UNICEF Cambodia Child Protection Programme 2019 -2023: Outcome Evaluation
There were no care plans in the cases reviewed, no follow-up dates or notes from family visits etc.
There were no supporting documents attached to any of the files (e.g., interview notes, medical
documents etc.). In Siem Reap, the Social Workers at DoSVY explained that they have a large pile of
files that are awaiting entry into the system but have not been entered yet. They reported that they
had not been able to use Primero for three months due to a technical problem. They had reported
the problem to MoSVY and were awaiting assistance. The process appears to involve the social
workers completing the six MoSVY paper forms and handing these to another social worker which
is charged with entering the data into the system. At one of the District Offices for Social Welfare
in Siem Reap, it appears that one of the two social services staff members has been informally
appointed as the Primero focal point. He enters cases into the database from hard copies of the six
MoSVY forms. Therefore, Primero does not appear to be used as a case management system- it is
used primarily for data entry and reporting.
Also, social services staff in some locations appear to be logging all cases into Primero –
including tier 1 and 2 cases, which was not the intention. It is intended to be used as a case
management system for child protection response services (not for prevention services). Many
of the cases in the system appear to be secondary prevention or basic social welfare cases, like
the provision of food and other material assistance for COVID-affected families. However, in Siem
Reap and Battambang, social services staff explained that they no longer enter Tier 2 cases into the
system.
There is a clear need – to ensure effective use of Primero – for in-depth face to face training
and ideally coaching, which integrates training in Primero within broader case management
training. Data from the comparator locations indicates that Primero is not being adequately utilised
where basic, online training has been the only form of training provided (noting that this was
necessary due to COVID-19 related restrictions). For example: “The Primero system has a lot of
problems. The teaching is not good – we only had one day training online and no practice. We know
almost nothing. I asked my colleagues in another five districts / towns and they told me they could
not use Primero.”106
It is recommended that UNICEF support and institutionalise in-depth training and
coaching of social welfare staff on Primero in a way that integrates Primero training into
broader case management training and coaching (see below), to ensure that Primero is
able to be utilised effectively as a case management tool.
106 KII with Chief of the Office of Social Welfare, Krong Samrong, Oddar Meancheay, 15 November 2022.
UNICEF Cambodia Child Protection Programme 2019 -2023: Outcome Evaluation 103
Output area 2: Child protection services and workforce
Progress / outputs
UNICEF is reporting that implementation of this output area is on track. Key progress from
2019 to 2022 included the finalisation of the Strategic Plan for training the social service workforce
2021-2025 and the development of the national training curriculum and training modules. Progress
was reported in strengthening the capacity of the social service workforce at provincial and district
level on the use of the Primero digital case management system.
As part of the COVID-19 response, the provision of child protection services was expanded to
respond to the needs of children infected and affected by COVID-19. Key interventions included the
provision of family emergency support, hotline/helpline services and Mental Health and Psychosocial
Support (MHPSS). As reported in UNICEF’s 2021 Annual Report, this meant that a total of 53,423
children received services from 2019 – 2021. Further evidence of progress during this period included
advocacy to ensure that national and sub-national COVID-19 preparedness and response planning
included the protection of children in alternative care; adapting case management guidelines and
practices to address COVID-19; and deploying additional social workers in 25 provinces.
Table 12: Summary of outputs against indicators in CP Programme’s results framework: Output 2
Output indicator Evidence from desk review
Number of Children suspected The number of children suspected or accused of a crime and
or accused of a crime and child child victims of crime who benefited from legal aid and (quality)
victims of crime who benefited legal representation during the year, through UNICEF-supported
from legal aid and (quality) legal programmes increased from a baseline of 0 in 2018 to 309 in
representation during the year, December 2022.107
through UNICEF-supported
programme (quantitative).
Number of children and adults The number of children and adults that have access to a safe
that have access to a safe and and accessible channel to report sexual exploitation and abuse
accessible channel to report has increased from 11,851 in 2020 to 27,766 as at December
sexual exploitation and abuse 2022.108
(quantitative).
107 UNICEF Cambodia, ‘RAM Report: Outcome: 0660/ A0/06/800 CHILD PROTECTION, 2022, p. 111.
108 UNICEF Cambodia, ‘RAM Report: Outcome: 0660/ A0/06/800 CHILD PROTECTION, 2022, p. 111.
104 UNICEF Cambodia Child Protection Programme 2019 -2023: Outcome Evaluation
Number of women, girls The number of women, girls and boys accessing GBV risk
and boys accessing GBV mitigation, prevention or response interventions has increased
risk mitigation, prevention from a baseline of 310 in 2020 to 26,734 by December 2022.109
or response interventions
(quantitative).
Number of unaccompanied and The number of unaccompanied and separated children
separated children accessing accessing family-based or other suitable alternative care was
family-based care or a suitable 2,638 at December 2022.110
alternative (quantitative).
Number of children [and The number of children and caregivers accessing mental health
caregivers] accessing mental and psychosocial support (MHPSS) increased from a baseline
health and psychosocial of 361,818 in 2020 to 1,259,618 in December 2022.111
support (quantitative). By December 2022, a total of 16,300 children (including 8,002
girls) and 13,478 youth and adults (including 6,657 females)
received professional counselling and psychiatric treatment.112
This is one of the main UNICEF Child Protection Programme
interventions adapted and scaled up in response to COVID-19.
Outcomes
The evaluation found that that outcomes in relation to the strengthening of the social welfare
workforce and child protection service delivery under output area 2 was mainly positive,
though critical challenges remain which have reduced the effectiveness of interventions.
Some stakeholders who participated in the research reported that case management practices
had improved as had coordinated service delivery at the sub-national level as a result of UNICEF’s
interventions. However, many stakeholders reported that, while practices had improved, critical
bottlenecks in the system at the sub-national level including the limited number of social welfare
staff members, lack of qualifications and skills, staff turnover, lack of operational budgets and the
enduring reliance on NGOs for basic case management services had limited the outcomes achieved
in strengthening child protection systems and services at the local levels.
109 Cambodia, ‘RAM Report: Outcome: 0660/ A0/06/800 CHILD PROTECTION, 2022, p. 111.
110 UNICEF Cambodia, ‘RAM Report: Outcome: 0660/ A0/06/800 CHILD PROTECTION, 2022, p. 112.
111 UNICEF Cambodia, ‘RAM Report: Outcome: 0660/ A0/06/800 CHILD PROTECTION, 2022, p. 111.
112 UNICEF Cambodia, ‘RAM Report: Outcome: 0660/ A0/06/800 CHILD PROTECTION, 2022, p. 109.
UNICEF Cambodia Child Protection Programme 2019 -2023: Outcome Evaluation 105
There was only moderate support expressed in the stakeholder survey in relation to the
Programme’s contribution toward increasing access to systems and services for children at
risk. While 14 out of 24 respondents stated that the CP Programme had mostly / largely contributed
to increased access to appropriate systems, services and support for children exposed to violence,
abuse, neglect or exploitation, nine respondents agreed that the Programme had only ‘moderately’
contributed to this objective (one further respondent selected that the Programme had ‘completely’
contributed to this objective). Results in relation to the question of whether the CP Programme had
contributed to improved case management in child protection were more mixed: five respondents
stated that the Programme had ‘moderately’ contributed, 11 stated that it had ‘mostly / largely’
contributed and four stated that it had ‘completely’ contributed to this objective (three further
respondents selected ‘not applicable’). There was reasonably strong support for the assertion that
the CP Programme has contributed to supporting the safe reintegration of children into family
care among stakeholders who completed the survey: 17 responded the Programme had mostly
contributed to the safe reintegration of children, while six responded that contribution in this area
had been ‘moderate.’
However, in the qualitative data, the contribution that UNICEF’s CP Programme has made to the
strengthening of a CP system at the sub-national level was particularly evident when examining the
systems and processes in place in districts / provinces in which UNICEF has worked intensively
compared to those in which UNICEF has not worked intensively. Case management and service
delivery appears to be functioning to a reasonable standard in the ‘intervention’ research
locations, with increased government ownership and improved service delivery, though with
some challenges as set out below. In the ‘comparator’ research locations, it was reported that
many child protection cases are simply not reported and referred at all and when they are, there
appears to be a tendency to place children into RCIs without considering other community-based
options (and / or perhaps due to the lack of community-based options available in these provinces).
For example, according to stakeholders from Oddar Meancheay and Pursat (the ‘comparator’
locations which have so far received only very minimal intervention from UNICEF):
“
“The [social services] team sometimes ignore the cases that are happening…I
think there has been many cases that have been hidden by people in the
community or lower levels, due to limited resources and lack of commitment or
other reasons.”113
“For big cases, such as those involving drug abuse or addicted children, abandoned
children, orphan children, street children – we cannot solve them effectively due
to the lack of the members’ capacities and resources. For those cases, we really
need the support from outsiders to address the cases. There are some RCIs and
NGOs working in the province, but their support is very limited.”114
113 KII with representative of WCCC, Oddar Meancheay province, 15 November 2022.
113 KII with Chair of WCCC, Pursat province, 4 November 2022.
106 UNICEF Cambodia Child Protection Programme 2019 -2023: Outcome Evaluation
In the ‘intervention’ research locations, UNICEF interventions in building the capacity of the
social services workforce appear to have led to some positive changes in case management
practices and service delivery. The case studies that were carried out in Battambang, Rattanakiri
and Siem Reap demonstrated that some positive outcomes had been achieved through improved
case management processes. UNICEF support appears to have contributed to improved
assessments, the ability to carry out case management and follow ups in relation to child protection
cases, family tracing and reintegration and improved coordination in the delivery of services and
support. For example, according to a District Social Services Officer involved in the case studies,
case management processes had improved following UNICEF support:
“
“For all cases, there is a significant change, a positive change [following UNICEF
support]…Sometimes, they invite us to attend a meeting and solve problems
together with them. We can conduct home visits. We can do assessment about
the family before integration. If the family cannot afford to strengthen themselves,
there would be some contribution from different NGOs based on their available
resources to help the family. We also follow up with the family if they are stable
or not.”115
In contrast to the comparator provinces, in which child protection cases – when they are actioned
(and it seems many are not) – appear to be referred to RCIs as a matter of course, in intervention
locations, children are able to be provided with a range of services, typically through
cooperative working with NGOs. For example, one case in Battambang involved a 12 year old
boy who had been placed at a Pagoda and then an RCI since he was a baby, following the death of
his mother. The case had been referred from DoSVY to an NGO in 2016 as part of a reintegration
programme. The NGO assessed and managed the case through the OsCAR system (NGO case
management system). Initially, the child was placed in a supported foster care placement while his
family was traced. After attempts were made to identify family members who had capacity and were
willing to care for the child, the child was placed in a more long-term supported foster placement.
According to interviews with the boy and his foster carer, the placement was supporting him very
well – he was in school, had basic needs met, had access to medical care, and he reported to be
happy with carer. However, there appears to have been limited involvement of government social
services workers and very limited access to non-material support and services (e.g. counselling
services).
The method of case collaboration appears to have contributed to these improved practices
in intervention provinces. The case collaboration process involves a social worker from an NGO
partner coaching the social welfare staff at the Provincial and District levels by jointly carrying out
case management in response to reported child protection cases, as illustrated by several key
stakeholders involved in the qualitative research:
115 KII with District Social Services Officer, Siem Reap, date.
UNICEF Cambodia Child Protection Programme 2019 -2023: Outcome Evaluation 107
“
“Responsibility for case management is with the focal point for social affairs. They
put it into the Primero system…We help each other, for example, to find a safe
centre for the case, like a temporary shelter, and we need to know about the case
profile…Mostly, we identify services together. They [the district social services
workforce] have the skills already. So it’s about the intervention – they need us to
support them, to [build] capacity to negotiate a safe place for them etc.”116
“OSVY [District social services workforce] or the CCWC in the commune identifies
the case and they do an assessment using the MoSVY forms. If they are identified
and if the case involves violence or sexual abuse, the CCWC refers the case to
the district office of social affairs for prevention or support. We know each other
and already work together with them, so they will contact our social workers to
work with them to respond to the issues of the children. Sometimes, it’s not
going through CCWC but sometimes it gets picked up by our outreach workers.
They see a case of violence and they contact OSVY to work together to assess
and prevent the violence.”117
According to key stakeholders, case collaboration has helped to support better case management
practices by building skills and increasing commitment among government service providers.
It has also supported improved access to services through building / maintaining strong connections
to NGO service providers. For example:
“
“We have found that some of the actors in government, they have started to
be active, and victims get support, they trust the service. Because they can do
a holistic service. We can come up with different sources of support – there is
more resource mobilisation in their Ministry. So we have reached more victims,
the government is more active, there is more identification and more trust from
victims and their families.”118
“They have improved. With the case collaboration, the government structure
always changes…they don’t know what case management means. Because our
NGO works with them, even though they do not yet get the training from the
government, by training and coaching from us, we can see their skills…They have
improved on how to identify child risk and help more children. Before, you can
say that they would make the referral and always dealt with the case as fast
as possible – they would make the referral to the NGO and ask for support for
bicycles and other things but some families have their strengths and have their
abilities but the requests that were coming were based on what the family wants,
not what they need. But now, they [district social welfare staff] can assess the
risks and needs. It’s not only based on what the family wants.”119
118 KII with representative of Friends-International, Phnom Penh (online), 14 November 2022.
119 KII with Technical Director, Children’s Future International (Battambang) (online), 10 November 2022.
108 UNICEF Cambodia Child Protection Programme 2019 -2023: Outcome Evaluation
Example of improvements in case management through case collaboration
“For example, if it’s a sexual abuse case, we told them that the top priority is to get the
children safe. Then we start to think about and know if the case needs to go to the hospital.
It’s important that we can protect the child within 48 hours in these cases. They need a
medical check-up. All the activities we support – they are all going together. The government
has a role to facilitate and invite all stakeholders to attend a discussion of the case (a case
conference) and our team will show them something they need to check and need to agree
the next priority. We teach them about the process. They fill in forms and local government
and DoSVY sign the case as open and then we follow through on the support. We consider
a medical check, do they need counselling etc.? It is an ongoing process of supported case
management until we agree that the case is done and we then close it.
But from the beginning it is difficult when they identify a case. They ask me to go alone and
say “I’m busy, I have no gas / transport”, etc. but my team has a strong commitment and they
say, “if you don’t have gas, we can pick you up on the motorbike” etc. UNICEF also support
some costs for them to do the case management – gas etc. to enable them to go see the
cases. Some cases are not close to their house. The government still does not have budget
to support this kind of thing yet.”120
However, the way the case collaboration process works appears to vary by province / district –
in some, it appears to be working quite effectively at building the capacity of the government social
services workforce, for example, in Battambang: “The social services staff commit to work with us
and always come to the field to see the case, and we come back and discuss with them how to
support and what the workplan will be etc. So for us, we don’t have any serious challenges.”121
However, in some other locations, the case collaboration is not functioning effectively and case
collaboration involves the government social services workforce simply referring the management
of the case to an NGO partner, reportedly due to the limited capacity of the social welfare workforce
at the district level. For example, according to an NGO partner in Phnom Penh: “At the moment,
DoSVY is the one who will be responsible for the case management; but actually, we are the ones to
hold the case management. Our team has Oscar [case management system] and the government
has Primero. We have been doing Tier 1 cases and putting the cases into the Oscar system…and we
input this into the Primero system through Oscar [interoperability]…we do the case management in
practice.”122 It was also reported that, in Phnom Penh, DoSVY has only input a couple of cases into
Primero so far – the rest have gone into the Oscar system.
Another barrier in some locations is the perception that NGOs will continue to do the bulk of
the work in child protection cases, including in terms of case management, which has hindered
the extent to which cases are ‘owned’ by government. This is illustrated by a stakeholder from an
NGO implementing partner:
120 KII with Director, Kalyian Mith, Siem Reap, 26 October 2022.
121 KII with Executive Director, Kumar Rekreay NGO (Battambang) (online), 11 November 2022.
122 KII with representative of SKO (Phnom Penh) (online), 3 November 2022
UNICEF Cambodia Child Protection Programme 2019 -2023: Outcome Evaluation 109
“
“They think ‘well, [the NGO] can do this by themselves’ and therefore there is
no need to post the case into Primero...I think one challenge is the capacity of
DoSVY – they are limited on how to use computers and systems. Sometimes
they depend on the NGO partner as they don’t have enough time to post the
case into the system. They have many tasks to complete and not just in child
protection…this and next year is elections for the commune. They have a busy
schedule – they cannot go and interview cases with us and do the case work. This
is the challenge we have.”123
In addition, several stakeholders reported that some NGOs are keen to retain ‘ownership’ of cases
and enter them into their own case management systems in order to demonstrate case numbers
to meet donor targets, which is a problem when their case management system is not compatible
with Primero.
In addition to case collaboration, UNICEF’s support in training and coaching the social
services workforce has contributed to positive outcomes. Training and coaching are delivered
by an NGO, Social Services Cambodia, with support from UNICEF. Training is provided to officials
in Phnom Penh, followed by observations and coaching sessions on site. However, there were
some challenges: “Social workers do not provide direct services – they just cooperate with partner
organisations. They don’t apply what they have learnt in the training and don’t learn new things from
the training.”124 Nonetheless, the enhanced knowledge and skills gained through the training and
coaching were reported by stakeholders in the intervention locations as being important inputs that
had improved their work in child protection case management and service delivery.
The institutionalisation of knowledge has been a key challenge, particularly in light of staff
turnover, which limits the ability for institutional retention of knowledge. Training initiatives
appear to have been short term, with staff in the district social welfare offices tending to move
between departments frequently. The staff who have been provided with training are moved out of
social welfare / child protection, and incoming staff tend not to have been trained, with many from
other backgrounds and lacking in basic social work skills. However, it appears that this is now being
addressed by UNICEF. The business case and Strategic Plan for training the social services workforce
has led to the development of a standardised national curriculum for the social welfare workforce.
Training modules that correspond with different ‘levels’ of the workforce (para-social worker (level
1); para-professional (levels 2 or 3); professional Social Worker (level 4)) will help to systematise and
institutionalise the delivery of training. This is a positive development and UNICEF should work
to ensure that the curriculum is adopted and rolled out.
One other challenge is that, as mentioned above, general case management training and
coaching is disconnected from Primero training: the NGO partners providing training and coaching
to district social services workforce do not train on Primero and the organisation does not appear to
be very knowledgeable on Primero.
123 KII with representative of SKO (Phnom Penh) (online), 3 November 2022.
124 KII with Social Worker, Social Services Cambodia NGO (online), 4 November 2022.
110 UNICEF Cambodia Child Protection Programme 2019 -2023: Outcome Evaluation
This indicates that case management and Primero are not linked up in training / coaching. This
may serve to reinforce the idea that Primero is not a case management tool, but a data collection
system that is disconnected from case management processes. There is a need to ensure that
Primero and case management training are linked together. Case management and Primero training
and coaching should be delivered intensively and primarily in a face to face modality. Stakeholders
in ‘comparator’ research locations noted that online training on Primero (which was necessary
during COVID restrictions) were inadequate. However, consideration should be given to utilising
the improved capacity for online training modalities gained during COVID restrictions, for example,
through providing online refresher or follow up training, resources and materials for the social
welfare workforce.
It is recommended that intensive case management training and coaching be delivered
to the social services workforce, and this training / coaching should integrate or link
up with training on the Primero case management system. This is important to ensure
that Primero is utilised effectively as a case management tool, rather than purely an
information management system. Measures to ensure that the training is institutionalised
should be continued. Consideration should be given to the development of an online
resource that includes follow up / refresher training and resources.
Other inputs that have contributed to improvements in case management include the provision
of funding by UNICEF to be used as operational budgets for the social services workforce and
also the provision of technical assistance in relation to individual (typically more complex) cases.
The workforce lacks a government budget to operationalise child protection service delivery (e.g.
to support travel for field visits, small disbursements etc.) (see below for a fuller discussion), and
the provision of budgets to facilitate case management practices has helped to support improved
processes in the ‘intervention’ locations. For example:
“
“Everything has improved, especially the capacity of officials and social workers.
Awareness has also improved. The training on case management, working
procedures and we also have tablets for data collection. In what ways has
awareness improved? Awareness of case management and how to deal with
the case and the whole working procedures, as we have received training and
support from UNICEF. Training has improved capacity and awareness. When there
is a case in the community, we have funds from UNICEF so we can visit the case
on time and deal with it on time we also provide training and raise awareness at
the district level and in local authorities on case management, communication and
writing reports, so that they can help.”125
125 KII with Director, DoSVY, Battambang Province, Battambang, 25 October 2022.
UNICEF Cambodia Child Protection Programme 2019 -2023: Outcome Evaluation 111
“
“UNICEF not only gives money, but they give technical support and other than
that, they also facilitate the government side. It makes the system strong…We
don’t really have any power and enough value to advocate and invite DoSVY and
provincial to do something. With support from UNICEF to facilitate if something is
struggling – e.g., a case that has many problems, UNICEF always attends the case
conference meeting and facilitates if we need to support to MoSVY and report to
top of Government. It makes the project strong and successful for me.”126
Efforts by UNICEF to improve coordination among government and NGO service providers has also
led to positive outcomes in child protection service delivery. UNICEF’s support for the 3PC network
and other initiatives aimed at coordinating the system at the local level (e.g., through provincial Child
Protection Technical Working Groups and development of Provincial Child Protection Plans) was also
valued by stakeholders involved in the research. The 3PC network has been effective in ensuring
NGO service providers are coordinated, including through the central management and distribution
of funding, standardised monitoring and evaluation frameworks and knowledge generation. For
example, according to NGO and Government stakeholders:
“ “They [UNICEF] are very good in coordinating and collaborating in having a
cohesive approach. NGOs do all different things – I have no idea how they are a
network. With UNICEF, they pull us together towards government strengthening,
aligned with government priorities and bringing everyone else with them…UNICEF
makes sure we’re all at the same level of understanding and allows everyone to
be part of that. And we all take a turn. We’re all very much aligned with where
we’re going, and it’s thanks to UNICEF for that one.127
“We have monthly, trimester and yearly meetings and all organisations that
operate the activities in the province. We have an MOU with DoSVY and they are
all members of the Provincial Child Protection Committee. When we developed
the action plan, we sat down and mapped out which organisation does what.”128
Remaining challenges
However, challenges in strengthening the child protection system at the sub-national levels remain
and will need to be addressed to ensure that the system is able to operate effectively. First, the very
limited capacity at the sub-national levels continues to hamper progress in strengthening
child protection service delivery. While some progress has been made in designating staff at the
provincial and district levels in the social welfare workforce, there are still very limited numbers of
personnel.
126 KII with Director, Kalyian Mith, Siem Reap, 26 October 2022.
127 KII with 3PC Technical Coordinator, Friends-International, Phnom Penh (online), 4 November 2022.
128 KII with two representatives of DoSVY, Siem Reap Province, Siem Reap, 25 October 2022.
112 UNICEF Cambodia Child Protection Programme 2019 -2023: Outcome Evaluation
In the research locations, there were only two Social Workers at the Provincial level and a further
two designated staff members (who have been provided with varying amounts of training but are
not qualified social workers) at the district level. Many social workers appear to be employed by
NGOs and this has limited the ability for UNICEF to ensure government ownership of the child
protection system and child protection cases. It has also limited the ability for the government to
provide quality child protection services, as illustrated by Government and NGO stakeholders who
participated in the research:
“
“The challenge is that capacity is limited and also, there is a limited number
of staff to implement the programme. MoSVY has a lot of responsibilities and
different roles, but there are not enough people to handle it all…When we
delegate responsibilities to the sub-national level, they don’t have capacity, they
can’t do it and they need training and capacity building.”129
“The [child protection] focal points have lots of different tasks – children, the elderly
etc. – and lots of child protection cases when you look at the seven categories
of cases that we cover. They [the district social welfare workforce] cannot cover
their cases. The focal point will normally pass on the case to the CCWC who will
then work with the 3PC partner on the ground. They don’t have the capacity to be
trained all the way through within the model. Sometimes the district focal points
put the children at risk.”130
“The problem is about the social worker. They seem to be overworked – they have
other work to do. Most of them are not interested in social work. They say it is the
responsibility of the organisation [NGO], not their official responsibility. We have
to find partner organisations to refer children to services e.g., if child is abandoned
and need a centre for the children, it is hard to find one for the children. Like an
institution? Safe place, shelter, a child needs to stay there 1 or 2 nights and then
find partner organisation which is hard to find. The government does not have a
safe place shelter for the child…right now, around 90% of cases, CCT [Cambodian
Children’s Trust] runs by itself. The cooperation from authorities is limited.”131
The lack of operational budgets at the sub-national level is a critical challenge. Financial
support for case management is still very donor driven, with a high reliance on NGOs. This has made
operationalising case management processes and supporting government ownership of cases very
difficult. This is illustrated by research participants from UNICEF and Government:
129 KII with two representatives of the Ministry of Social Welfare, Veterans and Youth Rehabilitation, Phnom Penh (zoom), 28
October 2022.
130 KII with 3PC Technical Coordinator, Friends-International (Phnom Penh) (online), 4 November 2022.
131 KII with Social Work Manager, Cambodian Children’s Trust, Battambang, 15 November 2022.
UNICEF Cambodia Child Protection Programme 2019 -2023: Outcome Evaluation 113
“
“The Government said they [districts, communes] need to allocate X% of their
budgets for social services, but they don’t know how. They have had no training
about that. If we go to the district social welfare offices, they ask about their
budget and how to use it for case support – travel, phoning families etc. They have
no budget for this. So what they say is they only have a salary, and no operational
budget.”132
“
“Participants like the village chief and such cannot afford the cost of transportation
for travelling to their village to the meeting venue in provincial downtown area.
The meeting venue is far from their home, not to mention that the road condition
is terrible…We do not work in our own geographic area. We need to travel all
around to other areas. So, the expense for us is travel. We are located in hilly
areas, so the cost of transportation is more expensive than in flat areas. We need
to spend more for the gasoline. If we are going to work in a village or community,
we need to spend all day there.”133
It is recommended that UNICEF’s next CP Programme focus on building capacity for
operationalisation of the child protection system, particularly at the provincial, district and
commune / village levels. This could involve supporting the operationalisation the SOPs,
when they are adopted. A stakeholder mapping could then be carried out to identify which
government Ministry / institution could support each part of the system. Consideration should
be given to supporting MoSVY and MOI to attract and retain quality social workers / social
services staff, including through subsidising or part-subsidising the wages of social workers
from NGOs to be placed within the DoSVY and the District Offices for Social Welfare to work
more closely alongside existing government staff and build their skills.
While UNICEF provides support for operationalising child protection case management in
some provinces, this is not sustainable (see section on sustainability, below). There is a need
for UNICEF to prioritise supporting MoSVY, MOI and the sub-national administrations with
costing child protection service delivery and in developing and institutionalising operational
budgets for child protection.
Another gap in child protection service delivery is that there appears to be only a limited
understanding of the emotional consequences of child abuse. For example, according to one of
the CP Programme donors:
132 KII with Child Protection Officer, UNICEF Cambodia, Phnom Penh, 24 October 2022.
133 KII with Representative of Inspection Police, O’Chum District Inspection Office, Ratanakiri Province, 31 November 2022.
114 UNICEF Cambodia Child Protection Programme 2019 -2023: Outcome Evaluation
“
“They will take them [the child] to the doctor, get medication then bring them
back to school. Then, everything is good. There is none of that understanding
and sensitivity around emotional impacts. We need more focus on that and
understanding emotional consequences…we need better capacity on emotional
abuse.”134
There are also reported to be limited service providers in mental health – e.g. in Battambang,
according to a representative of DoSVY: “…there are not many service providers who can give
psychological consultations. Even NGO employees and service providers, their capacity is still limited
for psychological consultations…it is hard to find qualified workers to give consultations to them.”135
There is a need for UNICEF to support improved programming in integration and
delivery of mental health services within child protection service delivery.
In summary, there is a critical need to understand and respond to gaps at the sub-national (particularly
district level) that are continuing to hamper quality child protection service delivery. This includes the
need to focus on public financing and budgeting and improved human and financial resourcing at
these levels. Capacity building, particularly in terms of skills in case management, should also be
prioritised in the next programme cycle, along with capacity building at the village and commune
levels in order to improve referrals of child protection cases.
© UNICEF Cambodia/2022/Bunsak But
134 KII with representative of UNICEF Australia National Commission (online), 25 November 2022.
135 KII with Director, DoSVY, Battambang Province, Battambang, 25 October 2022.
UNICEF Cambodia Child Protection Programme 2019 -2023: Outcome Evaluation 115
Output area 3: Child protection knowledge, attitudes, and behaviours
Progress / outputs
According to the desk review, UNICEF is reporting that this output is on track. Key progress
from 2019 to 2021 was that the knowledge, skills, and attitudes of parents, teachers, religious
leaders, communities, and adolescents were enhanced to protect children from violence, both
online and offline, through on the ongoing scaling up of the national communication for development
campaign, ‘Cambodia PROTECT: A Communication Strategy to End Violence against Children and
Unnecessary Family Separation in Cambodia, which was led by MoSVY in collaboration with other
Government Ministries and Departments and NGOs. The Strategy seeks to address the social and
cultural norms that legitimize violence against children and normalize the belief that residential
care facilities are beneficial to a child. Other core prevention programmes supported by the RGC
include a positive parenting programme, positive discipline in schools programme and a prevention
programme focusing on Pagodas.
A vital component of the campaign is the promotion of positive social and gender norms, and
the promotion of positive discipline in homes and schools. According to UNICEF’s global annual
results report (2021), this involved: “an expansion of training in school-based positive discipline,
with a specific focus on GBV to over 12,000 teachers and school directors in some 1,400 schools,
benefiting 429,300 boys and girls. UNICEF Cambodia also supported a multimedia campaign, ‘Do it
today, Don’t Wait for Tomorrow’ to promote children’s safe return to school, reaching 8 million people
nationwide.” 136 It was also reported that around 4,300 girls and boys who experienced violence
received services from social/welfare, health and law enforcement workers and around 185,000 girls
and boys benefited from the training of parents/caregivers, teachers and monks on parenting skills
and positive discipline.137
The campaign was expanded to include other key protection concerns such as child marriage,
child online protection, mental health and psychosocial support, and gender-based violence risk
mitigation. In 2021, UNICEF reported that at least eight million people were reached with messages
on prevention of violence against children, including over one million through adolescent-led
communication activities. In 2020, Cambodia PROTECT was expanded to promote the Pagoda Child
Safeguarding Policy. UNICEF reported that in 2020, at least 10 million people were reached with key
messages on prevention of violence against children and prevention of COVID-19, including three
millions with video messages by monks, three millions with the Cambodia PROTECT campaign and
four millions through existing programmes and partners.
136 UNICEF New York, GOAL AREA 3, Every child is protected from, violence and exploitation, Global Annual Results Report 2021, p. 36.
137 UNICEF New York, GOAL AREA 3, Every child is protected from, violence and exploitation, Global AnnualResults Report
116 UNICEF Cambodia Child Protection Programme 2019 -2023: Outcome Evaluation
Table 13: Summary of outputs against indicators in CP Programme’s results framework: Output 3
Output indicator Evidence from desk review
Percentage of parents/primary • The percentage of parents/primary caregivers reached
caregivers reached by the by the national behaviour change campaign (Cambodia
national behaviour change PROTECT) increased from a baseline of 0 per cent in 2018
campaign (quantitative). to 94 per cent at the end of December 2022.138
Number of parents and • The number of parents and caregivers reached through
caregivers reached through parenting programmes has increased from a baseline of
parenting programmes 10,000 in 2018 to 59,208 in December 2022.139
(quantitative). • Further, as at June 2022, the positive parenting toolkit (level
3) was distributed to relevant stakeholders at national and
sub-nation levels. Additionally, 6,254 parents and caregivers
(3,867 mothers and female caregivers) in eight provinces
were reached by positive parenting programme (levels 1 and
2), benefiting 9,049 children.140
Number of children and • By December 2022, 1,101,616 children and adolescents
adolescents reached with were reached with information and skills to stay safe
information and skills to stay online. 141
safe online (quantitative).
Number of children • The number of children studying in classrooms with
studying in classrooms with teachers trained in gender responsive positive discipline has
teachers trained in gender decreased from a baseline of 315,000 in 2020 to 352,608 as
responsive positive discipline of December 2022.142 It can be assumed that the decrease
(quantitative). rather than a decrease was due to the closure of schools for
much of 2020 to 2021 as a result of COVID-19.
138 UNICEF Cambodia, ‘RAM Report: Outcome: 0660/ A0/06/800 CHILD PROTECTION, 2022, p. 115.
139 UNICEF Cambodia, ‘RAM Report: Outcome: 0660/ A0/06/800 CHILD PROTECTION, 2022, p. 115.
140 UNICEF Cambodia: 2022 UNICEF Mid-year Assessment Presentation Section: Child Protection, Cambodia Country Programme 2019-2023, slide 6.
141 UNICEF Cambodia, ‘RAM Report: Outcome: 0660/ A0/06/800 CHILD PROTECTION, 2022, p. 115.
142 UNICEF Cambodia, ‘RAM Report: Outcome: 0660/ A0/06/800 CHILD PROTECTION, 2022, p. 114.
UNICEF Cambodia Child Protection Programme 2019 -2023: Outcome Evaluation 117
Outcomes
In terms of output area three, some positive outcomes were reported in terms of addressing
harmful community beliefs and practices. However, this evidence was largely anecdotal and there
are limited data to establish the outcomes or impacts in terms of attitudinal and behaviour change,
aside from data presented below in section 9.5 on changes in attitudes on physical punishment as
a result of the Positive Parenting Programme. Social behaviour change is inherently long-term, with
impact-level results not necessarily able to be achieved within a five-year programming cycle. It is
therefore important to develop intermediate outcome indicators to measure social behaviour change
and the next CP Programme could consider development of intermediate outcome indicators. It
was also suggested that the CP Programme (along with the Country Programme as a whole)
could benefit from integrating a stronger technical approach to social behaviour change.
It is recommended that a technical inputs from UNICEF’s social behaviour
change focal point should inform the next CP Programme.
In general, data from the focus group discussions (FGDs) indicated that participants in locations in which
UNICEF had been actively engaged were more aware of child protection risks and where to access
support than those in comparator provinces, though this typically included the Police Post, CCWC and
village / commune chief and a number of NGOs. Knowledge of Social Workers / Social Services Officers was
very limited and participants did not typically know about District or Provincial Social Services Officers. For
example:
“ “NGOs that use the word “Child Protection” with us include Care or UNICEF.
CCWC also mentioned it. It means to make children better off, both physical and
emotional support. It also means no violence against children. Children know
about their rights and can report to the village or commune when anything happen
to them.”143
“
“UNICEF talk about care for children, enrolling children to school, no violence
against children and so on. We have village chief, deputy village chief, CCWC,
Provincial Department of Women’s Affairs… that work on protecting children.”144
143 FGD with 3 males and 3 females, 18 – 24 years old, Rattanakiri, 3 November 2022.
144 FGD with 2 male and 6 female parents / caregivers, Kechong Commune, Rattanakiri, 3 November 2022.
118 UNICEF Cambodia Child Protection Programme 2019 -2023: Outcome Evaluation
In comparator provinces, there was a very limited understanding of child protection and participants typically
defined child protection as being limited to protection from mosquito bites, sickness, accidents etc.
without any mention of violence. They also identified very limited options for accessing support for child
protection issues, typically reporting that the village chief was the only option for seeking support. For example:
“We heard about that [child protection] but we don’t know what it means exactly…to me it means we protect
children from dangers, accidents, falling down from a high bed or hammock…”145 While these data are quite
limited, it does indicate that participants from ‘intervention provinces’ had improved understanding of child
protection risks and how to access support (and likely better options for accessing support) than those in
provinces in which UNICEF has not been actively engaged.
Stakeholders who participated in the survey were largely supportive of the statements that the CP
Programme had contributed to positive changes in parenting, school discipline and beliefs and attitudes
relating to VAC (see Figure 8). Written responses tended to focus on the impacts of the Positive Parenting
Programme as making a positive contribution, while it was also noted that the evidence to demonstrate
behaviour change was limited.
Figure 8: Survey responses to the questions ‘To what extent has UNICEF’s Child Protection Programme 2019 – 2023
contributed to positive changes to parenting, school discipline and beliefs, behaviours and attitudes to violence,
abuse and neglect of children? (n = 24)
Beliefs and behaviour to VAC 0 7 13 2 1
Positive school discipline 1 8 11 0 4
Positive parenting 1 6 14 2 1
Somewhat Moderately Mostly Completely N/A
Key informants who participated in the qualitative research clearly valued the Positive Parenting
Programme and reported that it had improved attitudes towards parenting and parenting practices.
Participants also generally expressed support for the school positive discipline programme. For
example, according to stakeholders, the positive parenting programme had helped parents reflect on the way
that violent forms of discipline can harm children and had also helped to improve other aspects of parenting.
For example:
145 FGD with 1 male and 7 female parents / caregivers, Samrong Sangkat, Oddar Meancheay, 18 November 2022.
UNICEF Cambodia Child Protection Programme 2019 -2023: Outcome Evaluation 119
“ “I attended the positive parenting courses. I can see that there are many
women who change the way of treating their children. Before, they were only
breastfeeding, there was no additional food or nutrition for their children. Some
of them used to use violence and they have stopped. Some that used to hit their
children, sometimes the parents cry during the session – they feel sad and guilty
and use bad words to their children/ during the session, we group them during the
break out session. E.g., we group pregnant women; one for women with small
children; etc. and allow them to ask each other what problems they have, e.g.,
‘do you hit your children?’ and some of them cry during that activity. The children
have rights from the day they are born. The other interesting thing is that I can
note when the children come to the meeting, and during that we have some food,
snack, refreshments, they clean or wash hands before eating. Before, they did not
do this. Children are dressed properly now, not nude. They wash their hand before
eating food. This is the result from the training on positive parenting as well.” 146
“ “Now [following participation in the Positive Parenting Programme], parents are
kind of listening and sharing story back with us. So, it is reducing violence. We
created more space for them to talk. Previously, they always hit their children
even for a small issue. And now, they want more of such kind of training.” 147
“We got feedback from families saying, ‘I used to hit my children to educate them
“
and make my voice very strong with them. I didn’t hit them very hard, and I used
to think that it’s not violent but after the training, I think it’s not right to educate
my children like this’, so they understand the ways to educate their children by
positive parenting. It’s very important – it’s not only one time or one training to
change the minds of the community – you need to take time and work with them
over time to change their mind.” 148
Participants in the FGDs in Battambang, Rattanakiri and Siem Reap also reported that the Positive Parenting
sessions had helped them (and they had seen it help other parents / carers in their community), in particular in
learning to communicate better with their children and avoid verbally abusive language.
The positive parenting programme appears to be quite embedded at the local level and is a good
example how national and sub-national work is connected to achieve positive outcomes. Positive
parenting is included in a national strategy under MOWA. Master trainers are trained and training is cascaded
down to the sub-national levels (local representatives of the CCWC and village leaders) by the master trainers.
The next step will reportedly be to support incorporation of positive parenting training into commune budget
plans, but, reportedly, it is not easy to find a human resources base in local authorities.
Feedback from some participants was that the positive parenting materials still require contextualisation
– the materials are thought to be quite academic and text-heavy and require further contextualisation to ensure
that they are useable in communities.149
146 KII with Chair and Deputy Chair, CCWC (Dauneko Commune), Siem Reap, 27 October 2022.
147 KII with Provincial Ofcie for Women’s Affairs, Kandal Province, 21 November 2022.
148 KII with Executive Director and Technical Director, Children’s Future International, Battambang, 26 October 2022.
149 KII with 3PC Technical Coordinator, Friends-International, Phnom Penh (online), 4 November 2022.
120 UNICEF Cambodia Child Protection Programme 2019 -2023: Outcome Evaluation
Also, according to one Government stakeholder, one challenge is that the different UNICEF programming
teams are not adequately joined-up, which minimises the positive outcomes that are able to be derived
from the positive parenting and positive discipline programmes: “We provide training to the schools, but
the parents, community members, they do not understand, so it is very, very challenging. The children go to
school and the school doesn’t use violence or violent discipline, but when they go back home, the parents use
corporal punishment, so it is very challenging.” 150
It is recommended that UNICEF consider how to join up programming between
different teams, in particular to ensure the same programming districts are
selected for both positive parenting and positive discipline programmes.
The provision of technical support by UNICEF’s CP Programme in the development and implementation
of the Pagoda Policy was also highly valued by relevant stakeholders, including the Ministry of Cults
and Religions. Given the central role of Pagodas and religious leaders in Cambodian society, engaging with
religious leaders to help shape social norms and behaviours is a positive initiative: “The [Pagoda] Programme
is very important, holistic and popular as it can prevent and protect children from violence and other types
of abuse in the Buddhist temples and in the communities. The knowledge gained by monks, achars and
the followers as well as parents and caregivers in the communities around the Pagoda may be changed.
Gradually, their bad behaviour and negative habits of disciplining their children and their subordinate monks
using violence and beating will be changed to positive discipline, like reading Buddhist lessons, bringing
water from the pond, cleaning around the Pagoda and so on. Therefore, violence will reduce gradually…As
the Cambodian people believe deeply in the Buddhist religion, when the Monks tell them, they believe and
they follow up on the Monk’s advice. So the message about violence against children, then rights of the child
spread out by the Monks or Achar and that is more effective than when other people do it.”151
Example of positive outcome from Pagoda programme
“Last year, in one pagoda in Sihanoukville, it was reported that the leader of monks educated three
child monks and five young adult monks by beating them at least five times per week because they
swam in the pond. When I met him, I asked him ‘why do you beat them?’ He told me it was because
they don’t respect the rule of the Pagoda. He added that beating is allowed by Buddha’s rule. I asked
him to show where Buddha’s rule says that. He said he just heard from other monks. I told him that
Buddha’s rule is never said that. I showed him about the Buddha’s rule as well as explained to him
about the bad habits of disciplining the monks, especially the child monks. I trained him and showed
him some points of national law and international law including on the rights of child. After that, he
listened and saw all points I showed him, he confessed that he did big mistakes in the past and he
apologized to me about what he had done towards the monks and appreciated me for giving him
clear knowledge about the right discipline for child monks and adults monks.”152
150 KII with representative of Ministry of Education, Youth and Sport (online), 1 December 2022.
151 KII with representative of Ministry of Cults and Religions, Phnom Penh, 31 October 2022.
152 KII with representative of Ministry of Cults and Religions, Phnom Penh, 31 October 2022.
UNICEF Cambodia Child Protection Programme 2019 -2023: Outcome Evaluation 121
In addition to the positive parenting, school discipline and social behaviour change programmes, the CP
Programme has incorporated a number of other issues under output area 3.
Adolescent and youth engagement
The CP Programme supported adolescent and youth participation through the Adolescent Youth
Reference Group (AYRG). The AYRG increased to 471 members, covering seven provinces during
the current CP Programme. In addition, 117 adolescent and youths received capacity building and
participated in awareness raising and community-based engagement.153 However, as noted above,
it is recommended that more effort is made to involve youth in vulnerable situations in the AYRG.
Child marriage programme
UNICEF supported the Department of Women’s Affairs in Ratanakiri province and the CCWC to
create a Plan of Action to Prevent Child Marriage (2017). Under the current CP Programme, the
action plan (i.e. actions to prevent child marriage) have now been incorporated into the provincial
investment plan. This is a positive example of outcomes derived from advocacy and a focus on
particularly vulnerable groups of children and a good example of UNICEF’s support in ensuring its
programme interventions are durable and sustainable.
Online child protection
Following UNICEF’s support for the study, Disrupting Harm (see above), the Ministry of Post and
Telecommunications (MoPT) is aiming to develop a guideline for the telecommunications industry
which applies to ICT companies in Cambodia as well as global companies that have operations in
Cambodia. MoPT reached out to UNICEF to support this initiative – guidelines were drafted, with
technical support from UNICEF, and the MoPT representative who participated in the qualitative
research noted that they valued the network of experts that UNICEF gave them access to.
153 UNICEF Cambodia: 2022 UNICEF Mid-year Assessment Presentation Section: Child Protection, Cambodia Country Programme 2019-2023, slide 6.
122 UNICEF Cambodia Child Protection Programme 2019 -2023: Outcome Evaluation
Extent to which the CP Programme has enabled monitoring, review
and adaptation to external contextual factors (in particular, COVID-19)
The evaluation found that the CP Programme successfully adapted to the changed context
brought about following the COVID-19 pandemic and resulting movement restrictions. In
response to the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic, UNICEF Cambodia adjusted its programme
structure to include priority indicators for COVID-19. The Child Protection Programme included new
indicators (Number of social service workers trained on specific knowledge and skills to deliver
essential services during the COVID-19 pandemic with UNICEF support in the reporting year; and
the number of children and adults that have access to a safe and accessible channel to report sexual
exploitation and abuse). COVID-19 delayed the implementation of some programmes and demanded
the adaptation of others, especially in utilising more virtual modalities. For example, delays occurred
in the finalization of revised Alternative Care Policy and the development of the Child Protection Law.
To enhance the care and protection for children infected and affected by COVID-19, UNICEF provided
technical support to MoSVY and the Ministry of Health to develop and implement specific guidelines
for health staff for improving child protection response and referrals, with a focus on children in
quarantine facilities and treatment centres. This included the capacity building of frontline workers.
In total, 2,173 Provincial COVID-19 Committee and Quarantine Centers officials received trainings
on how to protect people in quarantine.154 Programme adaptation in response to COVID-19 enabled
social workers of the DoSVY and 3PC partners to provide emergency family support packages to
children affected by COVID-19.
Also, as reported by UNICEF: “Adapting to the reality of COVID-19 containment measures, UNICEF
worked with MoWA to transform lessons on positive parenting and child online protection into a
video learning E-Course, consisting of seven lessons and two videos to be broadcast on social media
and converted into DVDs for use by community-based facilitators.”155 As a member of the IOM-led
UN Migration Network in Cambodia, UNICEF engaged in the Global Compact of Migration review
process, which involved working with other UN agencies and government counterparts to address
the protection of children affected by migration, with a particular focus on returning migrants from
Thailand during COVID-19.
UNICEF’s support in providing emergency packages for vulnerable families affected by COVID-19
was a welcome initiative that was clearly valued by stakeholders. Stakeholders particularly noted that
the flexibility within UNICEF’s financial support enabled them to respond effectively to the changed needs
of families during COVID-19. In addition, UNICEF’s technical support to government and NGO service
providers in changing to remote working modalities during COVID-19 was also a crucial intervention.
This included channelling more referrals through hotlines, the provision of online training (though noting that
online modalities were not found to be particularly effective for supporting case management practices and
the operationalisation of Primero). For example:
154 UNICEF Cambodia, ‘RAM Report: Outcome: 0660/ A0/06/883 CHILD PROTECTION, 2021, p. 90.
155 UNICEF Cambodia, ‘RAM Report: Outcome: 0660/ A0/06/883 CHILD PROTECTION, 2021, p. 114.
UNICEF Cambodia Child Protection Programme 2019 -2023: Outcome Evaluation 123
“ “When COVID came, parents lost their jobs, children didn’t want to go into
lockdown, so we diverted funding into an emergency package providing labour
support and food support. We changed the wat we do work, like virtual trainings
and meetings.” 156
“
“They [UNICEF] responded very quick on the COVID situation, on emergency
support. When something happens like that, UNICEF provides a budget to NGOs
which can identify families affected by COVID and can provide emergency support
like rice support, support for health etc…Also, UNICEF had a quick response to
case management during COVID – to the local authority, to NGOs. Everything
changed to working remotely, providing training online.” 157
“ “In Siem Reap, it was very challenging for 2021, because there was the long
lock down and we are 80% dependent on tourists. Everything was gone, it was
difficult to survive, even for me. All businesses closed (95% of them). Luckily,
we got top up funds and also the flexibility that we can go one by one and online
flexibility for online training and online formats etc. They were very helpful during
that time…they were not only focused on NGOs, but also focused on supporting
at national and sub-national level to implement the new development guidelines,
this kind of thing.” 158
“
“We had a flexible budget [during COVID] – we could go online, ensure key
information still reached the children and youth in different provinces. We were
flexible on some activities – we could change activities based on the real situation
in Cambodia. They were flexible on engagement of partners to connect to regional
platforms and to give youth and AYRG members capacity building.” 159
“ “During COVID, thanks to UNICEF being flexible, especially with regard to
emergency support, the response was quick and fast and was able to provide
quickly the support. All staff were working from home. We had online meetings,
trainings. We provide [anti] VAC training to local authority. We had group chats
with them and send a link so they can join. Also, we provide training to the family
also online. We contact and chat to them on how to use it. Some families we
interviewed by phone, for 15 or 20 minutes, or sometimes 2 hours I see our social
workers on the phone to them, educating them. We provide food by working with
the local authority during lockdown.” 160
156 KII with Child Protection Officer, Siem Reap Field Office, UNICEF Cambodia, Siem Reap, 24 October 2022.
157 KII with Technical Director, Children’s Future International (Battambang) (online), 10 November 2022.
158 KII with Director of Kaliyan Mith, Siem Reap, 26 October 2022.
159 KII with Director, CRC Cambodia, 10 November 2022.
160 KII with Technical Director, Children’s Future International (Battambang) (online), 10 November 2022.
124 UNICEF Cambodia Child Protection Programme 2019 -2023: Outcome Evaluation
It is recommended that the next CP Programme consider how to harness the
new modalities that were developed during COVID-19, including for example,
online refreshers to support more in-depth face to face training, providing
further support to hotlines etc.
© UNICEF Cambodia/2022/Bunsak But
UNICEF Cambodia Child Protection Programme 2019 -2023: Outcome Evaluation 125
Impact
Summary of findings on impact
1
The CP Programme has had a positive impact on increasing access to services for children
exposed to violence and to reintegration services for children in RCIs; increasing access
to diversion for children in conflict with the law; increased institutionalisation of child
protection services at the sub-national level through the development of child protection
plans; and the reported reduced use of physical violence among parents who underwent
positive parenting training.
2
It was not possible to examine the impact of the Programme on rates of violence, abuse,
neglect or exploitation of children, due to limited available data.
3
There was found to be a lack of quality / qualitative impact indicators in the CP Programme’s
results framework, which limits the extent to which the Programme can demonstrate its
contribution to the strengthening of the child protection system.
Reported impacts of the CP Programme
This section examines the impact of the CP Programme, according to indicators from the
Programme’s results framework (Annex 2). According to the Programme’s results indicators (those
that were able to be measured). It should be noted that the overarching impact indicators relating
to reduction in experiences of violence, abuse, neglect and exploitation of children were not
able to be measured, due to limited availability of data. The CVACS (2014) and the CDHS data on
physical violence (2021/22) did not contain sufficiently comparable questions to enable meaningful
comparison, and the full results of the 2021/22 CDHS data are not available (therefore, it was not
possible to report on impacts relating to experiences of sexual violence and child marriage against
findings in the 2017 CDHS).
A number of other Programme indicators were unable to be included in this section, due to a lack of
data that could be used to measure results.
126 UNICEF Cambodia Child Protection Programme 2019 -2023: Outcome Evaluation
Impact indicator 1: Number of girls and boys who have experienced violence
reached by health, social work or justice/law enforcement services (baseline:
24,000; target: 70,000).
Based on UNICEF’s programme monitoring data, it appears that access to systems and services
for children exposed to violence has increased substantially. The number of girls and boys who have
experienced violence and reached by health, social work or justice/law enforcement services has increased
from a baseline of 24,000 in 2019 to 69,401 (48 per cent girls) by December 2022.161 These services are
primarily delivered through district level paraprofessional social workers and NGOs, and in particular, the 3PC
network.162
Impact indicator 2: Percentage of girls and boys in residential care with a case
plan, reviewed every three months, with the aim of supporting permanent family
placement of the children (baseline 0%, target 100%).
Access to reintegration and care planning for children residing in RCIs also increased during the
Programme period. The percentage of girls and boys in residential care with a case plan, regularly reviewed,
with the aim of supporting permanent family placement of the children increased from 0 per cent in 2018 to
100 per cent in December 2022.163 With a substantial reduction in the number of residential care institutions
and the number of children in them, the current UNICEF programme made the strategic shift to focus on
quality of care in the current programme. This shift was warranted given that the previous programme had
demonstrated it was possible to move the system from a focus on institutional care to community-based
care. For example, in 2016, there were approximately 16,500 children were living in 406 residential care
institutions.164 In 2021, MoSVY reported that the number of children in residential care institutions had been
reduced by 59 per cent while the overall number of actual institutions had been reduced by 43 per cent.165
Impact indicator 3: Proportion of districts, Kahn and Krong that have local protocols
in place for the protection of children from violence, abuse and neglect.
As an indication of the Program’s impact in institutionalising the child protection system at the sub-
national level, UNICEF reports that the proportion of districts, Kahn and Krong that implement local protocols
for the protection of children from violence, abuse and neglect increased from a baseline of 0 in 2018 to 100
per cent in December 2022.166
161 UNICEF Cambodia, , ‘RAM Report: Outcome: 0660/ A0/06/800 CHILD PROTECTION, 2022, p. 92.
162 UNICEF Cambodia: 2022 UNICEF Mid-year Assessment Presentation Section: Child Protection, Cambodia Country Programme 2019-2023, slide 5.
163 UNICEF Cambodia and Division of Data, Research and Policy, A Statistical Profile of Child Protection in Cambodia, 2018, p. 43
164 UNICEF Cambodia and Division of Data, Research and Policy, A Statistical Profile of Child Protection in Cambodia, 2018, p. 43
165 Country Programme Full Approved Report: Cambodia Country Programme (2019-2023). Outcome 0660/AO/06/883 CHILD PROTECTION, Reporting Year: 2021, p. 98
166 UNICEF Cambodia, , ‘RAM Report: Outcome: 0660/ A0/06/800 CHILD PROTECTION, 2022, p. 92.
UNICEF Cambodia Child Protection Programme 2019 -2023: Outcome Evaluation 127
Impact indicator 4: Percentage of girls and boys in conflict with the law who
are subject to a diversion order or alternative measure as opposed to a custodial
sentence (baseline 0%, target 30%).
Use of diversion has increased for children in conflict with the law and appears to be on track to reach
the target 30 per cent by the end of 2023. The percentage of girls and boys in conflict with the law who
are subject to a diversion order or alternative measure as opposed to a custodial sentence increased from a
baseline of 0 in 2018 to 21 per cent in December 2021 (though it dropped to 20 per cent in 2022).167 Diversionary
measures were being implemented in five provinces by June 2022.168 This is a significant development given
that in 2017 there were 907 children in detention,169 but by October 2021, the number had risen to 1,420.170 In
contrast, between 2010 and 2014, there was a 56 per cent decrease in the number of children in detention. 171
Impact indicator 5: Percentage of men and women who think that physical
punishment is necessary to raise/educate children (baseline 26%, target 20%).
According to two recent studies, the parenting programme appears to have had a positive impact on
beliefs and practices and contributed to a reported reduction in the use of physical violence among
programme beneficiaries. An impact evaluation of parenting programmes in Cambodia172 found positive
results achieved in a programme designed to prevent violence against children through improving positive
parenting during COVID-19. The evaluation found that 59 per cent of participants reported using less physical
abuse while 54 per cent reported using less emotional abuse. Overall, 90 per cent of participants reported
more parent engagement and play; 82 reported being more confidence in having positive relationships with
children; 89 per cent reported more confidence in protecting children from sexual abuse; while 73 per cent
reported have increased capacity to cope with parenting stress. One parent quoted in the study said that as a
result of the parenting programme: “I have spent time with the children playing with them, engaging with fun
activities such as drawing, doing physical exercise, watch TV and share with them the COVID-19 messages.”
These results are based on 125 retrospective surveys conducted by the University of Oxford and Parenting for
Lifelong Health.
167 UNICEF Cambodia, ‘RAM Report: Outcome: 0660/ A0/06/883 CHILD PROTECTION, 2021, p. 93; UNICEF Cambodia, , ‘RAM Report: Outcome: 0660/
A0/06/800 CHILD PROTECTION, 2022, p. 92.
168 UNICEF Cambodia: 2022 UNICEF Mid-year Assessment Presentation Section: Child Protection, Cambodia Country Programme 2019-2023, slide 4.
169 UNICEF Cambodia and Division of Data, Research and Policy, A Statistical Profile of Child Protection in Cambodia, 2018, p. 29.
170 Data provided by UNICEF Cambodia: Number of Children in Detention as of 10 October 2021 (Annex 1.4).
171 UNICEF Cambodia and Division of Data, Research and Policy, A Statistical Profile of Child Protection in Cambodia, 2018, p. 29.
172 UNICEF Cambodia, COVID-19 Parenting Impact Evaluation: preventing violence against children through improving positive parenting in the time of
COVID-19, (undated), p. 1.
128 UNICEF Cambodia Child Protection Programme 2019 -2023: Outcome Evaluation
A 2020 UNICEF supported study173 sought to determine the progress of the Positive Parenting Programme
being implemented by Improving Cambodia’s Society through Skillful Parenting (ICS-SP), and whether it had
reached the intended results for children whose parents had participated in it. A key finding of study was
that participating parents demonstrated increased knowledge of positive parenting techniques, including
positive discipline and family communication. Further that parents were able to provide increased protection
of their children from harm: “In general, parents displayed increased knowledge of positive parenting
techniques, including positive discipline, family communication, providing children with warmth and care,
stress management and child protection.”174 The study reported that effective parent-child communication was
perceived as an important way to exchange and share information, solve problems, and for children to express
their emotional distress. Further, parents understood praise and rewards to be acceptable forms of positive
discipline, and a means for positively reinforcing children’s obedience and good behaviour.
Unfortunately, the CP Programme results framework (Annex 2) does not include sufficient impact
indicators that relate to quality – e.g. indicators of quality service delivery; quality of case management
outcomes for children and families; content / comprehensiveness of laws, policies and plans; content / quality
and outcomes of diversion measures etc. This limits the extent to which the Programme can demonstrate its
contribution to the strengthening of the child protection system.
It is recommended that the next CP Programme consider developing qualitative
impact indicators to be incorporated into the results framework. The next CP
Programme should also consider the use of intermediary results indicators,
particularly for social behaviour change components of the Programme (which
typically take more time to demonstrate impact).
© UNICEF Cambodia/2018/Chansereypich Seng
173 Improving Cambodia’s Society through Skillful Parenting (ICS-SP), Positive Parenting Programme: The Impacts on Behavioural Change Among Parents or
Caregivers, 2020.
174 Improving Cambodia’s Society through Skillful Parenting (ICS-SP), Positive Parenting Programme: The Impacts on Behavioural Change Among Parents or
Caregivers, 2020, p. 7.
UNICEF Cambodia Child Protection Programme 2019 -2023: Outcome Evaluation 129
Efficiency
Key research question: To what extent and how has UNICEF mobilized
and used its resources (human, technical and financial) and improved
coordination to achieve its planned results for Child Protection?
Summary of findings on efficiency
1
The CP Programming approach was found to be efficient in the achievement of the desired
results in terms of resource utilization and timely delivery. This finding is based on the
range of results documented by this evaluation and the programme’s relatively modest
financial base.
2
Based on the overall results achieved, the CP Programme staff were found to be highly
competent and efficient in terms of their technical capacity to effect positive change for
children and adolescents vulnerable to harm. However, there may be insufficient human
resources to support the full implementation of these changes.
3
Cambodia’s child protection sector has a high-level understanding of the child protection
situation, the drivers for children’s protection violations and required solutions to overcome
these violations. However, a critical gap is the understaffing of the sector and a lack of
access to systemised and competency-based learning.
4
The RGC and UNICEF have invested in generating data, evidence and knowledge to better
understand the child protection programme environment as well as to improve the quality
and reach of critical protection interventions. A critical inefficiency appears to be the
limited utilisation of the findings, recommendations and lessons learned of the knowledge
generated.
130 UNICEF Cambodia Child Protection Programme 2019 -2023: Outcome Evaluation
Cost-effectiveness and adequacy of UNICEF resources
(human, technical, financial)
A key finding is that although the Child Protection Programme has efficiently mobilised
and used its resources (financial, human, technical) to achieve its planned results for child
protection, as demonstrated by the range of results achieved, resource gaps remain.
Financial resource sufficiency
The initial projected budget for the current five-year programme was US$ 22.8 million dollars,
comprised of US$ 3.6 million dollars in regular resources and US$ 19.2 million dollars in ‘other
resources.’175 The per year average in ‘other resources’ is US$ 3.84 million dollars. This is an increase
of US$ 840,000 (28 per cent) per year compared to the two previous country programme cycles.
However, this may be attributed to the COVID-19 response. It is likely that emergency resources will
reduce, following the end of COVID-19 related restrictions and lockdowns.
Table 14: Summary budget table for child protection for three programme cycles
Year Regular Other Other Resources Total
Resources Resources Annual Average
2019 - 2023 $3,600,000 $19,200,000 $3,840,000 $22,800
2016 - 2018 $2,800,000 $9,000,000 $3,000,000 $11,800
2011 - 2015 $3,500,000 $15,000,000 $3,000,000 $18,500
Given the ambitious scope of the current programme, which is warranted, it is not clear that this increase is
sufficient to deliver the programme outcomes. While US$ 19.2 million dollars in other resources is a significant
investment of resources over five years, it is less significant when compared to the US$ 53.14 million dollars,
which is the ‘other resources’ budget for the education programme. Output three is designed to reduce
violence against children in households, in schools and in the community, by supporting the government
to take to scale three child protection programmes: positive parenting; positive discipline; and Cambodia
PROTECT. However, the desk review did not sight any detailed costings of the three programmes, or any
operational plans for achieving scale, or for defining scale. Such a costing is needed along with a strategy
for mobilising the required resources, which is likely to be more than the current budget could cover and
more akin to the level of resources needed in other sectors such as the education sector.
175 United Nations, Economic and Social Council, United Nations Children’s Fund Executive Board, Second regular session 2018, Country Programme
Document, Cambodia, 12–14 September 2018, p. 14.
UNICEF Cambodia Child Protection Programme 2019 -2023: Outcome Evaluation 131
It is recommended that UNICEF develop a full costed operational plan for
taking these programmes to scale, including a plan for phasing out UNICEF
funding and ensuring full RCG ownership of the programmes.
Notably, the CP Programme is promoting a more cost-effective way of achieving the same child protection
results. Specifically, it is advocating for the government to increase its budget investments in child protection,
particularly for the implementation of the three programmes proposed for scaling. This advocacy should lead to
greater efficiencies in national child protection programming as the cost of this effort shifts from development
partners to government.
UNICEF’s focus on scale is a highly efficient approach. In its early phase, it involves the development of a
model and then the testing of the model in a number of diverse settings. As one donor noted:
“
“This approach of having models that are piloted – e.g. the clinical handbook and
pagoda programme – they were piloted and then extended. UNICEF Cambodia
tends to do this. I think that is efficient and high value for money. Rather than
focusing broadly across a province or country, testing and extending is more
efficient and encourages donor support. If successful and shown to be successful,
donors will get on board.” 176
Human resource sufficiency
Based on the overall results achieved, the CP Programme staff were found to be highly competent
and efficient in terms of their technical capacity to effect positive change for vulnerable
children and families. One donor that supports projects in a number of UNICEF country offices
in the region noted: “In Cambodia, there is high capacity, both in terms of technical capacity and
human resources.”177 However, there may be insufficient human resource capacity within the child
protection team (in terms of numbers and skill sets) to support the full implementation of these
changes. As noted above, scaling of key programmes is a worthy ambition but specific competencies
are required in operational planning to support scaling of these programmes as well as to support the
implementation of new legislation and policy and institutionalising the interventions – for example,
expertise in budgeting and public finance management. The desk review did not see any plans for
how scale would be achieved.
As noted above, it is recommended that the next CP Programme focus heavily on operationalisation
of the CP Law and SOPs, and that it addresses remaining gaps within the system for example, in
terms of supporting a focus on mental health services for children and families, the incorporation
of the needs of children with disabilities, the absence of operational budgets for child protection
service delivery and so on. Consideration should be given to addressing any capacity gaps
within the child protection team in terms of these technical areas of focus.
176 Individual stakeholder interview with a donor agency, 25 November 2022.
177 Individual stakeholder interview with a donor agency, 25 November 2022.
132 UNICEF Cambodia Child Protection Programme 2019 -2023: Outcome Evaluation
It is recommended that a gap analysis be carried out between the human
resources needs of the new CP Programme and the existing resources within
the child protection team. A plan for addressing any capacity gaps within the
team (e.g. through additional training or recruitment) should be developed.
Technical sufficiency
UNICEF and the RGC have invested in generating data, evidence and knowledge to better understand
the child protection programme environment as well as to improve the quality and reach of critical
protection interventions. A critical inefficiency appears to be the limited utilisation of the
findings, recommendations and lessons learned.
Figure 9: The central challenge for the UNICEF Cambodia Child Protection Programme
UNICEF CP is very efficient in generating new data,
Investments in generating
evidence, knowledge and lessons learned about the child
new data, knowedge and
protetion situation and about how to improve the quality
information and lessons
and reach of programming and other interventions.
learned are potentially
wasted.
UNICEF CP is less effecient in demonstratiing how this
new knowedge is being applied.
It is important to note that there are several examples of where the Child Protection Programme has
applied the findings of previous studies and evaluations. For example, the lack of a comprehensive case
management system owned and implemented by RGC was identified as a critical gap by the 2018 UNICEF
Child Protection Formative Evaluation. In response to that finding, UNICEF has supported the RGC to adapt
Primero and use it as the national case management system. Primero was launched in July 2020 178 and is
being rolled out nationwide, as noted above. Another positive example is A Statistical Profile of Child Protection
in Cambodia, 179 published by UNICEF Cambodia and the UNICEF Division of Data, Research and Policy, New
York. This study was used to strengthen child protection data management systems in Cambodia.180
178 UNICEF, Primero – Digital Case Management System for Social Workers: Cambodia Experience, April 2022, slide 3.
179 UNICEF Cambodia and Division of Data, Research and Policy, A Statistical Profile of Child Protection in Cambodia, 2018.
180 UNICEF Cambodia and Division of Data, Research and Policy, A Statistical Profile of Child Protection in Cambodia, 2018.
UNICEF Cambodia Child Protection Programme 2019 -2023: Outcome Evaluation 133
Despite these positive examples, the evaluation team could not identify any systems or processes being
used to ensure that knowledge generated was systematically applied in practice. For example, UNICEF
has invested in generating knowledge about good practices in alternative care. A 2019 study181 documented
good practices and lessons learned from programmes that support family preservation and the prevention of
family separation. The evaluation did not find any documentation explaining how the recommendations of the
study were being implemented. Another study found that knowledge and practices about the harmful effects
of residential care appeared to be poorer in Siem Reap compared to other surveyed provinces.182 The same
study made several recommendations to strengthen positive community child rearing practices:
“
“UNICEF Cambodia and other organizations are recommended to explore barriers
to implementing practices to prevent VAC and unnecessary family separation.
For example, many respondents reported knowing the importance of positive
parenting skills, but only 40% practiced them. Understanding reasons for the
discrepancy between knowledge and practices could help to address these
issues more effectively.” 183
Again, no evidence was sighted indicating how this knowledge, including the recommendations, were being
applied.
Another study on parenting184 sought to determine the progress of the Positive Parenting Programme being
implemented by Improving Cambodia’s Society through Skillful Parenting (ICS-SP), and whether it had
reached the intended results for children whose parents had participated in it. A key finding of study was that
participating parents demonstrated increased knowledge of positive parenting techniques, including positive
discipline and family communication. The study recommended that there was a need to better design parenting
interventions based on a better understanding of children’s social and emotional/psychological development
and the different need of parents and the different needs of children at various developmental stages. The
evaluation team was unable to locate any evidence that this recommendation had been considered.
Globally, UNICEF has a process and template for ensuring that the main findings and recommendations from
evaluations are considered by the country office management team and monitored.
It is recommended that UNICEF Cambodia establish an internal process for
ensuring that the main findings, lessons learned recommendations from
studies are considered and applied.
183 Angkor Research and Consulting Ltd, Baseline Survey for PROTECT: A Communication Strategy to End Violence against Children and Unnecessary
Family Separation in Cambodia (Cambodia PROTECT), September 2019, p. 29.
184 Improving Cambodia’s Society through Skillful Parenting (ICS-SP), Positive Parenting Programme: The Impacts on Behavioural Change Among Parents or
Caregivers, 2020.
134 UNICEF Cambodia Child Protection Programme 2019 -2023: Outcome Evaluation
Effectiveness in leveraging resources and partnerships
Capacity building of partners is a core strategy of the Child Protection Programme. The evaluation
found that the CP Programme works in a strategic and collaboratively way with other child
protection development actors and its strategies and interventions have been informed by,
and is consistent with, the broad direction of the sector (see section 8.2). Further, the evaluation
found that while the CP Programme has complemented or added value to the efforts of other
development partners in several ways, there is room for improvement.
Two case management systems
UNICEF has supported the RGC to adapt Primero, as a national case management system for use by
government social workers. There is an another case management system, OSCAR, for use by NGOs,
led by Family Care First/REACT network of Save the Children. Although Primero is interoperable
with OSCaR, stakeholders expressed confusion about the two case management systems and
their functions. Compounding the situation, Primero also serves a dual function, providing national
statistics on child protection services to the Child Protection Information Management System for
policy makers and implementers. Stakeholders expressed concern that Primero was primarily a
data collection system rather than a case management system.
One programme area where a duplication of effort was highly probable but avoided was in
relation to the health system response to violence against women (VAW) and violence against
children (VAC). UNFPA is the lead UN agency for supporting the health system to implement the
clinical guidelines for VAW whereas UNICEF is the lead UN agency for supporting the health system
to implement the clinical guidelines for VAC. As one partner noted:
“
“… there is a different clinical handbook for VAW and handbook for VAC. We
continued to roll out those protocols we developed under the National Maternal
Child Health Centre. So we roll out the manual - we are UNFPA so we develop the
strategy to roll out the manual on health sector response. We try to complement
with UNICEF – UNICEF handle the response to children cases part.” 185
185 Individual stakeholder interview with a UN agency, 12 December 2022.
UNICEF Cambodia Child Protection Programme 2019 -2023: Outcome Evaluation 135
Several stakeholders raised concerns about UNICEF’s new engagement strategy at the sub-national level,
which includes supporting Provincial Administrations to develop child protection plans. While stakeholders
valued UNICEF’s work at the national level and in particular in its strong advocacy for MoSVY to be more
accountable for child protection, they expect a more collaborative approach to be adopted in programming at
the sub-national level:
“
“UNICEF works directly with government stakeholders so it is very useful
already. If UNICEF wants to work directly with local authorities and direct
delivery and implementation, it would be good if UNICEF does an assessment
of each organisation and sees our strategy and especially local NGOs working on
prevention and child abuse response.” 186
Collaboration across the UN system
Stakeholders reported that the CP Programme promoted a collaborative approach to its work
with partners. However, it appears that the concept of child protection systems building is
not well understood within UN agencies, which could be a barrier to efficient collaboration.
One stakeholder from a UN agency, while speaking highly of UNICEF’s approach to partnerships,
questioned the need for UNICEF to support the development of a stand-alone law on child protection
rather than supporting child protection to be built into an existing law on domestic violence: “…it
is important to have a law on Child Protection but maybe it would be better to include it the law on
domestic violence … and you just capture the section on the child. Better than to have different law,
different ministry responsible, etc.” 187
What this reflects is a broader challenge for UNICEF, not only in Cambodia but globally, in which
other UN agencies often do not see child protection as a system response or as a development
intervention. This stakeholder clearly understood the gender-based violence dimension of child
protection but not the broader meaning of child protection. Greater efficiencies would be gained
in collaboration across UN agencies if there was an agreed understanding of child protection as a
systems response to addressing violence, abuse, exploitation and neglect of children.
186 Individual stakeholder interview with an NGO, 2 November 2022.
187 Individual stakeholder interview with a UN agency, 12 December 2022.
136 UNICEF Cambodia Child Protection Programme 2019 -2023: Outcome Evaluation
Programme synergies within UNICEF
The UNICEF Cambodia Country Office was one of the first offices in the region to mainstream
violence against children into other UNICEF programmes. For example, the Child Protection
Programme collaborates with the health section in the implementation of the clinical handbook for
health practitioners on violence against children and the prevention of child marriage and teenage
pregnancies. It collaborates with the education section to scale up the positive discipline programme
and to rollout the child protection policy in schools. It collaborates with the social policy section
on strengthening the social services workforce at the sub-national levels. These linkages are
important in ensuring a multi-sector approach to child protection, engaging the necessary key
government partners and other stakeholders and ensuring mutually reinforcing and efficient
results. However, this initial burst of innovation and success during the previous country programme
appears to have waned and no new approaches were identified by the evaluation.
As noted above, one challenge in ensuring efficiency through joined up programming is that at
times, programmes that are complementary are not being implemented in the same locations
(e.g. the positive discipline and positive parenting programmes).
© UNICEF Cambodia/2022/Bunsak But
UNICEF Cambodia Child Protection Programme 2019 -2023: Outcome Evaluation 137
Sustainability
Key research question: To what extent are the benefits and achievements
of the UNICEF-supported programme likely to continue after the programme
has ended through national ownership, changes at family and community
level, and scalability and use of partnerships for sustainability?
Summary of findings on sustainability
1
The CP Programme has taken some important steps toward increasing government
ownership over the child protection system; however, more work needs to be done,
particularly at the sub-national level, to ensure that essential child protection functions are
owned and implemented by government duty bearers.
2
At the national level, the CP Programme has supported the institutionalisation of the system
legal and operational framework through the development of the Child Protection Law and
SOPs, through initiatives aimed at embedding a social welfare workforce for child protection
and through the incorporation of initiatives into government policies and action plans.
3
At the sub-national level, some positive steps have been taken to ensure government
ownership over child protection services, for example, through the designation, training
and coaching of social welfare staff; however, critical capacity gaps in the system have
meant that NGOs still carry out the bulk of child protection case work in practice.
©UNICEF Cambodia/2018/Todd Brown
138 UNICEF Cambodia Child Protection Programme 2019 -2023: Outcome Evaluation
Extent that the CP Programme has achieved government
buy-in, ownership and accountability at the national level
At the national level, the CP Programme has ensured government buy-in through maintaining
productive partnerships with key stakeholders, evidence generation and sustained advocacy
efforts. This has allowed it to institutionalise and scale some key components of the CP Programme.
For instance, the development of the Business Plan on Investing in Social Service Workforce Cambodia
(2021) and the adoption of the Strategic Plan on Social Service Workforce (2022-2031) resulted in the
institutionalisation of a child protection / social services workforce and designation of social services
staff at Provincial and District levels. This is an essential step toward ensuring that government
buy-in and ownership of the operational framework for child protection. The development of the
Child Protection Law and SOPs is a key factor in ensuring that UNICEF’s work on child protection
systems strengthening will be sustained. These instruments establish a comprehensive framework
and process for child protection; one that is inherently sustainable as laws place legal mandates on
key government duty bearers. However, in order to achieve outcomes for children under the Law
and SOPs, it is important that UNICEF’s advocacy continues after the enactment of legislation, in
particular, to support operationalisation and implementation of the laws.
According to a representative from MOWA, the positive parenting programme has been incorporated into the
Plan of Action and budget of MOWA. This is used to train focal points of the Department of Women’s Affairs at
the district and municipal levels.188 With technical support from UNICEF, MOWA supported the incorporation
of positive parenting into the state plans of action in order to ensure that a budget was allocated to positive
parenting programmes. This is a good result derived from sustained advocacy by UNICEF. The MOWA appears
to be very supportive of the Positive Parenting Programme and will reportedly give consideration to placing the
Programme into the NAPVAW in order to ensure it is institutionalised within the broader government strategy
on VAW. UNICEF should support this initiative – as noted above, placing the Positive Parenting Programme
within MOWA will help to ensure that it effectively integrates VAW and VAC prevention initiatives, which is
relevant to the context.
Another example is capacity building on data collection and reporting. The CP Progrmamme has
worked to ensure that the RGC is able to collect routine data on child protection through initiatives aimed at
institutionalising data collection into existing processes, such as through the incorporation of a module on
physical violence and discipline into the CDHS. Additionally, the CPMIS generates data to support planning
and policy implementation. It provides data on key child protection indicators and creates a holistic, systematic
process, replacing the fragmented and partial data collection practices that existed prior to this. The government
has reportedly taken ownership of this system. For instance, according to a key stakeholder from UNICEF:
“Before, we were going to ask them for data, but now they are providing it to the public. They are now
looking at publishing the data. they are starting to work to improve accountability through data sharing. When
they share data, they own it and recognise it as their responsibility. Rather than UNICEF leading it, it is the
government doing it.” 189
188 KII with two representatives of Ministry of Women’s Affairs (online), 12 December 2022.
189 KII with Child Protection Officer, Phnom Penh, 24 October 2022.
UNICEF Cambodia Child Protection Programme 2019 -2023: Outcome Evaluation 139
Important steps were taken to increase government ownership of the Primero case management system,
including building knowledge of the system among the Child Protection Department in MoSVY and appointing
two system administrators at MoSVY; supporting MoSVY to take on role of communicating with MoTP,
to advocate for them to host the system; and ensuring that the system is able to be run on minimal cost
(essentially through the use of open source software). However, the pathway to full government ownership
of the Primero is not clear, and challenges remain, including the limited technical capacity within
government institutions:
“
“The big question on Primero is sustainability. It comes with a cost – maintenance
costs – it relies on a capacity I don’t yet see in the country…it’s a good system,
but whether it will be the system that the government take over fully is another
story…it’s not owned by the government. Any glitch, upgrade, anything – it will
always go through UNICEF unless we find a way for the system to be managed
at country level.” 190
UNICEF stores the Primero data and the data is not owned by or stored on a Government server; however, the
digitisation of services in the RGC is quite new: there is a lack of IT professionals in Government Ministries and
the Government is quite new to digital data management (it purchased its first server this year). In addition,
while there is a basic level of commitment from national government, this has not yet filtered down to the
sub-national level. As noted above, this is in large part due to the very limited capacity at the provincial and
district levels to fully operationalise Primero:
“
“We have the full support at the national level in terms of developing the tools,
capacity building the workforce on how to use it etc. But when it comes to fully
owning the system and the tool, it is a challenge for them as they don’t have the
staff who have capacity to run the system. They still rely on us, on UNICEF, to
complement the technical gaps they have. They don’t have the capacity to provide
technical support when it comes to social work and case management.” 191
It is recommended that UNICEF support the RCG to develop a costed plan to
take full ownership of Primero. This should include inputs necessary to build
capacity at all levels of the system to enable it to be fully operationalised.
190 KII with member of Child Protection Team, UNICEF Cambodia, Phnom Penh, 19 October 2022.
191 KII with Child Protection Officer, UNICEF Cambodia, Phnom Penh, 28 October 2022.
140 UNICEF Cambodia Child Protection Programme 2019 -2023: Outcome Evaluation
In addition to Primero, it is unclear how other programme components will be government-owned and it appears
that limited planning has been undertaken to ensure that the RCG can ultimately take ownership and
scale all of the CP Programme components (e.g. coaching of social welfare staff, positive school discipline
initiatives).
It is recommended that UNICEF carry out a stakeholder mapping to determine
which programme component should sit with which Ministry, and then
develop a sustainability plan together with the key Ministry at national and
sub-national levels.
Extent that the CP Programme has achieved government
buy-in, ownership and accountability at the sub-national level
At the sub-national level, the CP Programme has not been as effective in facilitating
sustainability of its interventions. While some positive steps have been taken to ensure
government ownership over child protection services, for example, through the designation,
training and coaching of government social welfare staff, critical capacity gaps in the system have
meant that NGOs still carry out the bulk of child protection case work in practice. According to the
stakeholder survey, 10 out of 22 respondents felt that the CP Programme had only ‘somewhat’
(one) or ‘moderately’ (nine) contributed to ‘strengthened government ownership over the social
welfare workforce and case management processes.’ According to the qualitative research, limited
ownership at the sub-national level was expressed as a key gap. For example:
“
“There is a parallel NGO system that exists. NGO Social Workers have more
experience than government Social Workers…There are already many NGOs and
they have been in Cambodia many years and they do a good job. So this slows
it all down. There is no urgency [for the Government] to invest in social workers.
They also see NGOs as ‘this is their role.192
“
“At the sub-national level, they [UNICEF] tend to substitute what the government
is doing, rather than supporting it.” 193
192 KII with representative of UNICEF Australia National Commission (online), 25 November 2022.
193 KII with member of Child Protection Team, UNICEF Cambodia, Phnom Penh, 19 October 2022.
UNICEF Cambodia Child Protection Programme 2019 -2023: Outcome Evaluation 141
It was also noted that, without UNICEF funding, sub-national social welfare staff would not have a budget to
carry out case work: “What UNICEF has supported us are well aligned with our priorities and plan. However,
for us, we do not have sufficient budget to implement our plan or what we supposed to do. We can do it when
we have NGOs support to deliver our tasks.”194
Apart from some good initiatives (e.g. collaborative case work), it is unclear how the work of NGOs
is supporting the government in strengthening a sustainable child protection system. As noted above,
the working conditions for NGO social workers are often a lot better than for the government social services
workforce, and there tends to be a deferral to NGOs – to carry out even basic case management functions
which should be owned by government duty bearers.
It is recommended that UNICEF carry out a robust analysis looking into how to
attract and retain qualified social workers in the government system.
It is also recommended that the next CP Programme focus on supporting
the government, including through technical support on public finance
management, to operationalise the child protection system at the sub-national
level.
© UNICEF Cambodia/2022/Bunsak But
194 KII with representative of CCWC, Paoy Commune, Ratanakiri Province, 2 November 2022.
142 UNICEF Cambodia Child Protection Programme 2019 -2023: Outcome Evaluation
CONCLUSIONS
UNICEF Cambodia’s CP Programme 2019 – 2023 is a large, multi-component programme that is necessarily
ambitious in scope. It has made some significant contributions to the strengthening of Cambodia’s child
protection system, through a multi-tiered approach that has worked at national and sub-national levels to
strengthen legal and policy frameworks, operational frameworks and capacities (particularly capacities of the
social services workforce), along with addressing harmful norms, practices and beliefs that drive violence,
abuse, neglect and exploitation of children. However, critical gaps in the system remain, including the limited
capacity of the social services workforce and limited operational capacity at the sub-national level. This has, to
an extent, hindered the CP Programme’s ability to achieve positive results for children. The next CP Programme
should focus on addressing these bottlenecks and in (further) supporting the operationalisation of the system,
including the Child Protection Law and SOPs (when adopted). It should also consider how to increase and
support government ownership of essential child protection functions.
Relevance
The CP Programme was found to be highly relevant to Cambodia’s global development commitments
and, in utilising a strong systems building framework, was also found to be relevant to UNICEF’s
global frameworks and priorities. The three output areas of the Programme were found to respond
well to existing gaps and needs within the child protection system. The CP Programme’s multi-
tiered approach, involving interventions aimed at strengthening the system at both the national
and sub-national levels, responds well to the programming context and the engagement with new
stakeholders, in particular, the MOI, was found to be highly relevant to the new decentralised system
for social welfare / child protection service delivery. The CP Programme was found to have retained
its relevance in the changed context brought about by the COVID-19 pandemic.
While the Programme was found to be highly relevant to national Government policies, plans and
commitments, substantial capacity gaps at the sub-national level meant that some interventions
were not fully operationalised, indicating that more attention should have been given to the phasing
and complementarity of the Programme’s interventions at the sub-national level. With its focus on
addressing violence, abuse, neglect and exploitation of children, the Programme was found to be
highly relevant to the evidence base on the protection risks and needs of children in Cambodia;
however, there was limited systematic engagement of children in adolescents in the programme
design and review. While some measures were taken to integrate gender and equity into the
Programme design, these measures were found to be lacking, and there is a need to engage more
comprehensively with the gender dimensions of child protection issues and more effectively address
the protection needs of children with disabilities, in particular.
UNICEF Cambodia Child Protection Programme 2019 -2023: Outcome Evaluation 143
Coherence / connectedness
The CP Programme worked effectively in coordinating the different interventions of development
partners, including government and NGO partners through supporting the Child Protection Forum
at the national level. At the sub-national level, UNICEF ensured the effective coordination of child
protection service delivery primarily through the 3PC network. The development and maintenance of
respectful, open and enduring strategic partnerships was a key factor in UNICEF’s ability to achieve
outcomes under the Programme. However, it was found that work is needed to ensure more
effective coordination of interventions by different UN agencies, such as UN Women.
Effectiveness
The CP Programme was found to have been mostly effective in achieving results aimed at
strengthening the legal and operational environment for child protection (output 1), in particular
through the development of the Child Protection Law and Standard Operating Procedures and
establishment of a social welfare workforce. However, while the roll-out of Primero has contributed
to some positive outcomes including improving coordinated case management, organisation, data
security / privacy and information management, the operationalisation and use of Primero as a case
management system has been hampered by insufficient capacity at the sub-national levels.
The evaluation found that outcomes in relation to the strengthening of the social welfare workforce
and child protection service delivery (output area 2) were mainly positive, though critical challenges
remain which have reduced the effectiveness of interventions. Case management and service
delivery appears to be functioning to a reasonable standard in the ‘intervention’ research locations,
particularly in contrast to practices in the ‘comparator’ research locations, with increased government
ownership and improved service delivery through training, coaching and case collaboration
processes which pair government social services staff with NGO social workers to build capacity
in government case management systems. Service delivery was also improved through UNICEF’s
efforts in increasing coordination among different government and NGO service providers. However,
critical gaps remain in child protection service delivery at the sub-national level, including the limited
capacity and skills of the social services workforce, lack of operational budgets and limited services
in some areas (in particular mental health services).
Some positive outcomes were reported in terms of addressing harmful community beliefs and
practices (output area 3), particularly in relation to improved parenting practices and a reduction in
the use of violent discipline by parents. However, this evidence was largely anecdotal and there are
limited data to establish the outcomes or impacts in terms of attitudinal and behaviour change. The CP
Programme has included a number of other issues under output area 3, including on adolescent and
youth engagement, child marriage and online child protection. Stakeholders were clearly supportive
144 UNICEF Cambodia Child Protection Programme 2019 -2023: Outcome Evaluation
of these initiatives, and there is an evidence base to support the focus on these issues. However,
there is a need to link these initiatives to the systems strengthening framework, to avoid the
Programme becoming too ‘issue focused’ and fragmented.
The CP Programme adapted well to the COVID-19 context through support in providing emergency
packages for vulnerable families affected by COVID-19 and technical support to government and
NGO service providers in changing to remote working modalities during COVID-19.
Impact
The CP Programme has had a positive impact on increasing access to services for children
exposed to violence and to reintegration services for children in RCIs; increasing access to
diversion for children in conflict with the law; increased institutionalisation of child protection
services at the sub-national level through the development of child protection plans; and the
reported reduced use of physical violence among parents who underwent positive parenting
training. It was not possible to examine the impact of the Programme on rates of violence,
abuse, neglect or exploitation of children, due to limited available data. There was found to be a
lack of quality / qualitative impact indicators in the CP Programme’s results framework, which
limits the extent to which the Programme can demonstrate its contribution to the strengthening
of the child protection system.
Efficiency
The CP Programme approach was found to be efficient in the achievement of the desired results
in terms of resource utilisation and timely delivery. This finding is based on the range of results
documented by this evaluation and the programme’s relatively modest financial base. Based
on the overall results achieved, the CP Programme staff were found to be highly competent
and efficient in terms of their technical capacity to effect positive change for children and
adolescents vulnerable to harm. However, there may be insufficient human resources to support
the full implementation of these changes. Cambodia’s child protection sector has a high-level
understanding of the child protection situation, the drivers for children’s protection violations
and required solutions to overcome these violations. However, a critical gap is the understaffing
of the sector and a lack of access to systemised and competency-based learning. The RGC and
UNICEF have invested in generating data, evidence and knowledge to better understand the
child protection programme environment as well as to improve the quality and reach of critical
protection interventions. A critical inefficiency appears to be the limited utilisation of the findings,
recommendations and lessons learned of the knowledge generated.
UNICEF Cambodia Child Protection Programme 2019 -2023: Outcome Evaluation 145
Sustainability
The CP Programme has made taken some important steps toward increasing government ownership
over the child protection system; however, more work needs to be done, particularly at the sub-national
level, to ensure that essential child protection functions are owned and implemented by government
duty bearers. At the national level, the CP Programme has supported the institutionalisation of the
system legal and operational framework through the development of the Child Protection Law and
SOPs, through initiatives aimed at embedding a social welfare workforce for child protection and
through the incorporation of initiatives into government policies and action plans. At the sub-national
level, some positive steps have been taken to ensure government ownership over child protection
services, for example, through the designation, training and coaching of social welfare staff; however,
critical capacity gaps in the system have meant that NGOs still carry out the bulk of child protection
case work in practice.
© UNICEF Cambodia/2018/Antoine Raab
146 UNICEF Cambodia Child Protection Programme 2019 -2023: Outcome Evaluation
LESSONS
LEARNED
The evaluation of UNICEF’s Child Protection Programme 2019 – 2023 generated several broader lessons
learned which have relevance to child protection programming – particularly programming within the system
framework - in Cambodia and elsewhere.
1 In decentralised administrative systems, a multi-tiered approach to child protection
programming, which focuses on building / strengthening frameworks at the national
level while providing support at the local / service delivery level to operationalise
these frameworks is crucial. UNICEF Cambodia’s CP Programme aimed at strengthening
the child protection system at national and sub-national levels, with interventions targeting
national stakeholders, along with stakeholders at the provincial, district and commune
levels, which helped to support improved service delivery on the ground by addressing
gaps at the national level and sub-national levels. However, in multi-tiered programmes,
there is need to ensure strong vertical coordination between the national and sub-national
levels and link national level inputs with local outcomes.
2 It is important to ensure that inputs aimed at strengthening the child protection
system are properly phased. In particular, inputs should respond to existing capacities
and existing systems on the ground. One of the key findings of the evaluation was that
some of the CP Programme interventions were introduced at a time in which there was
insufficient capacity (in terms of the number and skills of the social services workforce)
to absorb the interventions. An example is the introduction of Primero which appears to
have been rolled out at a time in which there was insufficient capacity at the sub-national
(district and provincial) level to absorb the new system effectively. Insufficient numbers of
social welfare staff, inadequate case management skills and high staff turnover, including
the designation of very inexperienced staff as ‘social welfare workers,’ impeded the uptake
of the system and reduced the ability for the Programme to achieve results.
UNICEF Cambodia Child Protection Programme 2019 -2023: Outcome Evaluation 147
3 In contexts such as Cambodia, in which there are a large number of NGOs and
development partners working in the child protection space, initiatives to coordinate
the work of these organisations at national and sub-national levels can help create a
properly coordinated system. The UNICEF Cambodia CP Programme has ensured good
coordination among different stakeholders through the development and support of the
Partnership Programme for the Protection of Children (3PC). This enabled the different child
protection services to be coordinated around individual cases and helped to coordinate
different actors at the national level around a systems framework. However, care must be
taken to ensure that the child protection system is owned by government mandate holders
(utilising NGO service providers on a case by case basis).
4
The method of case collaboration – in which NGO social services workers coach
Government social workers by working together closely on individual child protection
cases - appears to have contributed to improved practices in case management. This
was particularly important in Cambodia as the Government social welfare workforce has
limited knowledge, skills and experience in case management.
© UNICEF Cambodia/2018/Todd Brown
148 UNICEF Cambodia Child Protection Programme 2019 -2023: Outcome Evaluation
RECOMMENDATIONS
Recommendations have been set out throughout the findings section of this report, and they are also presented
below.
On Programme structure and design
• It is recommended that UNICEF’s next CP Programme explicitly align to the new global Child
Protection Systems Strengthening articulated by UNICEF HQ in 2021, following a robust systems
diagnostic to ensure that the Programme focuses on the areas in which there are clear gaps in the
system. The global CPSS Framework provides an evidence-based and well-articulated structure
for UNICEF’s systems strengthening approach, along with diagnostic tools and monitoring
frameworks. These materials would provide very useful for planning the next CP Programme in
Cambodia and ensuring that it is embedded within a strong systems strengthening framework. In
order to ensure that funding is channelled into systems building initiatives, UNICEF could develop
communications materials for implementing partners and donors on how particular issues (e.g.
online exploitation and abuse) are connected to and best addressed within a broad systems
strengthening framework.
• It is recommended that the next CP Programme continue to use a multi-tiered approach that
is focused on both the national and sub-national levels in order to provide a comprehensive
systems building framework. When the Child Protection Law and Standard Operating Procedures
are adopted, the Programme should shift its focus to supporting national and sub-national duty
bearers to implement the Law and SOPs. Consideration should also be given to the role of
communes and village leaders and how UNICEF can support their role in the system, for example
through increased knowledge, skills and capacity in identifying child protection risks and referral
procedures.
• The Programme logic should articulate how the Programme will ensure vertical coordination
of child protection services and how national programme interventions link to sub-national
interventions.
• The next CP Programme design should also consider the phasing of interventions at the sub-
national level and in particular, how more general capacity building interventions can be more
effectively joined up with the Primero case management tool (one consideration should be that
capacity building on Primero should be embedded within broader case management training and
capacity building).
UNICEF Cambodia Child Protection Programme 2019 -2023: Outcome Evaluation 149
On measuring results
• It is recommended that the next CP Programme consider developing qualitative impact indicators
to be incorporated into the results framework. The next CP Programme should also consider the
use of intermediary results indicators, particularly for social behaviour change components of the
Programme (which typically take more time to demonstrate impact), and it should ensure that
equity indicators (gender, location / remoteness, disability and other equity considerations) are
comprehensively incorporated into the results framework.
On responsiveness to the needs of rights holders, including
girls and boys and children in vulnerable situations
• It is recommended that, in the next CP Programme, a mechanism such as a youth advisory
board, is developed to engage adolescents and youth in the design of the Programme both
routinely (e.g. through a quarterly forum) and at key point in the Programme’s life cycle (e.g. fit
for purpose reviews, monitoring and evaluation / assessments etc.). Adolescents and youth could
be recruited through the AYRG (as CRC Cambodia supports the AYRG in developing skills and
confidence in adolescent and youth participation). It is also important that UNICEF ensure that
the advisory board represents a diverse range of adolescent and youth voices from a range of
different provinces and that it reserves spaces on the advisory board for adolescents and youth
who are in vulnerable situations. UNICEF could consider more innovative ways of engaging with
members of the AYRG and beyond (e.g. through UReport communications). Consideration should
also be given to extending these youth engagements to cover the whole Country Programme.
• It is recommended that a thorough gender analysis be carried out to inform the development
of the next CP Programme to ensure that the gender dynamics of child protection issues are
more fully incorporated into the Programme. This should involve a consideration of the ways in
which violence against children and violence against women intersect and the ways that child
protection programming could incorporate VAW prevention and response initiatives (including
how processes like case management can be better aligned).195 UNICEF could ensure a
strengthened process is in place (management response, accountability framework) to ensure
that any recommendations from gender analyses or other relevant studies are incorporated into
the CP Programme. Efforts should be made to engage in collaborative work with UNFPA and UN
Women on the gender dimensions of the CP Programme.
195 This could be guided by recommendations in UNICEF EAPRO, UNFPA Asia and Pacific Regional Office and UN Women Asia and Pacific Regional Office,
Ending violence against women and children in Cambodia: Opportunities and challenges for collaborative and integrative approaches, 2020.
150 UNICEF Cambodia Child Protection Programme 2019 -2023: Outcome Evaluation
• It is recommended that the CP Programme explicitly integrate the needs of children with
disabilities into the next CP Programme, including through a specific sub-output / result that is
focused on improving services and services delivery for children with disabilities and capacity
building of government and NGO service providers in this area (e.g. under an overall output/s
on improving service delivery), both in terms of advocating for improved services for children
with disabilities at the national level and also through capacity building of service delivery at the
sub-national level. UNICEF Cambodia could also improve the way that disability is mainstreamed
effectively office-wide. This could include through integrating disability in routine office-wide
approval forms etc. to ensure that Programmes systematically consider the needs of children
with disabilities in decisions relating to partnerships, design of interventions and implementation
of specific initiatives. It should also consider development for staff on disability across sectors
to improve their understanding of disability and how it should be incorporated into programme
areas and outputs.
• It is recommended that UNICEF carry out an in-depth equity analysis to identify other groups
of children and parents / carers who may not fully benefit from the CP Programme (or its
components), based on e.g. geographical location, indigeneity, sexual orientation, gender identity,
displacement and so on, and integrate this knowledge into the next CP Programme. In particular,
it is recommended that the next CP Programme consider how it can apply in the context of
children who remain behind, and how particular programme interventions can be adapted. For
example, consideration should be given to the delivery of the positive parenting programme to
grandparents / other caregivers, rather than restricting this programme to parents (mothers).
On enhancing programme effectiveness
• It is recommended that intensive case management training and coaching be delivered to the
social services workforce, and this training / coaching should integrate or link up with training
on the Primero case management system. This is important to ensure that Primero is utilised
effectively as a case management tool, rather than purely an information management system.
Measures to ensure that the training is institutionalised should be continued. Consideration
should be given to the development of an online resource that includes follow up / refresher
training and resources.
• It is recommended that UNICEF’s next CP Programme focus on building capacity for
operationalisation of the child protection system, particularly at the provincial, district and
commune / village levels. This could involve supporting the operationalisation the SOPs, when
they are adopted. Consideration should be given to supporting MoSVY and MOI to carry out
a costing of the operationalisation of the CP system as a whole, and UNICEF should prioritise
supporting MoSVY, MOI and the sub-national administrations in developing and institutionalising
operational budgets for child protection.
UNICEF Cambodia Child Protection Programme 2019 -2023: Outcome Evaluation 151
• A stakeholder mapping could then be carried out to identify which government Ministry /
institution could support each part of the system. The mapping could include the different UN
agencies to ensure that programme outputs utilise and align work already being carried out by
other UN agencies to avoid duplication and inefficiencies.
• Consideration should be given to supporting MoSVY and MOI to attract and retain quality social
workers / social services staff. This could be informed by a study of graduates of the university
social work programme in Cambodia to determine their career pathways etc., and an analysis
of similar interventions that have been demonstrated to have been effective across similar
contexts. It could include subsidising or part-subsidising the wages of social workers from NGOs
to be placed within the DoSVY and the District Offices for Social Welfare to work more closely
alongside existing government staff and build their skills. There is a need for UNICEF to support
improved programming in the integration and delivery of mental health services within child
protection service delivery.
• It is recommended that a technical inputs from UNICEF’s social behaviour change specialist
should inform the behaviour change components of the next CP Programme.
• It is recommended that UNICEF consider how to join up programming between different teams,
in particular to ensure the same programming districts are selected for both positive parenting
and positive discipline programmes.
• It is recommended that the next CP Programme consider how to harness the new modalities
that were developed during COVID-19, including for example, online refreshers to support more
in-depth face to face training, providing further support to hotlines etc.
On increasing efficiency
• It is recommended that a gap analysis be carried out between the human resources needs of
the new CP Programme and the existing resources within the child protection team. A plan for
addressing any capacity gaps within the team (e.g. through additional training or recruitment)
should be developed.
• It is recommended that UNICEF Cambodia establish an internal process for ensuring that the
main findings, lessons learned recommendations from studies are considered and applied.
Alternatively, it is recommended that UNICEF build this process into the existing evaluation
management response processes.
152 UNICEF Cambodia Child Protection Programme 2019 -2023: Outcome Evaluation
On ensuring sustainability
• It is recommended that UNICEF develop a full costed operational plan for taking these programmes
to scale, including a plan for phasing out UNICEF funding and ensuring full RCG ownership of
the programmes, though this would need to be planned gradually over the cycle of the next CP
Programme (five years). As part of this, it is recommended that UNICEF support the RCG to
develop a costed plan to take full ownership of Primero. This should include inputs necessary to
build capacity at all levels of the system to enable it to be fully operationalised. Consideration
could be given to developing a long term strategy (15 year +) for full Government ownership of
child protection systems and services which contains concrete actions to be achieved in each CP
Programme cycle toward the outcome of full Government ownership.
• As part of the stakeholder mapping exercise (see above under ‘enhancing effectiveness’), it is
recommended that UNICEF determine which programme component should sit with which
Ministry, and then develop a sustainability plan together with the key Ministry at national and
sub-national levels.
© UNICEF Cambodia/2018/ Todd Brown
UNICEF Cambodia Child Protection Programme 2019 -2023: Outcome Evaluation 153
© UNICEF Cambodia/2018/Todd Brown
©UNICEF Cambodia/2018/Todd Brown
For further information, please contact:
Hadrien Bonnaud
(Chief of Communication)
E-mail: hbonnaud@unicef.org
Marianna Garofalo
(Chief Child Protection)
E-mail: mgarofalo@unicef.org