1
Final Evaluation Report
Evaluation of the Inclusive Education Programme Model UNICEF is implementing in Public Schools
RFP no. 2020-9157988
UNICEF Jordan Country Office
MENA Region
2022
Evaluation Team
Edvise ME
info@edvise-me.com
Submitted by Edvise ME
on 10th of May, 2022
TABLE OF CONTENTS
TABLE OF CONTENTS 2
TEXT BOXES 3
LIST OF TABLES 3
LIST OF GRAPHS 3
LIST OF FIGURES 4
ACRONYMS 5
SECTION 1: EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 6
SECTION 2: CONTEXT AND BACKGROUND 11
2.1 COUNTRY CONTEXT 11
2.2 OBJECT OF THE EVALUATION 13
SECTION 3: PURPOSE, OBJECTIVES AND SCOPE OF THE EVALUATION 15
3.1 PURPOSE 15
3.2 SCOPE OF THE EVALUATION 15
3.3 THEORY OF CHANGE (TOC) 17
SECTION 4: EVALUATION DESIGN AND METHODOLOGY 18
4.1 OVERVIEW 18
4.2 EVALUATION PROCESS 18
4.3 DETAILED METHODOLOGY 19
SECTION 5: EVALUATION FINDINGS 27
5.1 RELEVANCE 27
5.2 EFFECTIVENESS 35
5.3 COST EFFICIENCY & EFFECTIVENESS 48
5.4 IMPACT LONG-TERM 50
5.5 SUSTAINABILITY 51
5.6 COVERAGE 53
SECTION 6: EVALUATION CONCLUSIONS AND LESSON LEARNED 54
SECTION 7: RECOMMENDATIONS 55
SECTION 8: ANNEXES 58
8.1 LIST OF PEOPLE INTERVIEWED (KII) 58
8.2 SCHOOL VISIT SCHEDULE 59
8.3 OOSC FOCUS GROUP DISCUSSION SCHEDULE 60
8.4 DATA COLLECTION PROTOCOLS 61
8.5 TEAM COMPOSITION 68
8.6 LIST OF DOCUMENTS CONSULTED 70
8.7 ASSISTIVE DEVICES AVAILABLE 73
8.8 ACHIEVEMENT OF PROGRAMME OBJECTIVES 75
8.9 SHADOW TEACHER JOB DESCRIPTION 77
8.10 SURVEY RESULTS AND ANALYSIS 81
8.11 FGD PARTICIPANTS SIGNED CONSENT FORMS 81
8.12 FIELD WORK RECORDINGS 81
8.13 FIELD WORK NOTES 81
8.14 EVALUATION MATRIX 81
8.15 TERMS OF REFERENCE 81
8.16 DATA COLLECTION TOOLS 81
2
TEXT BOXES
Box 1: Evaluation Summary – Relevance 27
Box 2: Resource Room Definition 29
Box 3: Evaluation Summary – Effectiveness 35
Box 4: IEP Definition 46
Box 5: Shadow Teacher Definition 47
Box 6: Evaluation Summary – Cost Efficiency & Effectiveness 48
Box 7: Evaluation Summary – Impact Long – term 50
Box 8: Evaluation Summary – Sustainability 51
Box 9: Evaluation Summary – Coverage 53
LIST OF TABLES
9
Table 1: Critical and Strategic Recommendations
16
Table 2: Evaluation Criteria and Associated Questions
27
Table 3: Relevance - Evaluation Questions
31
Table 4: Areas of Alignment from NIES
32
Table 5: Areas of Divergence from NIES
35
Table 6: Effectiveness – Evaluation Questions
37
Table 7: Students with disabilities enrolment rates in Public Schools
Table 8: Students with disabilities retention rates in Intervention Schools 37
Table 9: Facilitating Factors for the IE Programme 44
Table 10: Cost Efficiency & Effectiveness - Evaluation Questions 48
Table 11: Impact Long - term - Evaluation Questions 50
Table 12: Sustainability - Evaluation Questions 51
Table 13: Coverage - Evaluation Questions
53
LIST OF GRAPHS
29
Graph 1: School accessibility according to Educators
30
Graph 2: Use of Assistive Technology Devices according to Educators
36
Graph 3: Effectiveness of the IE programme according to Educators
39
Graph 4: Should students with disabilities be included in school? According to Educators.
3 9
Graph 4.1: By Job Title
3
Graph 4.2: By School Type 39
Graph 4.3: By Enrolment in the IE programme 39
Graph 4.4: By Enrolment in the IE programme Training 39
Graph 5: Student’s acceptance of children with disabilities in school, 40
according to Educators
Graph 6: Parent’s acceptance of children with disabilities in schools, 40
according to Educators
Graph 7: Barrier’s students with disabilities encounter according to Educators 43
Graph 8: Did you benefit from the training? 45
Graph 9: Was the training effective in building your knowledge of working with 45
students with disabilities?
Graph 10: Did the training provide you with the necessary skills to accommodate 46
students with disabilities in your classroom?
Graph 11: Did you apply what you learned during training in your classroom?
46
Graph 12: Integration of children with disabilities in IE programme
47
school, according to Educators
LIST OF FIGURES
Figure 1: Evaluation Timeline 18
Figure 2: Description of Evaluation Phases 1 9
Figure 3: Overview of Survey Respondents 2 2
4
ACRONYMS
CRC Convention on the Rights of the Child
CRPD Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities
ESP Education Strategic Plan
FGD Focus Group Discussions
HCD Higher Council for the Rights of Persons with Disabilities
HRB Human Rights Based
IE Inclusive Education
IEP Individual Education Plan
KII Key Informant Interviews
MC Mercy Corps
MoE Ministry of Education
NIES National Inclusive Education Strategy
OOSC Out-of-School Children
SDGs Sustainable Development Goals
UNESCWA the United Nations Economic and Social Commission for
Western Asia
UNESCO The United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organisation
UNICEF The United Nations Children's Fund
ERfKE Education Reform for the Knowledge Economy
GIZ Deutsche Gesellschaft für Internationale Zusammenarbeit
GmbH
SOP Standard Operating Procedure
FCDO Foreign, Commonwealth and Development Office
AAI Accelerating Access to Education Initiative 2.0
5
SECTION 1: EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
Background: Inclusive education is not a new concept. It is a transformative way of
progressing towards more equitable education systems and in 2015, inclusive
education became a means to achieving the Sustainable Development Goal (SDG)
4 - “ensure inclusive and equitable quality education and promote lifelong
opportunities for all” 1. The Ministry of Education (MoE) in Jordan has made significant
strides, with the support of its partners and donors, toward providing children with
disabilities with access to schools and will continue to make progress with its
endorsement of the ten-year National Inclusive Education Strategy (NIES).
Despite the MoE commitment to inclusive education, there remains significant room
for improvement in providing children with disabilities with access to education. In the
2018/2019 school year, 1,396,868 students were enrolled in schools, out of which 21,859
were students with disabilities (approximately 1.5% of the total school population,
compared to the 10-15% global average of people with disabilities).
The object of this evaluation is The United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF) Jordan 7-
year IE (Inclusive Education) Programme (hereinafter referred to as the IE
Programme), implemented by Mercy Corps (MC), that aimed to ensure children with
disabilities have equal access to quality education in public schools.
The specific objectives of the Inclusive Education (IE) Programme were:
1) Improve the accessibility of schools;
2) Provide children with disabilities rehabilitation sessions and assistive devices;
3) Improve the quality of education available to children with disabilities;
4) Develop a referral and tracking system for children with disabilities;
5) Raise awareness and acceptance of parents and the community on the
importance of IE.
Objective: The evaluation aimed to inform UNICEF of the progress made towards
achieving the programme’s purpose and objectives, more specifically on 1) The
adequacy of UNICEF's IE Programme delivered by MC; 2) The adequacy of UNICEF’s
support to the MoE at the central level, and how it aligns to the NIES as well as to good
global practices.
The scope of the evaluation covered access, quality, demand, and system
strengthening. The evaluation questions (and sub-questions) were developed based
on the OECD/DAC “Guidelines for Project and Programme Evaluations”. Thus, the
criteria were relevance, effectiveness, cost efficiency and effectiveness, long-term
impact, sustainability, and coverage. For each criterion, the Evaluation Team
collected data as agreed each question and sub-questions.
The evaluation methodology was based on the United Nations principles of a Human
Rights-Based (HRB) approach to development: integrity, accountability, respect, and
beneficence. All relevant stakeholders participated in the evaluation, protocols on
6
safety, confidentiality and data were put in place, and protocols were developed to
ensure everyone’s safety and health during the current pandemic situation.
Data was collected through a variety of means. In total, data were collected in/from:
● Literature review
● An electronic survey sent to principals and teachers
● 9 Key Informant Interviews (KII) with key entities
● 10 school visits which entailed conducting interviews with the principals, Focus
Group Discussions (FGDs) with teachers and students, school tours, and
classroom observations.
● FGDs with Out-of-School Children (OOSC) with disabilities
Once raw data was collected, cleaned, and identified by data source, it was
organised according to each sub-question in the evaluation matrix. Each set of data
was analysed separately, and patterns in responses were identified.
The Evaluation Team identified three main limitations to this evaluation. The most
critical of which is the lack of institutional memory in every entity involved or
concerned with the programme, particularly at the MoE. Second, was the timing of
the data collection which took place after schools were closed for 1.5 years due to
Covid-19, which undoubtedly affected the evaluation participants’ ability to recall
important details. Third, there is a lack of consistent and reliable data on children with
disabilities which is often challenging to interpret because there are several definitions
of “children with disabilities” across the main stakeholders.
The Evaluation Team found that, to date, the IE Programme operated in a total of 102
schools in both host communities across all 12 governorates, as well as within the Syrian
refugee camps. As a result, according to the programme documents provided by
MC, the programme has integrated 4,695 children with mild to moderate disabilities
into schools, trained 2,191 educators, and raised awareness of 23,088 parents and
community members through awareness-raising sessions. In 2021, the IE Programme
has initiated its exit strategy, and 37 schools were handed over to the MoE. The
program generally achieved its set outcome level targets. However, predominantly
due to program design, limited funding, short funding cycles, and weaknesses in the
sector, the programme was not as successful in achieving its higher-level set
objectives.
The above accomplishments are significant breakthroughs for Jordan, specifically
regarding providing more children with disabilities with better access to public schools
and improving public schools’ capacity to accommodate students with disabilities.
While these are critical, they are insufficient without the provision of more adequate
resources (both financial and human) at the MoE in support of inclusive education.
Findings: In terms of relevance, the IE Programme is conceptually considered in line
with inclusive practices, except regarding one of its main features - reliance on the
7
concept of the resource rooms. This implies integration and not inclusion, even if
children spend most of their school days in the regular classroom.
Regarding effectiveness, most interventions were found effectiveness to a certain
degree but could be improved in order to achieve more success. Some of the
shortfalls include the absence of building consistent and standardised processes for
the awareness-raising efforts and training a small number of educators per school.
In terms of cost efficiency and effectiveness, the evaluation found consensus on the
limited capacity of the MoE – both financial and technical - to take over the
responsibility of the IE Programme or roll the programme out to more schools.
As mentioned, the IE Programme played a crucial contributing role to changing
perceptions surrounding students with disabilities, as well as raising awareness and
acceptance of children with disabilities- at least among those within the IE
Programme schools and their communities. The change in perception is considered
a long-term impact. However, to achieve sustainability, more effort and investment
are required to build the capacity of the MoE; institutionalise materials and processes;
develop strong measures to ensure the continuous transmission of capacity, expertise,
tools, and materials from the programme to the MoE.
When looking at coverage, the IE Programme targets children who are indeed
vulnerable, a historically underserved population. The programme also reached both
male and female schools, schools that are in underserved communities, Syrian
refugees within the host communities as well as the refugee camps- all showing reach
to populations that are considered “vulnerable”.
The Evaluation Team reached three overarching conclusions, which are:
1. More substantial investment from MoE and its partners is critical.
2. The definition of “children with disabilities” needs to be made consistent with
more reliable data and decision making.
3. Awareness-raising efforts are needed nationwide, focusing on representing
children with disabilities and highlighting their strengths, abilities, and potential.
The lessons learned as a result of the evaluation are:
● Schools need to be enabled to meet the learning needs of ALL children, and in
turn, support students to realise their potential- academic and otherwise.
● IE is the shared responsibility of several stakeholders, both public and private, in
support of the MoE through stable, reliable long-term partnerships and shared
accountability.
● It is critical, in any programming, to consider scalability, replicability and
institutionalisation to ensure the proper mechanisms and needed financial
allocations are in place toward sustainability.
8
The following evidence based critical and strategic recommendations were informed
by the evaluation findings and derived from the extensive data that was collected
from the key stakeholders and analysed. The Evaluation Team listened carefully to all
individuals who participated in the evaluation; and in the formation of the
recommendations paid specific attention to the shared successes, barriers and
bottlenecks, perceived weaknesses and strengths of the programme and
accordingly devised the recommendations. This ensured taking the perspectives of
the duty bearers and right holders in the formation of the recommendations for
improvement.
The findings indicate the need for UNICEF, and other donors, to continue supporting
the MoE in its plan and progress towards IE and its sustainability. The MoE and its
partners need to develop a long-term sustainability roadmap that plans out the
gradual and reasonable transition of responsibility (both technical and financial) from
the donors to the MoE. This plan should consider governance, policy, and institutional
capacity- both human and financial.
Furthermore, the table below organizes the more specific recommendations at two
levels- the system level and the programme level recommendations.
Table 1: Critical and Strategic Recommendations
Recommendation Timeframe Responsibility
1. Strengthen IE data organisation- better Medium MoE with
documentation on enrolment and retention, Term UNICEF in
including monitoring of attendance and progress. collaboration
This data should be centrally recorded and updated- with UNESCO
based on a consistent definition- in the OpenEMIS and USAID-
and on which all partners rely in their decision- funded JTAP
making.
2. Institutionalize the investments made under the IE Short-Term MoE with
Programme such as the approval and systemic support of
utilisation of the programme developed manuals, UNICEF
awareness raising kits, and Standard Operating
Procedures (SOP’s) pertaining to IE including the
development and implementation of the IEP’s.
Additionally, advocating toward institutionalising the
“shadow teacher” job description and capacity
building (pre-service as well as in-service).
3-Require stronger project management and Immediate UNICEF
monitoring and evaluation functions and processes
to ensure consistent and reliable data to inform
programme decisions and continuous learning and
improvement.
Short to UNICEF’s
4-Refine the capacity building efforts through: a) medium Implementing
More tailored trainings should be developed and term Partner
9
leveL
metsyS
delivered to ALL relevant MoE staff (at central, Field
directorates and school levels) in order to equip
them with the necessary knowledge, skills and
attitudes to feel confident serving ALL students. b) a
larger number of teachers need to be trained
toward proper and effective inclusion of all students
(including those with disabilities) in the classroom-
moving away from the reliance on resource rooms
and resource teachers.
Short to UNICEF’s
5-Develop a mechanism through which teachers, Medium Implementing
parents and other professionals work collaboratively term Partner
on the development and implementation of
Individual Education Plans (IEP’s) for students with
disabilities.
Medium UNICEF with
6-Systemize the awareness raising interventions: Term the assistance
materials and sessions for awareness raising need to of the
reach all schools. Awareness raising should focus on Implementing
recognising the abilities and strengths of children with Partner
disabilities beyond acceptance.
Medium UNICEF’s
7-Develop a comprehensive list of assistive Term Implementing
technology and devices (with specifications) so that Partner
schools are instructed and can procure the needed
resources in order to accommodate any and all
disabilities.
Medium UNICEF and
8-Mobilise existing structures (such as the SDDP school term MoE
or directorate level committees) toward leveraging
comprehensive and sustainable resources and
services to students with disabilities (including but not
limited to physical infrastructure improvement for
accessibility, rehabilitation sessions and psycho-social
support).
10
mret
regnol
hguorht(
leveL
emmargorP
selcyc
emmargorp
SECTION 2: CONTEXT AND BACKGROUND
2.1 Country Context
The Jordanian Education system is now halfway through the implementation of its
2018- 2022 (ESP), which heavily relied on the previous decade-long Education Reform
for the Knowledge Economy (ERfKE)1 and its achievements. The ESP development also
aligned its components with the Human Resources Development Strategy that was
developed in 2016- which stressed the priority of providing access to quality education
to ALL children in Jordan. Regarding inclusion, many efforts have been exerted, the
recent effort being the development of the ten-year NIES. The NIES has been endorsed
by the MoE, and many of its objectives and components are expected to be
incorporated within the ESP considering the currently underway mid-term review.
The total number of people with disabilities -according to the latest report by UN
ESCWA in Jordan in 2020- is 251,499 individuals. The majority (92%) live in urban settings
while only (8%) live in rural areas. Of them, (46%) are females and 54% are males, but
more importantly (6%) are children between the age of 10-14 and (5.5%) between the
age of 15 to 19. Disaggregating the statistics in terms of gender shows that there is a
higher percentage of male people with disabilities in Jordan (aged 5-14) than
females, (14.3%) compared to (11.2%) respectively. (78%) of male people with
disabilities do not receive any form of schooling, compared to (62.7%) of females2.
1. Jordan Progress toward IE
Access
In line with international agendas, Jordan has taken major steps towards inclusion of
children with disabilities in its schools. According to the MoE’s statistics for 2018/2019,
1,396,868 students were enrolled in schools, out of which 21,859 are students with
disabilities. This constitutes about 1.5% of the total school population, compared to
the 10-15% international average.
Jordan is expected to achieve better results in enrolling children with disabilities into
the public school system and accommodating those children as it commences the
implementation of the 10-year NIES with the generous support of several partners and
donors, including UNICEF.
1 The Education Reform for the Knowledge Economy Program (ERfKE) is a multi-donor sector program designed to deliver
education's national vision which is derived from the documents of Jordan's 2020 Vision and 2002 Vision Forum for the Future
of Education in Jordan.
2 UN ESCWA, Data Studio, Disability Dashboard, 2020: https://datastudio.google.com/reporting/0479429c-b7f6-4f67-a3ee-
27b89a131ef9/page/e34q
11
● National Inclusive Education Strategy
The MoE has developed the 10-year NIES in collaboration with the Higher Council for
the Rights of People with Disabilities (HCD) and an advisory committee, representing
key entities and partners of the MoE, such as UNICEF, MC, QRTA, NCCD, QRF, among
others.
The strategy lists a total of nine components covering a variety of areas aiming to
enable children with disabilities with the “enjoyment of education” and access to all
programmes, services, and facilities in educational institutions. According to the
strategy, children with disabilities must have access to quality education in an
environment that accepts diversity and provides a supportive learning environment
for all.
The components are as follows:
- Component 1: Policies and legislation.
- Component 2: Awareness, Media, and Advocacy
- Component 3: Identification, Diagnosis, Support and Referral Programmes
- Component 4: Accessibility and Reasonable Accommodation
- Component 5: Learning and Teaching ‘Educational Programmes’
- Component 6: Human Resources and Capacity Building
- Component 7: The Preschool Stage (Nurseries and Kindergartens)
- Component 8: Children who are not Enrolled in Mainstream Schools
- Component 9: Research, Scientific Studies and Databases
HCD and MoE have developed a 3-year action plan to kick-start the implementation
of the 10-year NIES. Additionally, the PROMISE project- supported by Deutsche
Gesellschaft für Internationale Zusammenarbeit GmbH (GIZ)- assists the MoE to ensure
proper implementation of the 10-Year Strategy for Inclusive Education (2020-2030) in
four key areas:
1. It enhances national planning and management capacities.
2. The programme prepares measures for inclusive education in 18 pilot schools
in three main field directorates.
3. It capacitates relevant stakeholders, including education authorities, school
principals, teachers and parents on how to support Inclusive Education.
4. It raises awareness among relevant stakeholders through community events
and activities to combat stigma and inform about Inclusive Education.
In support of the MoE efforts and in line with the NIES objectives, there are several other
interventions and efforts supported by several donors and partners such as:
● The Inclusive Education Guideline Manual
In support of the NIES, the MoE and Mercy Corps launched in November 2021, the
Inclusive Education Guideline Manual for public schools in Jordan. The manual aims
to support Jordanian and Syrian children with disabilities who attend public schools
12
and create better opportunities and experiences by allowing students from different
backgrounds to share one classroom. The manual was approved as an activity in the
10-year strategy for inclusive education in Jordan and currently serves as an
operational guide and draws on international up-to-date contextualized best
practices in inclusive education. It provides day-to-day steps and processes related
to implementing inclusive education in public schools, and can be used by Ministry of
Education staff, school staff, and parents.
● Towards Greater Inclusion and Diversity in Education in Jordan
The MoE, in partnership with the GIZ and The United Nations Educational, Scientific
and Cultural Organisation (UNESCO), launched the project “Towards Greater
Inclusion and Diversity in Education in Jordan”. The initiative plans to closely
coordinate and collaborate with the HCD in ensuring improved access to inclusive
quality education for all children with disabilities. The project seeks to provide
technical assistance and specialised expertise to the MoE in their efforts towards
inclusion, in line with the goals and priorities outlined in the 10-year NIES and the ESP.
The same partners are also focused on assessing the institutional capacity needs and
implementing a roadmap toward development of the capacity.
● Accelerating Access to Education Initiative 2.0 (AAI 2.0)
This initiative delivered on the promise of providing quality public education and
supporting access to quality education for vulnerable populations in Jordan including
both Syrian and non-Syrians. It is funded by a number of donors and focuses on
training new teachers, financing salaries for teachers and administrative staff,
opening additional double-shift schools, and supporting blended learning. The AAI 2.0
represents the second phase of the initiative and aims to support inclusive education
through increasing resources for children with disabilities in public schools.
● USAID Enhancing School Management Project
In addition to the above, there are a number of other efforts that are contributing to
IE such as the USAID-funded Enhancing School Management Project that is working
with the relevant stakeholders and the MoE on the development of school
construction codes, requirements, and standards (for any future school construction)
which will include specifications to ensure new school buildings are accessible.
These efforts come after UNICEF’s programme and should be informed by this
evaluation. It is critical for all partners to coordinate and collaborate towards meeting
the national priorities in regard to IE.
2.2 The object of the evaluation
Through the life of the programme, UNICEF has been working through its implementing
partner, MC, to implement an IE Programme in public schools aiming to ensure that
children with disabilities have equal access to quality education. The purpose of the
UNICEF intervention is to include and accommodate children with disabilities in public
13
schools, by providing them with all the necessary materials and resources for an
equitable chance to access education.
According to programme documents, the programme’s more specific objectives
include:
● Improving the accessibility of schools through the construction of ramps as well
as refurbishing and equipping Resource Rooms in all schools with furniture,
resources, and materials.
● Providing children with disabilities with occupational, physical and speech
rehabilitation sessions and assistive devices.
● Improving the quality of education available to children with disabilities,
through:
o Building the capacity of classroom teachers, including resource room
teachers, on the delivery of IE Programme services, and
o Deploying shadow teachers inside the schools.3
● Developing a referral and tracking system for children with disabilities.
● Raising awareness and acceptance of parents and the community on the
importance of inclusive education.
UNICEF has been operating in 102 schools, in both host communities across all 12
governorates, as well as the Syrian refugee camps (Azraq and Za’atari camps). As a
result, UNICEF, according to the last programme report document (for 2019)
submitted by MC, the IE Programme has integrated around 4,695 people with mild
to moderate disabilities and/or learning difficulties into the public school system,
trained 2,191 educators, and conducted awareness training sessions that reached
19,781 parents.
In 2021, UNICEF with MC and the MoE initiated the process of handing over 37 schools
to the MoE. Selection of schools were made according to:
● Evidence that these schools have the capacity to continue implementing the
IE Programme with minimal support from MC’s specialists.
● Schools’ staff have received training on Inclusive Education.
● Staff demonstrate a positive attitude towards students with disabilities.
● The school is operational and organised, including the resource room, to
support students with disabilities.
● School infrastructure and ground floor accessibility.
● The IE Programme has been implemented for 3 years or longer in the school.
● The availability of AT and in the resource rooms.
Detailed achievements of the programme between years 2017 and 2019 are
included in a table in Annex 8.8.
3 Shadow teacher in comparison to Resource room job description is highlighted in Annex 8.9
14
SECTION 3: PURPOSE, OBJECTIVES AND SCOPE OF THE EVALUATION
3.1 Purpose
This evaluation, as commissioned by UNICEF and described in this Final Report, is
based on the United Nations principles of a human rights based (HRB) approach to
development. As required, it is “normatively based on the international human rights
standards and operationally directed by promoting and protecting human rights”
(UNICEF, 2016). In addition, it acknowledges that “a human rights-based approach to
development and gender mainstreaming are complementary and mutually
reinforcing”(UNICEF, 2016).
As mentioned in the ToR (p. 1), inclusion is at the core of UNICEF’s work, and the core
of this evaluation. The evaluation aims to determine to what extent is the work of
UNICEF in education in Jordan; inclusive of girls and boys with disabilities, equitable in
its implementation, and sustainable in the long run.
This evaluation was set on the HRB normative standards, as well as upon the working
motto of the CRPD and the disability movement “Nothing About Us Without Us” and
includes, as main stakeholders, the rights-holders of the programme being evaluated.
Thus, children with disabilities, their parents, and teachers are the backbone of this
evaluation and provided essential information in response to the evaluation questions
and sub-questions.
As per the evaluation ToR (p.3), this formative evaluation’s higher-level purpose is to
inform future UNICEF programming on IE in Jordan. The more specific purpose is to
generate knowledge on:
● The adequacy of UNICEF's IE Programme delivered by MC in public schools in
camps and host communities; and
● The adequacy of UNICEF’s support to the MoE at the central level, and how it
aligns to the NIES as well as to global good practices.
In addition, two more specific objectives for this evaluation have been set by UNICEF:
● Assess the quality of the IE package provided by UNICEF and delivered by MC
at the school level in camps and communities.
● Provide recommendations on how UNICEF can better support the MoE to
operationalise and implement the NIES in the coming three years.
3.2 Scope of the Evaluation
The evaluation’s scope aims to cover the following key elements:
● Access: which includes the accessibility and the availability of resources and
materials, including assistive devices and services such as rehabilitation sessions
and referrals.
15
● Quality: which includes teacher training provided and the programme’s ability
to enrol, retain, and advance students.
● Demand: which includes raising awareness efforts to elevate awareness of
students, parents, and the community.
● System Strengthening: which includes the support provided to the MoE toward
sustainability and includes advocacy, data, and evidence generation efforts.
To fulfil the scope of the evaluation and answer the main questions, the Evaluation
Team formulated questions based on the OECD/DAC “Guidelines for Project and
Programme Evaluations”. The criteria and associated questions are:
Table 2: Evaluation Criteria and Associated Questions
Criteria Definition
Relevance To what extent the IE (Inclusive Education) Programme objectives
respond to the MoE priorities and beneficiaries’ needs?
Effectiveness To what extent was the IE (Inclusive Education) Programme in line
with inclusive practices and effective in delivering results for
children with disabilities?
Cost efficiency To what extent do stakeholders believe the ministry has the
and capacity to take over the responsibility of the programme, what
effectiveness elements of the programme, and what is in place (budget,
policies, technical capacity) to enable it to do so.
Impact Long- To what extent did the IE (Inclusive Education) Programme
term contribute to a positive long-term change for children and
children with disabilities in particular, teachers and improved the
current situation in terms of education, environment, social
cohesion?
Sustainability To what extent can the IE (Inclusive Education) Programme model
be replicated, expanded, and sustained?
To what extent has the upstream work (advocacy, technical
assistance, generation and use of data and evidence) of UNICEF
undertaken with the MoE contributed to the institutionalisation of
the programme?
Coverage Is the IE (Inclusive Education) Programme targeting children with
disabilities and the vulnerable populations in Jordan?
The above listed criteria and main questions were parsed out into sub-questions which
then guided the development of the data collection tools. The attached approved
matrix (Annex 8.14) organises the rationale to gather data and generate sufficient
information to answer the set questions and give practical evidence-based
16
recommendations to UNICEF and its partners. The matrix also considers the agreed-
on divergences from the ToR (for more information, please see Inception Report).
3.3 Theory of Change (ToC)
The evaluation detailed methodology and data collection tools of the IE Programme
were developed according to the Programme Outputs/ Outcomes and activities
included in the programme documents. A Theory of Change was not provided since
the scope of the evaluation was based on the outputs and outcomes of the
programme as required by the Terms of Reference (see ToR Attached Annex 8.15).
17
SECTION 4: EVALUATION DESIGN AND METHODOLOGY
4.1 Overview
The original evaluation contract was signed for the period extending over October
2020 to May 2021. The Inception Report was submitted as planned in November 2020;
however, the data collection process was delayed due to the rising cases of Covid-
19, and the MoE decision to close schools and return back to online learning. As a
result, a no-cost extension until the end of December 2021 was signed, whereas the
Evaluation Team resumed its work in the summer of 2021 in accordance with a revised
work plan and schedule of deliverables.
Nonetheless, due to varying circumstances - including the covid-19 outbreak in one
of the selected schools, in addition to the difficulty of recruiting students with
disabilities, OOSC children for FGDs - a set of shifts had to be made to the work plan
and timeline which led to a second no-cost extension to be signed extending the
contract until Mid-March 2022. Below is the original timeline with the associated
phases of the evaluation.
Figure 1: Evaluation Timeline
4.2 Evaluation process
The evaluation was conducted by a team of Jordanian and international experts in
close collaboration and consistent communication with the concerned team
members at UNICEF, where regular follow-up meetings with the programme manager
from MC and the MoE concerned department were conducted.
Below is a detailed description of tasks and steps taken under each phase of the
evaluation process:
18
Figure 2: Description of Evaluation Phases
-Literature Review Deliverables:
Phase One -Evaluation methodology and data -Data Collection Tools
collection tool development -Draft Inception Report
Inception
Phase
-Submission of Inception report -Final Inception Report
December 23, 2021
-Key Informant I interview with Deliverables:
Stakeholders -Data Collection summary &
Phase Two
-School Visits preliminary findings Presentation
Data
-School Tours No vember 22, 2022
Collection
-Classroom Observations
Phase
-Focus Group Discussions
-Online Survey
-Data Analysis
Deliverables
-Evaluation Matrix development
-Notes and Findings
Phase Three -Submission of Final Report
-
-
S
E
u
v
r
a
v
lu
e
a
y
t
D
io
a
n
t a
D r
A
a
n
ft
a
R
ly
e
s
p
is
ort
Data Analysis
- Evaluation Report
and Reporting
-Evaluation Presentation
Phase -Presenting key findings
February 13, 2022
4.3 Detailed Methodology
4.3.1 Data collection Break down
1. Conducting a total of eight (8) Key Informant Interviews (KII) with the following
representatives:
● 2 MoE representatives.
● 2 UNICEF representatives.
● 1 Mercy Corps representative (over two sessions due to time
constraints)4.
● 1 representative of the Higher Council for the Rights of Persons with
Disabilities (HCD).
● 1 Deutsche Gesellschaft für Internationale Zusammenarbeit (GIZ)
representative.
● 1 representative from the Foreign, Commonwealth and Development
Office (FCDO).
* The list of people interviewed is also available in Annex 8.1.
2. Conducting a total of ten (10) school visits.
The schools visited were selected in accordance with the agreed-on selection criteria
detailed in the Inception Report.
4 Three other meetings took place with MC representative over the duration of the assignment.
19
The first school visit allowed the Evaluation Team to test the appropriateness of the
data collection tools, assess if a review of some of the tools developed was needed,
and accordingly, the following revisions were made:
● Simplifying the language used in the FGD guides with children (with and
without disabilities) to ensure that the questions and topics were more easily
understood by participants.
● Adding a section to the school tour that documents the observations made
across all school facilities pertaining to the accommodation of different
disabilities and the resources available (particularly in the resource rooms).
At each visited school, data was gathered through interviews and FGDs with
principals, teachers, parents, and students (with and without disabilities of different
ages). The following interviews and discussions were conducted across the 10 schools
visited:
● 10 KII’s with School Principals.
● 76 FGDs:
o 11 FGDs with School Teachers with a total of 89 teachers
○ 11 FGDs with Parents with a total of 66 parents
○ 26 FGDs with Students with Disabilities with a total of 168 students
○ 28 FGDs with Students without Disabilities with a total of 246 students
**Principals, Teachers and Parents signed consent forms, agreeing to their
participation in the FGDs attached in Annex 8.11. Whereas students gave verbal
consent, documented in the fieldwork recordings, attached in Annex 8.12.
In addition to the interviews and FGDs, the fieldwork also included a school tour at
each school to assess school facilities and resources designed to measure the extent
to which they are accommodating of students with disabilities- in the classrooms as
well as all other school facilities. Moreover, classroom observations were conducted
at each visited school to: 1) assess the general environment of the classrooms in
regards to the acceptance of the students with disabilities among peers and with the
teachers, 2) assess the ability of the observed classroom teachers in effectively
including students with disabilities (both socially and academically), and 3) assess the
adaptation of instruction and/or materials being worked on during lessons to meet
the needs of the students with disabilities in the classroom.
**List of the schools visited, and schedule are attached in Annex 8.2.
3. Conducting FGDs and/or KII’s with OOSC with disabilities
The evaluation team, after facing significant challenges in gathering lists and contact
information of OOSC with disabilities from concerned partners, managed to conduct
a series of FGD’s or KII’s (as was appropriate with specific individuals and groups of
young people) and gathered information about the barriers they faced in regards to
20
accessing education, as well as the perceived challenges in receiving quality
education designed for children with disabilities within the public education system in
Jordan.
The team has successfully conducted 7 FGDs and 9 KIIs - 8 of which were virtual
reaching 50 OOSC with disabilities.
**The Focus Group Discussion schedule for OOSC with disabilities is attached in Annex
8.3.
4. Electronic Survey to principals and teachers
The survey was sent to:
1. 96 principals out of the 102 schools in the IE Programme; where principals were
asked to share the survey with their teachers, regardless of whether they
received the training or not. (The list of schools provided by MC to the
Evaluation Team at the time included only 96 schools and not the actual
number of 102 schools)
2. 159 teachers who have been trained by the programme for the academic
year 2018/2019 (compiled from attendance sheets of trainees trained during
the above academic year) regardless of whether they were still teaching at IE
schools under the programme or not.
** Full survey data is attached in Annex 8.10.
21
General Overview of Survey Respondents Figure 3: Overview of Survey Respondents
Currently teaching at a school that is
74% part of the IE (Inclusive Education)
Programme.
Currently teaching at a school that is
5%
not part of the IE (Inclusive Education)
Programme.
Do not know whether the schools they
21% are currently teaching at are part of the
IE (Inclusive Education) Programme or
Geographic Distribution
not.
45%
Gender Distribution
North
Females
40%
79%
Central
Camps vs Host communities
71% 29%
Highest number of responses 21%
from Al Azraq Camp 36%, and
Zaatari 35%
Males
15%
Distribution by Grade
South 53%
47%
Of Teachers
Of Teachers teach
teach Primary
Secondary School
School students
students (Grades
(Grades 1-6)
7-12)
4.3.2 Data analysis
In order to answer all set evaluation questions and sub-questions comprehensively
and accurately, the Evaluation Team reviewed and analysed all collected data. The
team also triangulated data- where relevant and possible- pertinent to the same
questions but collected through different means.
First, all data collected was organised depending on its type in various ways.
1. For each KII, school tour, and classroom observation specific were notes kept
in their individual forms.
22
2. For each FGD, notes were kept in “master sheets” for each type of participant
collated and summarised the findings across the pertinent FGD’s
3. Survey results were taken from SurveyMonkey.com, results were cleaned, and
organised for each individual question asked with the needed disaggregation
Once the clean data was ready, it was categorised by type of data source (i.e.,
document revision, KIIs, FGDs, observations and surveys) and organised according to
each sub-question of the evaluation matrix.
Then, each set of data under each sub-question was analysed separately, and
patterns in responses were observed and indicated for each set of data sources. In
addition to patterns of response (i.e., Most teachers and parents agreed on a lack of
rehabilitation sessions), the team also searched for instances where an individual (KII)
or set of data sources misaligned with the pattern (i.e., the implementing partner
indicated that all children who needed it, received rehabilitation sessions). In the case
of disagreement with the pattern (or majority responses), all data was recorded with
a clear indication of who/which data source provides contradictory to dissenting
information. In instances where the information needed to answer the sub-question is
missing, the relevant stakeholder was contacted for clarification or supplementary
information.
The sets of data in each sub-question were then further compiled under each main
evaluation question and analysed once again, with a view to answer a higher order
question. Where again, the team looked for response patterns, agreements, and
disagreements among data sources.
The data analysis took into consideration all data sources and all stakeholders’
contributions.
4.3.3 Ethical Standards and Considerations
The Evaluation Team followed the four principles of ethics as stated by the UNEG
(Ethical Guidelines for Evaluation 2020)5 throughout the evaluation and, most critically,
during data collection:
1. Integrity: the team adhered to moral values and professional standards
throughout maintaining: (a) honesty and truthfulness in communications and
actions during data collection, (b) professionalism based on competence,
commitment, ongoing reflective practice, and credible and trustworthy
behaviour, and (c) Independence and impartiality throughout, ensuring there
were no conflicts of interest or bias which may otherwise compromise
responsible and professional evaluation practices.
5 UNEG Ethical Guidelines for Evaluation (2020),
file:///Users/zain/Documents/Edvise%20ME/UNICEF/UNICEF%20Ethical%20Guidelines/2020%20Ethical%20Guidelines%2
0for%20Evaluation.pdf
23
2. Accountability: ensuring transparency in all actions taken during recruitment
and data collection phases while establishing trust and accountability towards
those affected by the evaluation including stakeholders and beneficiaries.
3. Responsiveness: as questions or events arose, adapting intentions and plans as
required. If, for example, abuse or other misconduct incidents were identified,
the Evaluation Team implemented protocols in place to refer cases through
the appropriate channels.
4. Respect: the team involved and engaged with all stakeholders and
beneficiaries in a way that honours their dignity, well-being and personal
agency while being responsive to their sex, gender, nationality, status, age,
background, religion, ethnicity, and ability as well as the different cultural,
economic, and physical environments.
5. Beneficence: the team captured the true perceptions of beneficiaries and
stakeholders while following the ‘do no harm’ policy. To that extent, the
Evaluation Team was also careful to avoid exposing themselves and the target
audience to any potential health risks where Covid-19 is concerned. The team
re-scheduled visits, self-quarantined, and took all the necessary precautions as
per the regulations of the Ministry of Health (MOH) in Jordan.
More specifically, the Evaluation Team followed the UNICEF Procedure for Ethical
Standards in Research, Evaluation, Data Collection and Analysis6 through taking the
following actions:
1. Ensuring that the evaluation design included all stakeholders involved -such as
the donor, the implementing partners, the MoE- but, most importantly, the
beneficiaries of the programme including people with disabilities (both in and
out of school), people without disabilities, parents of people (with and without
disabilities), and educators (principals and teachers). This was crucial in
ensuring that all diverse perspectives and perceptions were collected, and
heard while evaluating the programme, in order to provide a complete and
comprehensive assessment.
2. In terms of protocols on safety, confidentiality, data protection and mitigation
measures, data collection protocols are attached in Annex 8.4. Where the
Evaluation Team applied the “do no harm” principle consistently as follows:
● Participants were informed of the purpose of the evaluation, assured
their participation is optional, and confidentiality of all responses will be
maintained.
● The team collected consent from each and every participant- in writing
or verbally (recorded).
● The Evaluation Team did not use any video recordings or take any
pictures of any of the participants.
6 the UNICEF’s Procedure for Ethical Standards in Research, Evaluation, Data Collection and Analysis,(2015),
https://www.unicef.org/media/54796/file
24
● The Evaluation Team ensured that participants were respected and
provided with a safe space to share their views and experiences.
Finally, and given the Covid-19 pandemic situation, the Evaluation Team also
developed protocols which were adhered to by every Evaluation Team member
during data collection to protect their and others’ safety and health. The protocols
were in line with the Government of Jordan defence laws as well as the followed
regulations and instructions at MoE schools. The detailed protocols are attached in
Annex 8.4.
4.3.4 Evaluation Limitations
As expected, and disclosed in the Inception Report, the completion of this evaluation
was faced with a few issues and limitations- which are listed below:
1. There was an evident lack of institutional memory in almost every involved
entity at its different levels. When asked to recall information from the earlier
years of the IE Programme (i.e., 2014-2017) many evaluation participants had
limited details and information about certain matters. This was particularly true
at the MoE, where the high turn-over created a void of institutional memory
that is crucial in evaluation work.
2. The data collection was postponed due to complete school closures in light of
increasing numbers of Covid-19 cases. All data collection took place after
school closures that lasted 1.5 academic years, which we believe has affected
the evaluation participants’ ability to recall important details and, in some
cases, led to them providing information that focused on the present situation,
rather than the past period the evaluation is covering.
3. The lack of some data made available, and the poor quality of that which is
available presented important limitations to this study, including:
● The data pertaining to children with disabilities (both students and out-
of-school children), their enrolment and retention status is not consistent
or well organised. The evaluation found inconsistency between data
provided by the implementing partner, the Special Education
Department at MoE, and the Open EMIS system.
● Data on OOSC with disabilities was particularly difficult to attain from
both the implementing partner as well as UNICEF’s partners managing
the Makani Centres.
● Information around the cost of students with disabilities does not seem
to be available. The donor/ implementing partner model could not be
used to estimate the cost per student by the government, should the
interventions be taken over by the MoE, given how differently structured
NGO’s and governments budgets and costs are.
In order to try and mitigate the effects of the above limitations, the Evaluation Team
has put additional efforts in reviewing again the relevant literature and the reports
that cover the programme period being evaluated, where the team interviewed a
25
representative from UNICEF and a representative from Mercy Corps to address some
of the gaps found in data, and contextualised the presented data- where relevant-
to indicate that the timing of the evaluation might have affected the quality and
accuracy of the data collected.
While taking the above into consideration the Evaluation Team confirms these
limitations did not have a major effect to imply any concerns of the credibility of the
evaluation and its findings.
26
SECTION 5: EVALUATION FINDINGS
Evaluation findings are presented against each set criteria and evaluation questions
in the ToR. Each evaluation question will be answered with a detailed analysis of
findings according to the sub-questions and associated indicators included in the
evaluation matrix.
It is worth noting that there were no significant differences found in the data collected
across schools of different geographic areas and genders when compared. Also,
there were no major differences between secondary school teacher responses
(grade 7-12) and those of primary school teachers (grade 1-6). However, the
Evaluation Team did observe differences between the regular IE schools visited when
compared to the one model school included in the sample.
5.1 Relevance
Table 3: Relevance - Evaluation Questions
Evaluation Question Evaluation Sub-Questions
To what extent did the IE 1. To what extent is the IE (Inclusive Education) Programme
(Inclusive Education) at the school level (camps and host communities) relevant
Programme objectives
to the needs of children with disabilities?
respond to the MoE
2. To what extent does the IE (Inclusive Education)
priorities and beneficiaries’
Programme reflect the gender, equity and Human rights-
needs?
based approach?
3. Noting that the NIES was only launched in January 2020,
to what extent is the IE (Inclusive Education) Programme
aligned? If alignment doesn’t exist what are the gaps and
how can it be done?
4. To what extent is the IE (Inclusive Education) Programme
aligned with global practices (CRC (Committee of the
Rights of the Child), CRPD (Convention on the Rights of
Persons with Disabilities ...)?
Box 1: Evaluation Summary – Relevance
Overall, the evaluation found that the pro gramme design is highly relevant to the MoE
priorities and relevant to the needs of some children with disabilities- excluding those
with certain types and severity of disabilities. The programme can conceptually be
considered in line with inclusive practices - except for one of its main features which is
the reliance on the concept of the resource rooms, which implies integration and not
inclusion, even if children are spending time in the regular classroom. While several
stakeholders acknowledge the programme is making important strides in assisting the
MoE make progress in regard to IE and within the available resources and capacity,
the programme would not be considered “inclusive” according to the CPRD and other
globally agreed on definitions of “inclusion”.
27
5.1.1 To what extent the IE (Inclusive Education) Programme objectives respond to the
MoE priorities and beneficiaries’ needs?
Overall, the general perception is that the programme is relevant to the needs of
some children with disabilities - depending on the specific type and severity of their
disability. That is evident, for example, in the range of assistive technology provided
(based on the disabilities at school when the equipment was purchased), as well as
the infrastructure and physical accessibility of the school.
Similarly, in regard to addressing the priorities of the MoE, the programme was
considered aligned with the MoE priorities in regard to inclusion and became more
relevant over time, particularly once the programme started demonstrating the
improvements in infrastructure, teachers' technical capacity, and teaching resources
(material and human) that were made available in the targeted schools.
5.1.1(a) To what extent is the IE (Inclusive Education) Programme at the school level
(camps and host communities) relevant to the needs of children with disabilities?
The extent to which the programme was relevant to the needs of children with
disabilities varied. Although most evaluation participants indicated that the program-
in essence- responds to an identified gap in Jordan related to providing children with
disabilities with access to education, there were weaknesses found when the
evaluation considered specific elements of the programme as explained below:
In terms of physical infrastructure:
1. General accessibility: although one of the criteria at select intervention schools is
“physical accessibility”, the evaluation found that not all schools can actually be
considered “accessible”- the points below provide specific examples to further clarify:
● The schools were generally accessible to students with physical disabilities;
however, other disabilities did not seem to be accommodated. For example,
in schools where there were visually impaired students; none of the signage
was in braille, and none of the schools had slip-resilient floors or flooring with
differing textures.
● All schools’ main buildings were accessible but not all school facilities were
necessarily accessible. During the school tours only 5 out of the 10 schools had
accessible stalls in their toilets, and none of the schools had elevators.
● Three out of the ten visited schools had ramps that were either too steep and/or
not wide enough.
The survey showed consistent trends when the respondents were asked if the schools
they work at are prepared to accommodate students with disabilities.
The graph below illustrates their responses:
28
Graph 1: School accessibility according to Educators
48% 50%
When asked what
improvements were
made to help
accommodate
12% 38%
Of Which
students with
disabilities, the three
most chosen
responses were
“availability of a
resource room”,
“wide door frames
Schools are not Schools are Schools are Schools are and hallways” and
a ccessible at all accessible fully somewhat “added ramps”.
accessible accessible
Box 2: Resource Room Definition
2. Resource rooms: Although the use of resource
Resource Rooms: Are Support
rooms is not considered a feature of IE, all ten
Classrooms, outside of the main
visited schools had a resource room. This was
classroom where students with
seen as necessary since the programme is aware
learning difficulties and
that public schools in Jordan are not currently
disabilities receive academic
equipped to support students with disabilities
support by resource and or
inside the classroom and that the support, they
shadow teachers.
receive at the Resource Room is important.
On that premise, the resource rooms (in at least 6 of the 10 visited schools) are not
serving all students but rather only students from Grades 1 through Grade 6.
3. Assistive Devices: all 10 schools- according to MC’s reports and confirmed by the
school visits- had an impressive variety of assistive devices including assistive
technology (AT). However, the provided assistive devices only accommodate the
disabilities that are/were present when the devices were purchased. Should a child
with a non-represented disability enrol in the school, he/she will not have the
necessary devices to facilitate his/her learning.
** A full list of all AT devices at the 10 schools is available in Annex 8.7
The survey results showed that many respondents (36%), when they were asked if they
use assistive technology devices while teaching students with disabilities, confirmed
that they do use assistive devices. Of those educators, the majority selected responses
indicated the utilization of: electronic worksheets, spelling software, videotaped social
skills, and reading pens in a descending order. The graph below illustrates these
responses.
29
Graph 2: Use of Assistive Technology Devices, according to Educators
41% 36%
Of Which
have used
Electronic Spelling Software Videotaped Reading
Do not use Do use
Worksheets Social Pens
assistive devices assistive
Skills
devices
Now, in terms of interventions and programming:
● Training: is relevant to the teachers inside the classroom but not as relevant to
other educators such as administrative staff at the school and not specialised
enough for resource room teachers.
● Rehabilitation sessions: According to the Implementing Partner, an estimated
total of 400 sessions of rehabilitation were conducted on a monthly basis,
however this number was decrease to its half due to funding restrictions.
Rehabilitation sessions are critically needed by the students.
In the survey, (48%) of respondents indicated that their school offered rehabilitation
sessions to students with disabilities through the IE Programme - of whom (88%)
indicated that the sessions were given on-site, at the school.
5.1.2 To what extent does the IE programme reflect the gender, equity, and human
rights-based approach?
Conceptually, the programme reflects UNICEF’s programmatic focus on children from
vulnerable populations, children exposed to humanitarian crisis, children in remote
and/or difficult to reach areas, as well as both male and female. Furthermore, the
programme from a design standpoint- according to the provided programme
documents for the years 2017, 2018 and 2019, follows UNICEF’s HBA standards.
● Gender: Out of the 102 schools targeted by the programme, (57%) are female
and mixed schools and (43%) are male schools, which indicates unequal
distribution of schools across genders but not necessarily inequitable
distribution as (63%) of the total MoE schools in Jordan are female or mixed
schools.
● Geographic distribution: (34%) of schools implementing the IE Programme are
in the North (excluding those schools in the camps), (46%) are in the Central
region, and (20%) are in the South. Given that the general distribution of public
30
schools in the country is (40%) in the North, (42%) in the Centre, and (18%) in the
South, the IE Programme distribution across the regions is equitable with a
slightly higher focus on schools in the South.
In terms of reach into the refugee camps, (80%) of the 102 schools are in host
communities and (20%) are across the two Syrian refugee camps (13% in Al
Za’atari and 7% in Al Azraq camps). While this is a high percentage distribution,
it is consistent with the programme objectives due to the high levels of children
with disabilities residing within the camps and the cross-cutting objective to
target vulnerable populations.
Based on the distribution above, the Evaluation Team finds that the IE Programme
does follow the UNICEF pillars of a human-rights and child-centred approach in
design, and respects the principles of non-discrimination.
5.1.3 Noting that the NIES was only launched in January 2020, to what extent is the IE
(Inclusive Education) Programme aligned? If alignment doesn’t exist what are the
gaps and how can it be done?
The Evaluation Team found that there is a high degree of alignment between the NIES
and UNICEF’s programme especially in regard to the underlying principles and focus.
An important point of alignment between the NIES and the IE Programme is the notion
of gradual transition towards the inclusion of children with severe disabilities. This is
embodied under the Fifth Component of NIES, which state that the objectives of
learning and teaching are meant to be achieved through a range of activities in
order to complete the process of the full inclusion of students with disabilities in the
classroom.
Below are further areas of alignment:
Table 4: Areas of Alignment from NIES
NIES Component IE (Inclusive Education) Programme Element
Component 1: Quality and operations guidelines of the IE (Inclusive
Policies and Education) Programme manuals are aligned with the set
Legislation policies and legislation in the NIES.
Component 2: The IE (Inclusive Education) Programme embodies several
Awareness, Media interventions and efforts that seek to achieve objectives that
and Advocacy are aligned with this component. The areas of alignment are
related to the implementation of awareness raising activities
focusing on awareness raising in the training of school staff, as
well as highlighting and disseminating success stories towards
promoting positive attitudes towards children with disabilities
and their acceptance.
Component 3: The IE (Inclusive Education) Programme aims to establish
Identification, multidisciplinary teams of specialists to assist children with
31
Diagnosis, Support disabilities access schools. These specialists are expected to
and Referral support children with disabilities based on their diagnosed
Programs needs. Additionally, access to rehabilitation services and
support classrooms, act as complementary classes to
complete the process of access to education.
Component 4: Selected schools under the IE (Inclusive Education)
Accessibility and Programme are required to provide children with disabilities
Reasonable with accessibility to buildings as well as tools, supplies, aids,
Accommodation assistive technologies, and teaching and learning strategies
adapted to support students with disabilities in class.
Component 5: Both aim to train teachers on using multiple techniques to
Learning and support students with disabilities in their learning and provide
Teaching adapted teaching and learning materials to meet the various
‘Educational needs of students.
Programs’
Component 6: Both focus on building the capacity of existing school staff, in
Human Resources addition to trained specialists (shadow teachers) to assist
and Capacity students with disabilities at school.
Building
Component 8: The IE (Inclusive Education) Programme includes OOSC with
Children who are not disabilities in informal education through “Makani Centres”.
Enrolled in Moreover, the programme conducts diagnosis of OOSC with
Mainstream Schools disabilities in order to determine if they will be able to be
included in the formal education system.
KII Interviewees agreed there is alignment- especially in terms of vision-, and that the
IE Programme alignment has become more evident overtime, as the programme
evolved from a humanitarian relief programme focused on children with disabilities,
to a programme focused on the equitable provision of IE to all children (including
those with disabilities). In terms of areas of divergence, the Evaluation Team found
only the below:
Table 5: Areas of Divergence from NIES
NIES Component IE (Inclusive Education) Programme Element
Component 3 and While the NIES includes younger children, kindergarten children
Component 7 are not officially targeted under the IE Programme (but are
included in the camps), and as a result, children at risk of a
delay or disabilities are not referred to “early intervention
services” or targeted by the programme.
Component 5: The IE (Inclusive Education) Programme does not include
Learning and structured efforts to introduce tiered levels of support.
Teaching Intervention strategies are not implemented within the
‘Educational classroom consistently or depending on the type/ severity of
Programs’ the disability. Schools do not incorporate work on adaptation
of curricula or provide individualised instruction.
32
** Data gathered during school visits indicated that stakeholders had no knowledge
of the NIES.
5.1.4 To what extent is the IE (Inclusive Education) Programme aligned with global
practices (CRC, CRPD...)?
The Evaluation Team found the IE Programme vision and aim are closely aligned with
international laws and conventions such as the CRC and the CRPD. The IE Programme
aims to provide all children with equitable and free access to education and aims to
accommodate children with disabilities more effectively in order to enable them to
learn, take part in social interaction, and build social skills and peer relationships.
However, the practice of providing students with disabilities with support and
individualised attention outside the regular classroom through the use of the resource
rooms and with the aid of resource room teachers goes against the concept of “full
inclusion”.
The Evaluation Team found that the IE programme was using resource rooms due to
the following reasons:
1. Resource rooms are a solution for overcrowded classrooms and lack of support
made available to classroom teachers.
2. The resources and materials students with disabilities need within the school,
such as the tiered and multisensory approach require a lot of funding to make
it available in classrooms.
3. The curriculum in Jordan is very dense, teachers can barely cover the material
throughout the scholastic year, let alone spend extra time supporting students
with disabilities.
Ultimately these indicate systematic challenges within the public school system that
affects all students and teachers and should be addressed in order to progress to full
inclusion.
A comparison between international recommendations for practice (as described by
the 2020 UNESCO Global Education Monitoring Report7 and aligned with the CRPD
General Comment nº48) and the IE Programme further indicates divergent/insufficient
areas such as:
1. Shared experiences and resources: data gathered for this evaluation does not
indicate if efforts were made to improve communication and experience
sharing among teachers, between schools, and across actors.
2. Meaningful consultation with parents and communities: while awareness
raising was an important component of the IE Programme, many parents and
7 UNESCO, Global Education Monitoring Report, ءﺎﻨﺜﺘﺳا ﻼﺑ ﻊﯿﻤﺠﻟا:ﻊﯿﻤﺠﻠﻟ ﻞﻣﺎﺸﻟا ﻢﯿﻠﻌﺘﻟا .ﻢﯿﻠﻌﺘﻟا ﺪﺻﺮﻟ ﻲﻤﻟﺎﻌﻟا ﺮﯾﺮﻘﺘﻟا ﺺﺨﻠﻣ,2020:
https://unesdoc.unesco.org/ark:/48223/pf0000373721_ara
8 UN, CRPD GC4, 2016 ﻊﯿﻤﺠﻠﻟ ﻞﻣﺎﺸﻟا ﻢﯿﻠﻌﺘﻟا ﻲﻓ ﻖﺤﻟا نٔﺎﺸﺑ (2016)4 ﻢﻗر مﺎﻌﻟا ﻖﯿﻠﻌﺘﻟا : https://documents-dds-
ny.un.org/doc/UNDOC/GEN/G16/262/98/PDF/G1626298.pdf?OpenElement
33
education professionals were unable to recall instances of consultation and/or
collaboration.
3. Cooperation across government departments, sectors, and tiers: the IE
Programme and the NIES implementation are the responsibility of only one
department within the MoE and does not embody the necessary development
of a systemic approach and ethos.
4. Collect data for inclusion: programme specific monitoring and evaluation
processes need strengthening. National data on inclusion (as systemic
transformation) is inconsistent and unreliable.
Evaluation participants at the school level seem to have no awareness of global
practices or international laws and conventions such as the CRC and CRPD and
therefore, were unable to identify whether the IE Programme was consistent with
them.
34
5.2 Effectiveness
Table 6: Effectiveness – Evaluation Questions
Evaluation Question Sub-Questions
To what extent was the 1. To what extent were the objectives of the programme achieved
IE (Inclusive Education) effectively in terms of:
Programme in line with Support of enrolment and retention of children in schools; Support
inclusive practices and children’s learning and participation/ engagement in courses;
effective in delivering Change in attitudes of children, caregivers, and practices in schools.
results for children with 2. What were the bottlenecks that hindered the achievement of the
disabilities? intended objectives?
3.What are the strengths and weaknesses of the IE (Inclusive
Education) Programme delivered at the school level?
4. What are the barriers for children with disabilities and the
facilitating factors for accessing and benefitting from the IE (Inclusive
Education) Programme at school level (including model schools)?
5. What are the existing referral mechanisms for referring children
with disabilities to schools? How effective are they?
6. To what extent is the teacher training model effective and
sufficient in enabling teachers to support the retention and learning
of children with disabilities?
7. To what extent does the IE (Inclusive Education) Programme meet
the needs of children with disabilities in terms of enabling them to
fully engage in the learning process similarly to people without
disability?
Box 3: Evaluation Summary - Effectiveness
In regard to effectiveness, there was varying degrees of effectiveness across the
programme interventions. Provision of resources and assistive devices, teacher training,
and awareness raising were effective- to the extent they were implemented. However,
the programme- in design and scope- fell short in building consistent and standardised
processes for awareness raising efforts at the school, building the capacity of educators in
larger numbers, and establishing processes that allow for on-the-job support such as
mentoring and coaching for schools and teachers towards the continuous improvement
in the inclusion of students with disabilities.
The detailed findings per sub-evaluation question are discussed below. The survey
collected general impressions on the overall effectiveness of the program.
(50%) of educators found the IE programme somewhat effective, (25%) stated they
do not know, (16%) found the programme very effective, and (7%) found it ineffective.
The graph below shows the distribution of rating across the educator respondents.
35
Graph 3: Effectiveness of the IE programme according to Educators
16% 50% 7% 25%
Very Somewhat Ineffective I don’t
Effective Effective know
****This question was phrased in a very general sense and not contextualised within
the sector’s preparedness in terms of resources or capacity.
5.2.1 To what extent were the objectives of the programme achieved effectively in
terms of:
Support of enrolment and retention of children in schools;
Support children’s learning and participation/ engagement in courses;
Change in attitudes of children, caregivers, and practices in schools.
The evaluation findings indicate that the programme was successful in increasing the
enrolment of children with disabilities into public schools and changing attitudes
towards children with disabilities in targeted communities.
The programme was somewhat successful in providing children with learning support
however, the findings indicated that a majority of that learning support was within the
resource rooms and not within the general classrooms which is counterintuitive to
inclusive learning.
The evaluation was unable to determine the programme achievements in retaining
children with disabilities within the public-school year due a lack of organised and
consistent data.
1. The effective achievement of programme objectives:
The implementing partner provided programme reports for the years 2017 through
2019 that detailed the set objectives and targets for each year. Upon comparing
them, the Evaluation Team found that the implementing partner was successful at
satisfying most of their set targets to varying degrees, as is evident in Annex 8.8.
2. Support of enrolment and retention of students with disabilities:
The Evaluation Team accessed multiple sources of data focused on the enrolment
and retention of students with disabilities and found that the available data on
36
enrolment is inconsistent and unreliable, whereas data on retention was limited and
therefore the evaluation was unable to reach any solid conclusions regarding the
programme’s effectiveness on retention. The evaluation findings demonstrate the
programme’s contribution to the increase of enrolment of students with disabilities in
public schools, despite the inconsistent numbers given by different sources partially
due to inconsistent definitions of “children with disabilities” across different entities.
Noting the inconsistencies, the table below shows a steady increase in the total
number of students with disabilities enrolled in public schools; from 8,412 (2019/2020)
to 13,256 (2021/2022), with a steady increase in both female and male students.
Table 7: Students with disabilities enrolment numbers in Public Schools
Total # of students with
Year disabilities enrolled in Male Female
public schools*
2019/2020 8,412 3,904 4,508
2020/2021 14,097 6,503 7,594
2021/2022 13,256 6,140 7,116
Table: Data obtained from OpenEMIS
In terms of retention, numbers of students with disabilities enrolled and retained at the
intervention schools - the data in the table below indicates that the total number of
enrolled students with disabilities showed a gradual increase between 2014 and 2018
and then a more drastic increase for the academic year 2018/2019. The retention is
the highest in 2017/2018 academic year but across the board the following are
considered high rates.
Table 8: Students with disabilities enrolment and retention rates in Intervention Schools
Academic Enrolled* Dropped Retained %
Year out** Retained
2014-2015 1687 282 1405 83%
2015-2016 1906 207 1699 89%
2016-2017 1662 108 1554 94%
2017-2018 1949 100 1849 95%
2018-2019 2850 326 2524 89%
Table: Data submitted by Mercy Corps
*Provided with services during the scholastic year
37
The Evaluation Team found that limitations to accurate retention rates are due to:
- Compiling and reporting numbers at the beginning of the academic year,
when some students might drop out later in the year
- Absence of a mechanism that follows students who have left a school under
the IE Programme in order to determine whether the child has dropped out or
simply moved to a different school.
- The above reported numbers are for the schools that remain under the direct
implementation of the IE programme and do not cover schools that were
handed back to the MoE.
3. Support of children’s learning and participation
Please see subsection 5.2.6 below on pages 45-46.
4. Change in attitudes
The evaluation found that there is wide acceptance of students with disabilities across
all participants including parents, teachers, and students without disabilities, and
acceptance and encouragement for them to be included in schools.
Acceptance predominantly
“A girl in my class is a slow writer, but that’s okay
stems from people’s religious
because I help her and write for her. Islam teaches
beliefs and/or their familial
us to treat others as we wish to be treated” (Student
values that teach people to
without disabilities, Irbid)
accept all humans despite their
differences. The Evaluation Team came across sentiments of sympathy and/or pity
when speaking of students or children with disabilities.
As for the increased awareness of disabilities, it is mostly a result of direct interaction
and socialising with students with disabilities in school which the IE Programme made
possible, and not necessarily due to attending awareness raising sessions offered by
the IE Programme.
As a result of the school visits, the Evaluation
“My perceptions have changed since
Team found that most teachers and
enrolling in this inclusive school, children
with disabilities used to frighten me. I was students have become accustomed to,
afraid that they would hit me by mistake and comfortable with students with
because they do not know how to disabilities, after they interacted with them
interact in social settings. Seeing them in school.
around us daily proves that they are not
so harmful after all” (Student without
The majority of students with and without
disabilities, Mafraq)
disabilities said students with disabilities
were generally treated with kindness, but
they all still agree that there are incidents of bullying that take place in the form of
38
verbal mistreatment and teasing. Most respondents acknowledged there are usually
efforts from the teachers to stop this kind of negative behaviour.
The classroom observations conducted by the Evaluation Team found that the
general environments of the observed classrooms were friendly and accepting of
students with disabilities. The treatment of both students and the teachers toward the
student(s) with disabilities in the observed classrooms was kind and respectful, and no
incidents of bullying or teasing were observed in any of the classrooms.
The survey results shed light on the matter. When asked if students with disabilities
should be included in school, (47%) of educators believe that this depends on the
type/severity of the disability, whereas (19%) believe that students with disabilities
should not be included in school. A more detailed breakdown of their responses is
illustrated below:
Graph 4: Should students with disabilities be included in school? According to Educators.
47% 34% 19%
Graph 4.1: By Job Title Graph 4.3: By Enrolment in the IE programme
97% 2% 1%
71%
Work or have worked in a school that
had implemented the IE programme
Of Which
Teachers Principals Counsellors
Graph 4.2: By Scho ol Type Graph 4.4: By Enrolment in IE Programme Training
63% 31% 6%
24% 17% 61%
Depends on Should be Should not
the included in be Female Male Mixed progr
I
a
E
mme tr
O
a
t
in
h
i
e
n
r
g tra
N
in
o
in g
type/severity of school included in
Schools Schools schools
training
the disability school
When survey respondents were asked - in their opinion- if students accept the
presence of students with disabilities in schools- (64%) said that some of them are
accepted, (28%) said yes, and (8%) said no. The graph below illustrates the results.
39
Graph 5: Student’s acceptance of children with disabilities in school, according to Educators
64% 8% 28%
Some of them No Yes
When respondents were asked if -in their opinion- parents accept the presence of
students with disabilities in schools, (58%) responded with some of them, (36%) said
yes, and (6%) said no. Findings are illustrated in the graph below.
Graph 6: Parent’s acceptance of children with disabilities in schools, according to Educators
58% 6% 36%
Some of them No Yes
It is worth noting that respondents in schools that are within the IE Programme were
more likely to indicate students and parents are accepting of students with disabilities
than respondents working in non-IE Programme schools.
When educators were asked more generally about the biggest hurdles children with
disabilities face pertaining to accessing education- (56%) of respondents indicated
both “perceptions towards children with disabilities by society” and “lack of
awareness towards the needs of children with disabilities” as the two most prevalent
challenges.
40
5.2.2 What were the bottlenecks that hindered the achievement of the intended
objectives?
The Evaluation Team found that the bottlenecks that hindered the achievement of
the intended objectives varied and are at varying levels of complexity. These hurdles
include:
- The macro-level challenges that the education system faces that impose
bottlenecks to the IE Programme and hinder it from achieving its intended
objectives, such as; insufficient technical capacity, limited human and
financial resources, ineffective capacity to decentralise implementation and
coordinate action on the ground, and that special education is the concern
of only one department within the MoE and not integrated more strategically
across the system.
- The short durations of funding where funding was renewed annually on the
following dates.
At an implementation level, the Evaluation Team the following to present bottlenecks:
● The lack of clear processes or protocols for handover, with change in staff at
the different levels- specifically at the school level.
● The unpreparedness of schools to accommodate students with disabilities
especially in terms of physical infrastructure.
● The insufficient number of trained and capable personnel at school to work
with, and accommodate, students with disabilities, especially in terms of their
learning and academic advancement.
5.2.3 What are the strengths and weaknesses of the IE (Inclusive Education)
Programme delivered at the school level from the perspective of children with
disabilities, their caregivers, the school (teacher and directors) as well as the MoE?
The Evaluation Team found that the IE Programme pillar related to addressing stigma
and discrimination was one of the most successful aspects of the programme.
Changing the perceptions of parents, community members, and school personnel
was critical and contributed to the increase in enrolment and acceptance of students
with disabilities within schools and within the greater the communities.
On the flip side, the IE Programme’s efforts in regard to infrastructure improvement
and the provision of appropriate furniture for children with disabilities were not found
to be sufficient, which was attributed to a lack of sufficient funding. Furthermore, the
Evaluation Team found that more work is needed toward achieving sustainability. It
was stated that once the programme ends, without a strong exit strategy, most
schools will not be able to sustain the programme activities and interventions.
According to the perspectives collected at the school level, a total of eight strengths
were mentioned across but the four most frequently mentioned were:
41
● Concept: The concept of the IE Programme is considered an impressive effort
by the government that should be widespread in all schools across the country.
● Social Benefit: There is a sense of gratitude and appreciation that children with
disabilities are now more accepted and provided better access to education.
● Specialised staff: The presence of trained professionals who are capable of
teaching children with disabilities and learning difficulties, such as resource
room teachers and shadow teachers.
● Awareness: The presence of children with disabilities in school has increased
general awareness to their educational needs. In turn, this increased their
acceptance by others, including students and educators.
As for the weaknesses mentioned at the school level, a total of seven weaknesses
were listed throughout but below are the four most frequently mentioned:
● Physical accessibility and accommodation: The programme does not focus on
physical improvements to ensure schools and all their facilities are accessible
and accommodating.
● Awareness: There needs to be more awareness-raising efforts for teachers,
students without disabilities, and the general community.
● Capacity: More efforts are needed toward building the capacity of teachers
and school staff in order to work better and accommodate students with
disabilities since the number of qualified staff is still insufficient.
● Academic support and progress: The IE Programme is viewed -by parents- as
more successful in socially accommodating students with disabilities than in
helping students with disabilities make progress and/or excel academically.
5.2.4 What are the barriers for children with disabilities and the facilitating factors for
accessing and benefitting from the IE (Inclusive Education) Programme at school level
(including model schools)?
The topic of barriers was discussed with all stakeholders at all different levels from
which the Evaluation Team classified the two main categories barriers into those
internal to the school and those external to the school. Below are the summarised
barriers on accessing and/or benefitting from the IE Programme.
Internal Barriers
● Physical inaccessibility/ inappropriate physical infrastructure
● Non-acceptance of children with disabilities by some school staff/ principals
● Perception of unacceptance of- and sometimes mistreatment of- children with
disabilities by students without disabilities
● The classroom environment is not conducive to teachers accommodating
students with disabilities; overcrowding, teachers’ workload and the duration
of classes were the main factors mentioned.
● Insufficient human resources and capable personnel at the school which puts
42
a significant load on resource room and shadow teachers in any one school.
External Barriers
● Limited funding and resources made available to schools.
● Unavailability of transportation to and from schools
● Non-existence of a policy that requires schools to register children with
disabilities in public schools
● The perceptions of society toward children with disabilities / some parents’
negative opinions on inclusion of children with disabilities in their children’s
schools/ some parents’ embarrassment of their own children’s disabilities
● Insufficient training and professional development for teachers/ school staff on
inclusion
● Financial limitations to hiring specialised staff
When survey respondents were asked to select the most significant barriers that
children with disabilities face pertaining to education, the two options that were
selected most often were “perceptions held towards disabilities by society" and
equally, “the lack of awareness towards the needs of children with disabilities”. The
below graph shows the survey choices and the percentage of respondents who
selected them:
Graph 7: Barrier’s students with disabilities encounter according to Educators
56% 22% 5 6% 47% 51% 38% 16% 36%
Societal Perceptions Lack of Lack of Lack of Insufficient The MoE The MoE does
perceptions towards awareness means strategies funding from does not not give
towards disabilities by towards the and methods government view inclusion
disabilities the child’’ needs of for teaching bodies inclusion as much
family children with children with a top attention
disabilities disabilities priority
43
In terms of the facilitating factors, the Evaluation Team identified the following internal
and external facilitating factors for accessing and benefitting from the IE Programme.
Table 9: Facilitating Factors for the IE Programme
Internal Factors External Factors
More schools are now physically Donors supported the MoE develop and
accessible (either old facilities that now put in place construction codes and
have ramps to main buildings or newly specifications for schools that are in
constructed schools that adhere to compliance with IE standards
international standards)
The increased awareness of children with The increased awareness of parents of
disabilities and acceptance by school children with and without disabilities of
staff and other students having children with disabilities enrolled in
schools
Access to AT devices and rehabilitation Having an implementing partner that is
sessions donor funded and can make services and
resources available to schools (without it
costing families or the schools)
5.2.5 What are the existing referral mechanisms for referring children with disabilities
to schools? How effective are they?
The Evaluation Team found that there is inconsistent understanding of what “referral”
is- while some stakeholders understood “referral” as the way by which OOSC children
with disabilities are identified and referred to the nearest school for enrolment, others
conceptualised it as a mechanism by which children are referred to services within or
outside of school in response to their specific needs- the latter is not one of the
programme aims.
The approved data collection tools went by the latter definition, and since it is not a
focus of the programme it is not surprising that those referrals were found absent.
UNICEF and MC, after the submission of the draft final report, clarified that what is
done under the programme is actually “outreach” to OOSC to have them assessed
for enrolment in schools and that the programme does not provide any “referral” to
services or support. That clarification was not provided in time to collect the relevant
data.
Having said that, the Evaluation Team was still able to identify some challenges
pertaining to referrals. The evaluation found that school leadership determines
whether or not they can/want to enrol the child- even if the diagnosis of the child
determined they can be accommodated by the IE Programme schools.
44
5.2.6 To what extent is the teacher training model effective and sufficient in enabling
teachers to support the retention and learning of children with disabilities?
The Evaluation Team found that the training is effective in helping teachers acquire
the necessary knowledge and skills to enable them to teach children with disabilities
and support their learning since it follows international best practices, provides in-
house specialists for support, and is reviewed annually based on a lessons-learned
exercise.
The weaknesses of the training were:
- The training was more theoretical than practical in
preparing teachers to work with students with “We are in need of
more trained shadow
disabilities.
teachers that have
- The methodologies the teachers were trained on
received specialized
are not easily implemented in the classroom due
training to support
to overcrowding and short duration of classes.
students with disabilities
- The training is not tailored to fit the different
in the classroom”
trainees` needs, and their roles and responsibilities- (Amman)
everyone attended the same training regardless
of whether they were administrative or teaching staff , or which grade/ subject
they are teaching.
- The training did not include a sufficient number of teachers per school (the
most frequently reported number was 3 staff members/ school)
The survey examined the effectiveness of the training more in-depth and the results
are as follows according to educators who responded to the survey and have
attended the training (a total of 126 respondents)- the perceptions were generally
and predominantly positive, where (67%) of educators benefited from the training,
(66%) believe that the training was effective in building their knowledge of working
with students with disabilities, (49%) agreed that the training provided them with the
necessary skills to accommodate students with disabilities within the classroom, and
(53%) said that they applied what they learned during the training within their
classroom. The detailed responses are illustrated in the graphs below
Graph 8: Did you benefit from the training? Graph 9: Was the training effective in building you
knowledge of working with students with disabilities?
67% 5% 28%
66% 6% 28%
Yes No Somewhat Yes No Somewhat
45
Graph 10: Did the training provide you with the necessary Graph 11: Did you apply what you learned
skills to accommodate students with disabilities in your during training in your classroom?
classroom?
49% 10% 41%
53% 8% 39%
Yes No Somewhat Yes No Somewhat
The classroom observations conducted by the Evaluation Team found that many of the
practices focused on in the training sessions were not applied within the classroom. However,
the data from the classroom observations is limited due to the fact that only four teachers in
the 10 classroom observations had attended the training sessions.
The only practice regarding the “accommodation” of students with disabilities
observed in the classroom was placing the student(s) with disabilities in the front row.
5.2.7 To what extent does the IE (Inclusive Education) Programme meet the needs of
children with disabilities in terms of enabling them to fully engage in the learning
process similarly to children without disability?
Overall, the Evaluation Team considers the
“The training was useful, I learned
programme successful in meeting the needs of
about the different types of
students with disabilities but not “fully” or “similarly
disabilities. It also changed my
perception towards children with to students without disabilities”. There is a need for
disabilities, I used to be more significant investment to enable and
completely against inclusion” prepare the schools to sufficiently meet the
(Teacher, Zarqa) different needs of students with disabilities similarly
to those without.
Box 4: IEP Definition
The expected practice of
IEP: Individualised Education Plans – are action
developing an IEP is a start to
plans created by Shadow Teachers for students
organising the school in terms of with disabilities – specifically catering to the
identifying the needs of the Childs specific disability – highlighting the
students and devising a plan to academic objectives per year – IEP’s are
meet those needs. More support updated annually to keep track of the students’
and enforcement is required in this progress.
46
Box 5: Shadow Teacher Definition
regard as the Evaluation Team found that while schools
Shadow Teachers: Are teachers
usually develop IEP’s, some have not yet done so for this trained and employed by MC
academic year. to work with children with
disabilities, in MoE public
The developed procedure of producing IEPS, and the schools. These teachers
set guidelines for shadow teachers on the development provide additional support to
of IEPs and scheduling regular meetings with the students with disabilities in the
teachers and parents to discuss the progress of students schools’ resource room. MC
with disabilities, was not consistently followed in the 10 confirmed that shadow
teachers are additionally
visited schools; the majority of parents and classroom
required to support students
teachers were unaware whether their students with
with disabilities inside the
disabilities had IEPs or not.
classroom, however the ET did
not find any evidence of that.
The survey asked respondents if the IE Programme was
able to integrate and meet the requirements of
children with disabilities in school. The below graph demonstrates the responses:
Graph 12: Integration of children with disabilities in IE programme school, according to Educators
47% 9% 25% 19%
To an extent No Yes I don’t know
about the
programme
These indicate that schools enrolled in the programme are more likely to have had
reasons to believe that their schools are more accommodating in integrating and
meetings the needs of students with disabilities.
5.2.8 Based on the achievements of the present programme, what recommendations
will be made to UNICEF’s programme document and its alignment with the national
strategy?
Covered under Section 7: Recommendations of the report pages 55-57.
47
5.3 Cost Efficiency & Effectiveness
Table 10: Cost Efficiency & Effectiveness - Evaluation Questions
Evaluation Question
To what extent does the ministry have the capacity to take over the responsibility of
the programme, what elements of the programme, and what is in place (budget,
policies, technical capacity) to enable it to do so.
Box 6: Evaluation Summary – Cost Efficiency & Effectiveness
O verall, there was agreement that the MoE does not currently have the capacity
- financial and technical - to take over the responsibility of the IE Programme. There
is currently insufficient budget allocation that would enable the MoE to take on the
interventions in the current IE Programme schools or roll it out to more schools. There
is also insufficient capacity- especially at the school levels- that would enable the
MoE to provide good accommodation and quality education to students with
disabilities.
5.3.1 To what extent was the IE (Inclusive Education) Programme cost effective? What
is the breakdown of costs per child with disability?
Research onto the subject of financing IE is adamant that the cost of IE cannot be
subsumed by costing the education of children with disabilities in segregated or
integrated settings 91011(such as the case of Jordan) as these are generally 2.5 to 3
times higher that educating children with disabilities in inclusive settings where the
quality of the entire education system is improved. The costing of IE is related to
costing the development of equity and anti-discrimination barriers, some of which are
out of the purview of ministries of education.
Based on the international best-practices and the information gathered for this
evaluation, the Evaluation Team concluded that it is not possible to determine the
cost effectiveness of the IE Programme because the structure and format of costing
and budgeting for a donor -funded programme is very different than that of
government budgeting. A large portion of donor programme funds is used to cover
the costs of the implementing NGO and therefore, estimating how much it would cost
the government to take on the responsibility (financially) is a difficult task.
Another factor that makes costing difficult is the fact that the accommodation of
different disabilities looks different depending on the disability, and might require
9 UNESCO, Global Education Monitoring Report, Inclusion and Education: All means all. 2020: https://unesdoc.unesco.org/ark:/48223/pf0000373718
10 UNICEF, North Macedonia, Inclusive Education: Financing of Inclusive Education, 2014: https://www.unicef.org/northmacedonia/reports/inclusive-
education-financing-inclusive-education
11 Mangiaracina,A. (Ed.). Financing of Inclusive Education: Background Information Report. European Agency for Special Needs and Inclusive Education.
2016
48
different specifications, devices, etc. According to an interviewee from a donor
agency, the cost per students with disability is (50%) more than an average student
without disabilities.
49
5.4 Impact Long-term
Table 11: Impact Long - term - Evaluation Questions
Evaluation Question
To what extent did the IE (Inclusive Education) Programme contribute to a positive long-
term change for children in general and children with disabilities in particular, teachers
and improved the current situation in terms of education, environment, social cohesion?
Box 7: Evaluation Summary – Impact Long - term
The IE Programme played a crucial contributing role to positive change in regard to
perceptions, awareness, and acceptance of children with disabilities- at least
among those within the IE Programme schools and their communities. The change
in perception is considered a long-term impact and will contribute to more
widespread positive change in awareness but also lead to constant increase in the
number of students with disabilities enrolled and retained in schools.
The Evaluation Team found that the biggest impact the programme has had (or can
potentially contribute to) was in increasing acceptance and awareness of students
with disabilities among school communities, which allows for opportunities of
socialization that can help students with disabilities develop their social skills and life
skills.
Students (with and without disabilities) believe the “Including my child in public
programme interventions will have a long-term school has allowed him to
positive impact on everyone within the targeted build relationships with his
schools. They stressed the long-term benefits of peers. Unfortunately, he still
needs to progress
including children with disabilities in class, as it helps
academically, I am
improve everyone’s social skills and aids character
incapable of supporting him
building. Students with disabilities reported that
at home” (Parent of in-
attending school with students without disabilities
school child with disabilities,
helps build their confidence and makes them feel
Irbid)
equal, as it provides them with equal educational
opportunities.
50
5.5 Sustainability
Table 12: Sustainability - Evaluation Questions
Evaluation Questions
1.To what extent can the IE (Inclusive Education) Programme model be replicated,
expanded, and sustained?
2. To what extent has the upstream work (advocacy, technical assistance, generation
and use of data and evidence) of UNICEF undertaken with the MoE contributed to the
institutionalisation of the programme?
Box 8: Evaluation Summary – Sustainability
Overall, the IE Programme and its model do not sufficiently reflect considerations
for sustainability. Several key aspects need to be reconsidered, and specific
measures are required to be put in place in order to achieve better sustainability
and institutionalisation of the interventions.
5.5.1 To what extent can the IE (Inclusive Education) Programme model be replicated,
expanded and sustained?
The Evaluation Team found the programme, although replicable to more schools
within Jordan should the needed resources be allocated, is not sustainable in its
current format.
For replication, a significant amount of funding and/or budget allocation will be
necessary in order to; a) physically prepare schools to become accessible and
accommodating to children with disabilities, b) build the capacity of staff at schools,
c) provide the necessary equipment and assistive technology, d) provide the
rehabilitation sessions as needed, and e) conduct the awareness raising sessions
within communities.
In regard to sustainability, the MoE and its schools are currently unable to take on the
costs of inclusion and the interventions presented by the IE Programme including the
provision of shadow teachers (who are not MoE employees and are paid by the
programme), the continuation of the rehabilitation sessions, the maintenance of
existing and acquiring new assistive devices, while also ensuring a certain number of
teachers at any one school are trained.
It was also found that the mechanisms and processes set in place to ensure continuity
are insufficient. The Evaluation Team found one major challenge is the rapid turnover
and change in staffing within the schools which results in the limited transfer of
knowledge and information about the IE programme.
51
In terms of the handover plan- which was followed by only 37 of the total number of
schools (102)- does not take into consideration the funding required for sustainability
and the MoE’s inability to secure those funds to continue with the IE Programme
introduced interventions.
The other concern is the MoE’s limited capacity, from a technical and managerial
perspective, to effectively sustain the programme activities within the current schools
and replicate the programme activities in other schools as well as expand the
programme activities to achieve higher levels of inclusion within all schools.
5.5.2 To what extent has the upstream work (advocacy, technical assistance,
generation, existence and use of data) UNICEF has undertaken with the MoE
contributed to the institutionalisation of the programme?
The programme is not yet institutionalised although there have been discussions
pertaining to replication and sustainability- specifically in light of the 10-year national
strategy.
As mentioned above, the programme has provided a solid foundation for future
efforts toward ensuring the integration of children with disabilities in the existing
educational system. This can be mainly attributed to the development of the
guidelines manual in July 2021, and the general framework of the interventions and
the associated materials (such as training material, templates for IEP’s, etc). However,
most efforts, as discussed in previous sections, did not contribute to institutionalisation,
or to inclusive education.
In regard to advocacy, there is a need for more advocacy efforts at several levels
since it became apparent there is very limited attention given to the potential of
students with disabilities. The awareness raising efforts were successful but need to be
more systemic and happen at a broader scale in order to contribute to
institutionalization.
52
5.6 Coverage
Table 13: Coverage - Evaluation Questions
Evaluation Questions
Is the IE (Inclusive Education) Programme targeting children with disabilities and the
vulnerable populations in Jordan?
Box 9: Evaluation Summary – Coverage
The IE Programme is indeed targeting children with disabilities and was able to
contribute to meeting the specific needs of some of them. This indicates the
programme is reaching a vulnerable population- as children with disabilities are
generally underserved populations lacking some of their most basic rights. The
programme also expanded its reach to students from low socio-economic status
as well as those from the Syrian refugee population (in host communities and
camps)- both fitting within the general definitions of “vulnerable populations”.
5.6.1 Is the IE (Inclusive education) Programme targeting a vulnerable population in
Jordan?
The Evaluation Team found that the programme did achieve its objective to target
children with disabilities and vulnerable populations in Jordan. However, although the
selection criteria were valid, the selection process was not detailed and one that
accounts for priority and the criteria not weighted to ensure consistent reach across
vulnerable populations.
The IE programme targeted schools from geographic locations with high numbers of
students with disabilities, schools with high rates of OOSC with disabilities, and schools
in areas with a high prevalence of poverty (based on monthly income and size).
Furthermore, the school selection process used by programme took into account the
accessibility of the school (i.e. if there is a ramp), the capacity of the school to provide
a resource room, and the willingness of the leadership within the schools to participate
in the programme and enrol children with disabilities.
53
SECTION 6: EVALUATION CONCLUSIONS AND LESSON LEARNED
Based on the analysis and identified findings in accordance with the evaluation matrix
and set questions and sub-questions, the Evaluation Team was able to reach a
number of strategic conclusions and lessons learned.
The Evaluation Team reached three overarching conclusions worth discussing and
considering in any future IE programming in Jordan and they are:
● More substantial investment from MoE and its partners is needed to continue
the journey towards inclusive quality education for all children.
● The definition of “people with disabilities” needs to be made consistent
across different entities and programmes which will in turn provide reliable data
critical to support and inform future decision making Based on the success of
the IE programme in creating awareness around children with disabilities in
school communities, nationwide awareness raising efforts should be created
with more focus on children with disabilities’ strengths, abilities, and potential.
As for the lessons learned and reached as a result of the evaluation:
● Enrolling children with disabilities in schools is not sufficient without enabling schools
to meet the learning needs of ALL children and to help them realise their potential.
● The responsibility of IE should include several stakeholders such as the Ministries of
Health and Social Development, civil society organizations, as well as private
sector entities that could support of the MoE through stable, reliable, and long-
term partnerships with shared accountability.
● It is critical, in any programming, to consider scalability, replicability, and
institutionalisation during the design phase in order to ensure that proper
mechanisms and needed financial allocations are in place to support
sustainability beyond the project end date. This process should include and
engage the relevant stakeholders from the very beginning.
54
SECTION 7: RECOMMENDATIONS
The following are the evidence-based strategic and critical recommendations that
were informed by the evaluation findings and derived from the extensive data that
was collected through key informant interviews, focus group discussions, surveys, and
school visits and analysed against the evaluation criteria and questions. The formation
of the recommendations paid particular attention to the information collected by the
individuals (duty bearers and right holders) who participated in the evaluations and
their perceptions of the successes, challenges, weaknesses and strengths of the
programme. The findings indicate the need for UNICEF, and other donors, to continue
supporting the MoE in its plan and progress towards IE and its sustainability. The MoE
and its partners need to develop a long-term sustainability roadmap that plans out
the gradual and reasonable transition of responsibility (both technical and financial)
from the donors to the MoE. This plan should consider governance, policy, and
institutional capacity- both human and financial.
Furthermore, the table below organizes the more specific recommendations into two
levels- the system level and the programme level recommendations.
Table 1: Critical and Strategic Recommendations
Recommendation Timeframe Responsibility
1. Strengthen IE data organisation- better Medium MoE with UNICEF in
documentation on enrolment and retention, Term collaboration with
including monitoring of attendance and UNESCO and
progress. This data should be centrally USAID-funded JTAP
recorded and updated- based on a
consistent definition- in the OpenEMIS and on
which all partners rely in their decision-
making.
2. Institutionalize the investments made under Short-Term MoE with support of
the IE Programme such as the approval and UNICEF
systemic utilisation of the programme
developed manuals, awareness raising kits,
and Standard Operating Procedures (SOP’s)
pertaining to IE including the development
and implementation of the IEP’s. Additionally,
advocating toward institutionalising the
“shadow teacher” job description and
capacity building (pre-service as well as in-
service).
55
leveL
metsyS
3-Require stronger project management and Immediate UNICEF
monitoring and evaluation functions and
processes to ensure consistent and reliable
data to inform programme decisions and
continuous learning and improvement.
Short to UNICEF’s
4-Refine the capacity building efforts through: medium Implementing
a) More tailored trainings should be term Partner
developed and delivered to ALL relevant
MoE staff (at central, Field directorates and
school levels) in order to equip them with the
necessary knowledge, skills and attitudes to
feel confident serving ALL students. b) a
larger number of teachers need to be trained
toward proper and effective inclusion of all
students (including those with disabilities) in
the classroom- moving away from the
reliance on resource rooms and resource
teachers.
Short to UNICEF’s
5-Develop a mechanism through which Medium Implementing
teachers, parents and other professionals term Partner
work collaboratively on the development and
implementation of Individual Education Plans
(IEP’s) for students with disabilities.
Medium UNICEF with the
6-Systemize the awareness raising Term assistance of the
interventions: materials and sessions for Implementing
awareness raising need to reach all schools. Partner
Awareness raising should focus on recognising
the abilities and strengths of children with
disabilities beyond acceptance.
Medium UNICEF’s
7-Develop a comprehensive list of assistive Term Implementing
technology and devices (with specifications) Partner
so that schools are instructed and can
procure the needed resources in order to
accommodate any and all disabilities.
56
mret
regnol
hguorht(
leveL
emmargorP
selcyc
emmargorp
Medium UNICEF and MoE
8-Mobilise existing structures (such as the term
SDDP school or directorate level committees)
toward leveraging comprehensive and
sustainable resources and services to students
with disabilities (including but not limited to
physical infrastructure improvement for
accessibility, rehabilitation sessions and
psycho-social support).
57
SECTION 8: ANNEXES
8.1 List of people interviewed (KII)
Name Title Entity Date
Maisa Asmar Program Manager Mercy Corps 08/09/2021
Gemma Wilson- Chief of Education UNICEF 15/09/2021
Clark
Sajeda Atari ECED specialist UNICEF 28/10/2021
Dr. Mohammad Head of Special Needs Ministry of 09/09/2021
Rahamneh Department Education
Dr. Sami Mahasis Managing Director of General Ministry of 09/09/2021
Education Education
Ghadeer al Haris Secretary General Assistant for Higher Council for 08/09/2021
Technical Affairs the Rights of
Persons with
Disabilities
David Debattista Advisor, Promoting Quality in GIZ 16/09/2021
Inclusive Education (PROMISE)
Roohi Malik Education technical Advisor FCDO 16/09/2021
Rana Kawar Education Specialist UNICEF 01/02/2022
58
8.2 School Visit Schedule
Governorate School Name Date
Irbid ﺔﺳردﻣ نوﻠﺳﯾﻣ ﺔﯾﺳﺎﺳﻷا تﺎﻧﺑﻠﻟ * 3 & 4 October
Maysloon Primary School for Girls
Zarqa ﺔﺳردﻣ نﺎﻛﺳا ﺔﯾﻣﺷﺎﮭﻟا ﺔﯾﺳﺎﺳﻷا ﺔطﻠﺗﺧﻣﻟا 5 & 6 October
Iskan Al Hashmiyeh Mixed Primary
School
Amman ﺔﺳردﻣ مﺻﺗﻌﻣﻟا ﺔﯾﺳﺎﺳﻷا نﯾﻧﺑﻠﻟ 10 & 11 October
Mo’tasem Primary School for Boys
Za’atari Camp School 2 *** 12 & 13 October
Za’atari Camp School 3 17 & 18 October
Amman ﺔﺳردﻣ مأ رﺎﻣﻋ ﺔﯾوﻧﺎﺛﻟا ﺔطﻠﺗﺧﻣﻟا * 20 October & 8 November +
Um Ammar Secondary Mixed
School
Mafraq ﺔﺳردﻣ ءارﻣﺣﻟا ﺔﯾﺳﺎﺳﻷا ﺔطﻠﺗﺧﻣﻟا 26 & 27 October
Al Hamrah Primary Mixed School
Ma’an لﯾﻠﺧﻟا نﺑ دﻣﺣا ﺔﯾﺳﺎﺳﻻا نﯾﻧﺑﻠﻟ 31 October & 1 November
Al Khalil Bin Ahmad Primary School
for Boys
Karak ﺔﺳردﻣ ﺔﻟوﺧ تﻧﺑ روزﻷا ﺔﯾﺳﺎﺳﻷا ﺔطﻠﺗﺧﻣﻟا 2 & 3 November
Khawla Bint Al Azwar Primary
Mixed Schools
Irbid ﺔﺳردﻣ ﻲﺑأ رﻛﺑ قﯾدﺻﻟا ﺔﯾﺳﺎﺳﻷا نﯾﻧﺑﻠﻟ 9 & 10 November
Abu Bakir Al Sidiq Primary School
for Boys
59
8.3 OOSC Focus Group Discussion Schedule
Governorate Centre Facilitator Date
Madaba Mlaih Charitable Jordan River 28.Oct
Association Foundation
Amman Makani Centre MC list of OOSC with 4. Nov
Marka - Face to face disabilities
and phone KIIs for
those who did not
show up
Mafraq Mghyer Makani Jordan River 11. Nov
Center Foundation
Mafraq Manshieh Makani Jordan River 11.Nov
Center - VIRTUAL Foundation
Irbid Ramtha Makani Jordan River 8. Nov
Center - VIRTUAL Foundation
60
8.4 Data Collection Protocols
I. Written protocol to ensure subject’s safety
● The evaluator in direct contact with the children participating in the evaluation
is obligated to report to law enforcement agencies if he/she suspects or is
made aware of a child who needs protection. During the informed consent
process, children must be made aware of the evaluator’s obligation to report
certain incidents, and therefore break confidentiality.
● This protocol is based on the assumption that children can be safely referred to
social services, the police, or emergency services. These are mandated and
able to assess the risks and take all appropriate actions. In other words, we
assume that the mere reporting will not expose children to increased risks.
● The evaluator will therefore have at every location where children are going to
be interviewed or participate in the focus groups, the list, addresses and phone
numbers of the nearest social services/emergency services and police.
● If a child gives signs that he/she is about to disclose past or current situations
that are not addressed and still put the child at risk/ need of protection, the
evaluator will interrupt him/her immediately and warn about the potential
need of breaching the confidentiality.
● If the child does not want to go further, the evaluator will ask whether he/she
feels OK and wants to continue or terminate the interview.
● If the child decides to terminate the interview, the evaluator will allow enough
time for the child to feel comfortable to leave the room and see his/her
parents/caregivers or the social workers. The evaluator closes the interview by
thanking the child, reassuring him/her that this will not have any consequences
on his/her wellbeing or care plan. The evaluator also reconfirms that the
information that he/she made available will be kept confidential and not
shared with anyone.
● If the child does disclose past or current situations that are not addressed and
still put the child at risk/in need of protection, the evaluator will listen quietly,
carefully, and patiently without displaying shock or disbelief. He/she will show
acceptance of what is being said without judgement.
● He/she will not assume anything, nor speculate or jump to conclusions. He/she
will not investigate, interrogate, or decide if the child is telling the truth.
● He/she will let the child explain in his or her own words what happened and will
not ask leading questions or open questions.
● He/she will tell the child again that that she must inform relevant people/groups
but only those whose job it is to protect children.
● He/she will acknowledge how difficult it must have been to talk and to open
up.
● He/she will make some very brief notes at the time and write them up in detail
as soon as possible. She will record the date, time, place, words used by the
child and how the child appeared to her. She will record statements and
observable things, not her interpretations or assumptions.
61
● He/she will tell the child what she will do and check his/her general status and
if he/she feels comfortable going back home/to the centre etc., or if he/she
wants to be accompanied to a safe place.
● He/she will refer the child to the appropriate services, taking into account who
the alleged perpetrators are (family members, social services, police officers or
external people) and the urgency of the intervention. He/she will accompany
the child to a safe place as requested/needed.
● The evaluator will inform UNICEF that a report for a child at risk was made,
indicating the date and to which authority.
II. Written protocol for the protection of subjects’ identities
This evaluation effort aims at evaluating the Inclusive Education Programme on behalf of
UNICEF and Mercy Corps.
Assent: If you are willing to participate, please fill in the above questionnaire and consent
sheet.
1.I confirm that I have read and understand the information sheet dated _________
[insert date] explaining the above evaluation project and I have had the opportunity to
ask questions about the project.
1. I understand that my participation is voluntary and that I am free to withdraw
at any time without giving any reason and without there being any negative
consequences. In addition, should I not wish to answer any particular question or questions,
I am free to decline.
1. I understand that my responses will be kept strictly confidential with the
exception of cases that might reveal that a specific child needs protection.
I give permission to the members of the Evaluation Team to use the information that I will
share with them, provided that my responses are confidential. I understand that my name
will not be linked with the evaluation materials, and I will not be identified or identifiable in
the report or reports that result from the evaluation.
1. I understand that my participation will not take more than 4 hours of my time and
those of the child I am responsible for, including the travel to the place of meeting with the
evaluator and the travel back.
1. I understand that my participation and those of the child I am responsible for could
cause negative emotions to us because of the remembering of our experience.
1. I agree to take part in the above evaluation project.
1. I agree the information about the age, the psychical and physical conditions of the
child and the services provided to her/him/our family to be shared with the evaluator provided
that these details are confidential.
1. In my capacity of a parent/foster parent/legal guardian [underline the true] of
____________________________________ [insert the name and the family name of the child] I
agree she/he to take part in the above evaluation project under the same conditions.
________________________ ________________ ____________________
62
Name of Participant Date Signature
_________________________ ________________ ____________________
Name of person taking consent Date Signature
To be signed and dated in presence of the participant
Copies:
evaluator’s contact details: [Name], [phone number].
Once this has been signed by all parties, the participant should receive a copy of the signed
and dated participant consent form, the information sheet and any other written information
provided to the participants. A copy of the signed and dated consent form should be placed
in the project’s main records (e.g. a site file), which must be kept in a secure location.
OR, for a parent
Assent: If you are willing to participate, please fill in the above questionnaire and consent
sheet.
1. I confirm that I have read and understand the information sheet dated
_________ [insert date] explaining the above evaluation project, and I
have had the opportunity to ask questions about the project.
1. I understand that my participation is voluntary and that I am free to
withdraw at any time without giving any reason and without there being any
negative consequences. In addition, should I not wish to answer any particular
question or questions, I am free to decline.
1. I understand that the responses of my child will be kept strictly confidential
with the exception of cases that might reveal that a specific child needs
protection.
I give permission to the members of the Evaluation Team to use the information
that my child will share with them provided that these responses are confidential.
I understand that my name or that of my child will not be linked with the evaluation
materials, and no member of my family will be identified or identifiable in the report
or reports that result from the evaluation.
1. I understand that the participation of my child will not take more than
4 hours of my time and those of the child I am responsible for.
1. I understand that my participation and those of the child I am responsible
for could cause negative emotions to us because of the remembering of our
experience.
63
1. I agree to take part in the above evaluation project.
1. I agree the information about the age, the psychical and physical
conditions of the child and the services provided to her/him/our family [underline
the true] to be shared with the evaluator provided that these details are
confidential.
1. In my capacity of a parent/foster parent/legal guardian [underline the
true] of ____________________________________ [insert the name and the family
name of the child] I agree she/he to take part in the above evaluation project
under the same conditions.
________________________________________ ____________________
Name of Participant Date Signature
_________________________________________ ____________________
Name of person taking consent Date Signature
To be signed and dated in presence of the participant
Copies:
Evaluator’s contact details: (Name), (phone number).
Once this has been signed by all parties, the participant should receive a copy of the signed
and dated participant consent form, the information sheet and any other written information
provided to the participants. A copy of the signed and dated consent form should be placed
in the project’s main records (e.g. a site file), which must be kept in a secure location.
III. Written protocols for protection of data
Edvise Me follows a strict policy of data protection and safe data storage.
Data of primary beneficiaries and service clients will be handled according to the
procedures foreseen in the UNICEF ethical guidelines and WHO guidelines on
evaluation on violence referenced in the section on adherence to ethical
procedures.
Evaluators who have access to the identified data will be clearly identified and limited
by access procedures to files storages. Evaluation and data collection processes that
involve human subjects or entail analysis involving sensitive secondary data will be
submitted to an internal clearing and data handling process, overseen by the team
leader and supported by the project coordination. All direct identifiers to personal
informant, particularly children, will either not be collected or removed and
anonymised. Hard copies such as interview notes or audio tapes will be kept securely
64
locked away and destroyed after the evaluation process. Files – including computer
files – that contain personal or identifiable data, such as names will be encrypted or
password protected, and only accessed by agreed members of the team.
IV. When facilitating a FG or Interview (please adhere to the following order)
1- Before facilitation:
Facilitator:
- Introduce project.
begin any interview/ meeting or focus group session with a clear
introduction of the purpose of the assessment, the external and neutral
relationship of the contracted consulting firm, and the importance of
their honest participation and data sharing.
- Read/ sign consent forms and collect first names, and verbal consents
for each participant
Note-taker:
- seat participants
- Start recording.
2- During facilitation:
Facilitator:
- Phrase all questions in a neutral manner to encourage discussion without
any implied ‘judgement’ or ‘stance’ on any topic through any facial
expressions, body gestures or tone of voice.
- Gear the conversation from general questions to more specific
questions as discussions are taking place. The consultant will facilitate
the conversation to maintain focus but also allow some natural flow and
divergence for a few minutes.
- Try and include everyone in the conversation to ensure different
perspectives are heard and the discussion is not dominated by one or a
few.
Note-taker:
- Keep track of time and adhere to schedule
- The ideal duration for a focus group is anywhere between 45 to 60
minutes.
3- After facilitation:
- Save the file under the following format: [governorate, shortened school
name , Category (example OOSC or In-School people with disabilities)
and age range (for children/ students)
65
- Upload recording to Drive
- Upload notes to DriveFill out Master note-taking sheet Fill out # of
participants per FG on Drive
Health Protocols
Covid-19 related precautions:
- Field work team should wear a mask at all times, and distribute masks to
participants if they are not wearing any.
- Maintain social distancing between participants.
- Select spacious rooms with adequate ventilation to conduct FGDs
- If the field work team encounters a school with cases of Covid-19, the team
must cancel the visit, self-isolate and each number must get a PCR test with a
negative result before the next school visit
V. Methodological note prepared for interviewers and facilitators - Ethical
considerations [1]
Persons with disabilities are not “weak”, “helpless” or “useless”. They do not “suffer”
from a disability and are not “victims” of a disability. In addition, people with disabilities
may or may not be a part of a “vulnerable population”, depending on their individual
circumstances. Making generalizations regarding people with disabilities based on
stereotypes is wrong, and often serves to perpetuate the charity or medical models
of disability. The social model of disability enshrined in the CRPD promotes people with
disabilities as fully deserving, autonomous and independent people.
Often, people with disabilities will say that they just need “an opportunity to be myself
and participate with my peers”. As a young woman from the Philippines will tell you,
“value us for who we are and what we can do, not by how we look and what we
cannot do”.
When communicating and/or working with people with disabilities, common sense,
sensitivity and basic interpersonal skills should be used. Children asking questions
about people with disabilities is a typical part of development, attitude formation and
learning values. Therefore, it is important to teach children (even the very young ones)
the most adequate ways of speaking to and about people with disabilities.
The CRPD promotes the use of person-first terminology when referring to people with
disabilities. Therefore, you should say “a child with a disability” instead of “disabled
child” to emphasize the individual as the primary subject. In addition, you should use
terminology that is not demeaning and does not carry derogatory or negative
meanings. Thus, you should say “child with polio” for example, and not “polio affected
child”.
In all cases, be respectful of the person you are talking to or about. When in doubt,
ask the person her/himself which is their preference, or ask an Organization of Persons
with Disabilities (OPD) in the area. When distinguishing between children with and
children without disabilities, do not use the term “normal”.
The following are some basic rules of etiquette to follow throughout the evaluation:
66
1. ASK BEFORE YOU ACT – when in doubt, ask a person with a disability how they
would like to be addressed or how you should refer to their impairment or
disability;
2. Do not speak about a person with a disability as if they are not present, cannot
hear you, or cannot understand you;
3. In all cases, refer to people by their names – do not describe people with
disabilities as “the little blind girl” or “the man in crutches”;
4. Do not talk to adults with disabilities as if they are children and cannot fully
understand you or act on their own – even people with communication
limitations can understand and take their own decisions;
5. Speak from a position that is comfortable to anyone – if needed, sit down or
crouch to be at eye level;
6. Every person has the right to make their own decisions – if someone uses a
wheelchair it may seem easier or faster to decide where/how to go on their
behalf. But, making decisions is a right and you should give the opportunity and
time needed for independent decision-making;
7. Don’t think in terms of stereotypes, thinking that all people with disabilities are
tired, angry, frustrated, depressed, sick or vulnerable. Persons with disabilities
are just people with their own individualities; do not attribute their behaviour to
their disability;
TREAT PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES THE WAY YOU WOULD LIKE TO BE TREATED –
respectfully and attentively, not with pity or paternalism.
[1] Adapted from: UNICEF (2015). Disability Orientation (video). Retrieved from
https://www.unicef.org/66434.html
67
8.5 Team Composition
Below is the team structure to conduct the evaluation in addition to the roles and
responsibilities under each position
Team Member Roles and Responsibilities
Team Leader ● Ensure objectives are met within timeframe and scope outlined
Nour Abu by UNICEF.
Ragheb ● Provide guidance and direction to the project team.
● Ensure that Edvise ME team who will be facilitating the Focus
Group Discussions are consistent with the script and protocols
across the three countries.
● Review all project deliverables and provide quality input
wherever needed.
● Work with the project team leader and rest of the team in
formulating solid recommendations based on findings.
● Support with FGD’s plan and implementation
● Conduct key informant interviews with the senior consultant.
International ● Support in conducting secondary research on IE in Jordan
Expert ● Advise on international evidence and research on IE.
Paula Hunt ● Inform on international best practices and global experiences/
programs.
● Support and provide quality input on the process of developing
the data collection tools
● Support in the analysis of the data gathered from the field in
order to evaluate the outputs of the Inclusive Education
Programme.
● Participate in producing the evaluation report in collaboration
with the project manager, team leader and consultant.
Field Team ● Lead on all field work to include training of facilitators and data
Leader collectors, as well as arrange for transportation and all other
Zain Al Hakim field logistical needs.
● Conduct focus group discussions with different targeted groups
● Conduct key informant interviews with key stakeholders
● Participate in producing the evaluation document in
collaboration with the project manager, team leader and
international expert.
68
Education and ● Conduct focus group discussions with children with disabilities
Disability ● Conduct school visits and classroom observations
Expert ● Work on the deliverables and draft recommendations using field
Rania Sabbagh data.
Data Collectors ● Effectively manage the focus group discussions, through
and keeping participants focused, encourage everyone to speak
Moderators up, enforce a respectful tone, manage the pace, and uncover
hidden information and hence, generate productive and
quality discussion.
● Record all focus group discussions for analysis.
Team Structure
Team Leader
International Expert
Nour Abu Ragheb – Edvise ME
Paula Hunt - Consultant
Partner
Field Team Leader
Zain Hakim – Edvise ME Senior
Consultant
Data Collection Moderator
Nataly Fakes – Edvise ME Senior
Consultant
Data Collection Moderator
Rania Sabbagh – Education and
Disability Expert
Data Collectors
Nour Darwazeh – Edvise ME Junior
Consultant
Data Collectors
Nadeen Hakim – Note Taker
69
8.6 List of Documents Consulted
1) Received Documents from UNICEF
A. Schools that had been Handed over
● School handover plan
● 37 schools to be handed to MoE
● Arabic handover action plan
B. Mercy Corps PD
● MC Programme document Final 2017
● MC Programme document Final 2018
● MC Programme document Final 2019
C. Mercy Corps Progress
● Final report September 2017-2019
● IE-Mercy Corps Progress Report 3
● IE-Mercy Corps Progress Report 4
● Mercy Corps CWD in formal education
D. Programme Description
● Play area
● Playground description
● Training manual
E. School supplies
● All school supplies from 2013
● Um Ammar School
● Maysaloon
2) Others
● Inclusive Education Training Material/ Guide for CWD section supervisor/
teachers grades (1-3), schools principals
● Education Strategic Plan
● UNICEF Targets
● the 10-year strategy for inclusive education
● Inclusive education operational plan
● Inclusion of CWD in the formal education (policies and procedures)
● Sustainable Development Goals 4
● Convention on the Rights of the Child
● Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities
3) Received Documents from Mercy Corps
● Covid Response in the host communities
● Parent meetings and awareness raising
● Students’ Progress Evaluation
70
● Case Study 2 Shadow Teachers support Summayya
● List of MC schools
● Lockdown Survey Report
i) Received 09/2021
● Trained teachers attendance sheets
● Schools fazed out plan
● Awareness raising activities for community members
● List of assistive devices per school and school supplies
ii) Received 10/2021
● List of OOSC with disabilities
iii) Received 11/2021
● List of student with disabilities per school (280 students with disabilities)
iv) 3. Received 7/12/2021
● 6 extra schools names that were not originally included in the original list of 102
schools
● MC log frame
● IEP tool kit
● MC Inclusive education manual
● MC core training overview
● MC and MoE training manual (Arabic)
● Shadow teacher Job Description (Arabic)
● Retention and enrolment rates of people with disabilities per year
● NFE IE training material
v) Received 02/2022
● M&E situation analysis report (shadow teacher prep and post analysis report)
● Awareness raising and parents meeting folder:
o Annex 1: Awareness raising M&E report - sensitization/ ECO 2017-2020
o Annex 3: Parent meetings and awareness raising
o Annex 5: Parent meetings and awareness raising
o Annex 8: Awareness raising results
o Awareness raising analysis M&E repot
● Case studies and photos folder:
o Case study 1: Homam journey to learning
o Annex 2: communication and visibility
o Portics photo deck
● Impact and studies folder
o Annex 7: Parent survey results
o Annex F: M&E students well-being report
o MC impact study report
o MC situational analysis study
● School equipment (excel sheet)
71
● Shadow teacher SOW (Arabic)
vi) Received 02/2022
● Carm (community, accountability, reporting mechanisms) data on inclusive
education June 2020
● School selection criteria filled out for a number of schools
● Awareness-raising guide (Arabic)
● School observation suggested analysis
● Rehab priority criteria (PPT)
4) Documents from Secondary Research
● School and Classroom Disabilities Inclusion Guide for Low-and Middle-Income
Countries, RTI, Jennae Bulat, Anne M. Hayes, Wykia Macon, Renáta Tichá, and
Brian H. Abery Occasional Paper, Jan 2017
● Removing Barriers – The Path towards Inclusive Education, Australian Aid, 2018
● The Current Situation of Persons with Disabilities in Jordan, K4D, August 2018
● Inclusive Education in Jordanian Schools: Special Education and General
Education Teachers’ Perspectives, Athens Journals, 2019
● Moving to Inclusive Education for Students with Disabilities in Jordan: Rhetoric,
Practice and Prospects, Global Journal of Advanced Research, Hamza
Mahmoud Al Shoura and Aznan Che Ama, 2015
● General Comment No. 4 (2016) Article 24: Right to inclusive education
● Inclusive education: Understanding Article 24 of the Convention on the Rights
of Persons with Disabilities
● Conceptualising Inclusive Education and Contextualising it within the UNICEF
Mission
● Legislation and Policies for Inclusive Education.
● Inclusive education: children with disabilities – paper commissioned by the
GEMR 2020
● Index for Inclusion: developing learning and participation in school
● Towards greater inclusion and diversity in education in jordan, MoE, GIZ,
UNESCO
● The inclusive education guideline manual, MoE, MC
72
8.7 Assistive Devices available
Boo Furnitur
Boo Rehabilitati
k Visu Wood Educatio e for Sensor
Smart Comput Loop k Heads I Stationer Curtai on unit ﻢﺳا
with al en Tablet nal tool resourc y
Board er system with et pad y kit ns equipment ﺔﺳرﺪﻤﻟا
stan tool stand kit es room room
pen kit
d kit
ﺔﺳر"ﻣ
-,+ﻌ)ﻟا
1 0 0 0 1 4 1 3 4 5 1 1 1 1 1 0 ﺔ0ﺳﺎﺳﻻا
4032ﻠﻟ
نﺎ)ﻋ
1 رﺎ)ﻋ ما
5
But
Now they ﺔ<;ﻧﺎ9ﻟا
1 3 1 remove 3 0 0 5 1 1 1 1 1 1
only have
d for تﺎ32ﻠﻟ
3
now
نﺎ)ﻋ
نﺎﻜﺳإ
ﺔﯿﻤﺷﺎﮭﻟا
1 6 1 1 0 2 1 3 4 5 1 1 1 1 1 0 ﺔﯿﺳﺎﺳﻷا
ﺔﻄﻠﺘﺨﻤﻟا
ءﺎﻗرز
نﻮﻠﺴﯿﻣ
1 4 0 0 0 0 0 0 5 5 1 1 1 1 1 0 ﺔﯿﺳﺎﺳﻻا
ﺪﺑرا
1 0 1 0 0 0 3 1 1 1 1 1 0 0 0 ﺮﻜﺑ ﻮﺑا
73
ﺪﺑرا
4
Two are
missing
after
6
sending ءاﺮﻤﺤﻟا
Only
them to ﺔﯿﺳﺎﺳﻻا
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 two 3 1 1 1 1 1 0
maintenan ﺔﻄﻠﺘﺨﻤﻟا
availab
ce so they قﺮﻔﻣ
le now
only have
total 5 of
tablet and
iPad
ﺔﺳردﻣ
Recently تﻧﺑ ﺔﻟوﺧ
was given روزﻻا
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 1 0 1 1 0
one small – ﺔﯾﺳﺎﺳﻻا
old-tablet ﺔطﻠﺗﺧﻣﻟا
كرﻛﻟا
5 Recently
ﻦﺑ ﻞﯿﻠﺨﻟا
Only 2 was given
1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 1 1 1 1 0 ﺪﻤﺣا
availab one small
نﺎﻌﻣ
le old-tablet
74
8.8 Achievement of programme objectives
Years/ Area of 2017 2018 2019
comparison
Geographical Amman, Zarqa, Irbid, Mafraq, Madaba, Ajloun, Jerash, Ma’an, Tafila,
coverage Zaatary Camp, Azraq Camp
CWD 340 students with 350 students with 500 CWDs, 225
disabiltieis disabiltieis students with
integrated. integrated disabiltieis in 15 new
schools
4200 students got 900 students got
psychosocial support psychosocial support 900 students got
psychosocial support
Model schools 2 for an Not included in 30
accumulative total report
of 2
Schools handed to Not included in report. The evlauation team 30
MoE assumes no schools were handed to the MoE
before 2019
Teachers trained 180 for an 150 102
accumulative total
of 1589
supervisors and 30 Not included in 22
principals trained report
# of children with 50 for an 10 57
disabilities accumulative total
participating in of 361
rehabilitation sessions
# of people reached 3000 for an 3000 for an 300 for an
through through accumulative total accumulative total accumulative total
sensitization and of 16,109 of 20,088 of 23,088
information events
# of people reached 1000 for an Not included in Not included in
through through accumulative total report report
advocacy initiative of 1500
75
# of students with 100 for an Not included in 40
disabilities enrolled in accumulative total report
MAKANI of 295
# of students 300 for an 600 300
attending extra- accumulative total
curricular activities in of
Zaatari camp schools 17447
# of students 2100 for an 300 600
attending extra- accumulative total
curricular activities in of 4214
Azraq Camp schools
76
8.9 Shadow Teacher Job Description
Comparing the job description of Shadow Teachers as shared by Mercy Corps to the
observations of the Evaluation Team shows that the shadow teachers were successful
at fulfilling the majority of their roles and responsibilities, with minor exceptions such as
attending and supporting students with disabilities inside the classroom, which is
integral to the holistic approach of inclusive education.
The roles and responsibilities of shadow teachers are as follows:
1. Enrolling the students who are eligible to join the programme and maintaining lists
of the names of students integrated into the programme. Students may be referred
to the programme by Mercy Corps’s own outreach efforts, the special education
supervisor, school principal, parents, or otherwise. This process includes:
a. Filling out student checklists in cooperation with the resource and
qualification teacher
b. Conducting a comprehensive survey to observe students in the school
(during the attendance of the classes in the classroom, or presence in
the facilities and activities of the school.
c. Conducting the initial evaluation and preparing the necessary data
and entering it into the database (from COMMCARE) in preparation
for the evaluation process by the field officer.
d. Conducting the initial visual and audio survey for the students who are
being evaluated and for each student from the school who needs to
be surveyed
e. Recording the results of visual and audio surveys and preparing lists of
audio and vision examinations on a regular basis.
f. Attending the assessment that is carried out by the field officer of the
situation with a discussion of the necessary objectives and
recommendations.
2. Coordination with specialists and the multidisciplinary team to assess students with
disabilities. The team of specialists consists of the school administration, guide,
support teachers, rehabilitation team, the special education supervisor, and may
include the parent/s. This team is essential to the development of Individual
Education Plans (IEPs) for each student, to determine their needs for environmental
support, medical devices and rehabilitation services;
a. Updating the individual plan and the electronically saved educational
plan periodically (on a quarterly basis for the IEP, and monthly for the
IEP) in relation to the objectives
3. Ensuring that each student receives academic support inside the resource room
through the number of lessons/days of the week / or individual or group sessions.
a. Providing the necessary educational services based on the IEPs and
rehab goals -based on the recommendations of the Mercy Corps
supervisor. Important note: (Individual sessions are held as needed only
as decided by the Mercy Corps liaison officer)
b. Group sessions: providing educational services as necessary for an
individual student or a group of students based on common academic
goals.
77
c. Making the appropriate educational aids for the objectives of the
sessions (individual and group) in coordination and cooperation with
the field officer from Mercy Corps
d. Preparing for the session, which includes preparing the necessary tools,
worksheets, the educational aid that was manufactured, student plans,
location of the session, etc.
4. Ensuring students in getting rehabilitation services.
a. Ensuring that students receive the rehabilitative services and therapy
sessions necessary; for an individual student or a group of students
based on common therapeutic goals
b. Making the appropriate educational aids for the objectives of the
sessions (individual and group) in coordination and cooperation with
the field officer from Mercy Corps.
c. Conducting a periodic scanning of students inside the school to
determine if there are students in need of medical equipment,
rehabilitation services, or environmental support, and transferring the
names of those who do to the responsible field officer from Mercy
Corps and the special education supervisor.
5. Supporting students inside the classroom:
a. Determining which students need follow-up inside the classroom, by
attending a class session for each of the students listed on the shadow
teacher’s schedule at the beginning of the school year
b. Based on the point above, students who need support in the class are
identified and the appropriate program is developed according to the
needs of each child, bearing in mind that the student is visited in class
at least once a week.
c. Filling out the form designated (to support the student in the class
session) for all students with disabilities and continuing to fill them out
every time a student attends a class.
d. Ensuring the student is in the correct sitting position, and the
appropriate seating place in the classroom, and making the necessary
adjustments during the class session.
e. Providing the necessary support to the student during the class session,
such as clarifying the teacher’s explanation, helping to transfer from
the board, reading the problem, etc.
f. Preparing the modified and/or educational tools that the student
needs based on the topic of the lesson and the goal of the class, and
using them with him/her in the classroom
g. Suggesting the appropriate environmental modifications for the
student in the classroom and presenting them to the field officers.
h. Applying a child-to-child teaching methodology within the regular
classroom when needed (such as bullying of children with disabilities)
6. Supporting the general class teachers inside the classroom:
a. Through coordinating with the class teacher before attending the class
to know the topic of the class and the goal of the lesson so that the
shadow teacher can evaluate the student inside the class according to
its objectives.
78
b. Providing the teacher with the appropriate teaching aids for the class
and conducting appropriate activities in the classroom aimed at the
participation of students with disabilities with their peers in the class
c. Assisting the class teacher in implementing differentiated educational
lessons (applying differentiated teaching strategies according to the
lesson’s goal as much as possible)
d. Giving the teacher the appropriate recommendations to make a
differentiated exam for the student in proportion to his disability,
participating in its design, and following up on its implementation.
7. Supporting the resource teacher in:
a. giving some lessons to children with disabilities as per the individual
education plan, in addition to attending and viewing sessions for all
students who are integrated into the programme.
8. Documentation and record-keeping:
a. Conducting sessions and documenting them on paper (using the
organization’s customized forms) and digitally (photos, videos, filling out
electronic links).
b. Electronically filling in and saving EIPs of students with disabilities.
c. Note down the rehab and therapy sessions including duration/session
type/number of students.
d. Coordination with teachers to check the attendance and absence of
students on a daily basis
e. Communicating with the parents in the event of the repeated absence
of the student with a disability for 3 consecutive days, documenting the
reason for the absence and informing the field officer from the Mercy
Corps team to take the appropriate action.
9. Follow up:
a. Coordinating periodic meetings with the students’ parents/ caregivers
to:
1. discuss the individual education plans and the goals that have
been achieved with the child, in the presence of the team
responsible for the child’s educational plan.
2. Inform them of daily duties and exercises required at home
3. Inform them of student performance and development, and
challenges or observations that require parents’ attention.
b. with teachers on the implementation of support strategies for children
with disabilities in the regular classroom through observation sessions
and ensure that the basic teacher transfers training to other teachers.
10. Raising awareness of disability and inclusion issues:
a. Carrying out appropriate activities to raise the level of acceptance of
students with disabilities and raise awareness about their disability.
b. Raising awareness for parents of students with and without disabilities
and the local community
c. Coordination with the school administration in all activities to be
implemented (after referring to the liaison officer from Mercy Corps)
11. Keep records and follow-up on attendance
79
a. Coordination with teachers to check the attendance and absence of
students on a daily basis.
b. Documenting students' attendance on a daily basis on the electronic
link prepared by the organization
c. Communicating with the parents in the event of the repeated absence
of the student with a disability for 3 consecutive days, documenting the
reason for the absence and informing the field officer from the Mercy
Corps team to take the appropriate action.
The points above are under the supervision of the Education Supervisor and Mercy
Corps.
In comparison, the roles and responsibilities of the resource room teachers included:
1- Educating students with learning difficulties, not students with disabilities in the
resource rooms.
2- Develop IEPs for these students.
3- Plan, assign, and organize activities for students with learning difficulties inside the
resource room to encourage learning through different mediums.
4- Assess student performance. Resource room teachers typically do not use the same
grading system as other teachers, but they are still responsible for accurately assessing
the academic performance of their students.
80
8.10 Survey Results and Analysis [Documents are attached in separate folders]
8.11 FGD Participants Signed Consent Forms [Documents are attached in
separate folders]
8.12 Field Work Recordings [Documents are attached in separate folders]
8.13 Field Work Notes [Documents are attached in separate folders]
8.14 Evaluation Matrix [Documents are attached in separate folders]
8.15 Terms of Reference [Documents are attached in separate folders]
8.16 Data Collection Tools [Documents are attached in separate folders]
81