Multi-country evaluation of UNICEF’s response
to the Venezuela outflow crisis (2019-2021)
© Virginia Thomas / DARA
Colombia Country Case Study
October 2022
Virginia Thomas – Team Leader
Ricardo Sole – Senior Health Specialist
Silvia Hidalgo – Deputy Team Leader
Tim Morris – Editor
Disclaimer
The views presented in this document are the authors’ and do not necessarily represent those of
UNICEF.
The data collection for this country case study was conducted in October 2021, and the reporting phase was
finalised in October 2022. Although findings were not updated, recommendations were workshopped with the
Colombia Country Office and regional office in September 2022.
Abbreviations & Acronyms
AAP Accountability to Affected Populations
AGD Age, Gender and Diversity
ACH Acción Contra el Hambre (Action Against Hunger)
ALNAP Active Learning Network for Accountability and Performance
AOR Area of Responsibility
C4D Communication for Development
CBI Cash-Based Intervention
CCCs Core Commitments for Children in Humanitarian Action
CEAP Corporate Emergency Activation Procedure
CEDAW Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women
CENAF Centros Nacionales Fronterizos (National Border Centres)
CERF Central Emergency Response Fund
CFS Child-friendly Spaces
CIDEMOS Corporación para la Investigación y Desarrollo de la Democracia
CMEU Child Marriage and Early Unions
CO Country Office
CONPES El Consejo Nacional de Política Económica y Social
CP Child Protection
CPD Country Programme Document
CRAS Reference Centre for Social Assistance
CWC Communication with Communities
CWD Children with Disabilities
DFID Department of International Development (now Foreign, Commonwealth &
Development Office (FCDO)
DSE Departmental Secretariat of Education
DTM Displacement Tracking Matrix
EA Espacio de Apoyo (Support Centre)
ECHO European Commission Humanitarian Aid
EMOPS Office of Emergency Programmes
EPP Emergency Preparedness Platform
EQ Evaluation Question
ERIC Ethical Research Involving Children
ET Evaluation Team
ETP Estatuto Temporal de Protección (Temporary Protection Status)
FO Field Office
GBV Gender-Based Violence
GIFFM Grupo Inter agencial sobre Flujos Migratorios Mixtos (Interagency Group on
Mixed Migratory Flows)
GoC Government of Colombia
HAC Humanitarian Action for Children appeal
HACT Harmonized Approach to Cash Transfers
HCT Humanitarian Cash Transfer
HPD Humanitarian Programme Document
HPM Humanitarian Performance Monitoring
ICBF Instituto Colombiano de Bienestar Familiar
IOM International Organization for Migration
IP Implementing Partner
IPPDH Instituto de Políticas Públicas en Derechos Humanos (Institute of Human
Rights Public Policy)
IR Inception Report
IRB Interview Review Board
IYCF Infant and Young Child Feeding
JNA Joint Needs Assessment
KI Key Informant
KII Key Informant Interview
LACRO Latin American and Caribbean Regional Office
LCs Learning Circles (círculos de aprendizaje)
LGBTIQ+ Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, Trans, Intersex and Queer
MEN Ministerio de Educación de Colombia (Colombian Ministry of Education)
NRC Norwegian Refugee Council
NYHQ UNICEF New York Headquarters
OECD Organisation for Economic Co-Operation and Development
ORR Other Regular Resources
PAHO Pan American Health Organization
PARD Proceso Administrativo de Restablecimiento de Derechos (Administrative
Process for the Re-establishment of Rights)
PCA Project Cooperation Agreement
PDET Programas de Desarrollo con Enfoque Territorial
PPE Personal Protective Equipment
BPRM Bureau of Population, Refugees and Migration
PSEA Prevention of Sexual Exploitation and Abuse
R4V Response for Venezuelans
RCCE Risk Communication and Community Engagement
RMRP Regional Migration Response Plan
SDEs Secretarías departamentales de educación
ToC Theory of Change
ToR Terms of Reference
TPS Temporary Protection Status
UASC Unaccompanied and Separated Children
UNCRC UN Convention on the Rights of the Child
UNEG United Nations Evaluation Group
UNFPA United Nations Population Fund
UNHCR United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
UNICEF United Nations International Children’s Emergency Fund
UNOCHA UN Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
UNV United Nations Volunteer
VMC Venezuela Migration Crisis
WASH Water, Sanitation and Hygiene
Table of Contents
Executive Summary 2
1. Background and context of UNICEF Colombia’s response to the Venezuelan Migration Crisis (VMC) 7
1.1 Rights holders and duty bearers 7
1.2 Object of the evaluation and country case studies 8
2. Purpose, objectives and scope of Colombia CO case study 12
2.1 Purpose 12
2.2 Objectives 12
2.3 Scope 12
2.4 Stakeholders 13
3. Evaluation criteria and questions 13
4. Methodology of the Colombia country case study 14
4.1 Document and literature review 14
4.2 Context analysis and timeline 15
4.3 Country visit 15
4.4 Semi-structured key informant interviews (KIIs) 15
4.5 Engagement with families of children on the move and host communities 15
4.6 Feedback loops and validation process of the case study 15
5. Limitations of the case study 16
6. Ethical and gender considerations 16
7. Findings 17
7.1 Appropriateness 17
7.2 Effectiveness 28
7.3 Coverage 55
7.4 Coherence and Coordination 59
7.5 Efficiency 62
7.6 Connectedness 64
7.7 Cross-cutting: gender, equity, conflict sensitivity and accountability 66
8. Good practices and lessons learned 67
8.1. Good practices 67
8.2. Lessons learned 68
9. Conclusions 68
10. Recommendations 71
Table of figures
Table 1. Timeline of the Emergency and Response in Colombia ............................................................................ 10
Table 2. Funding Requirements and Gaps by Sector – 2019 (US$ millions) ........................................................... 11
Table 3. Funding Requirements and Gaps by Sector – 2020 (US$ millions) ........................................................... 11
Table 4. Funding Requirements and gaps by sector – 2021 (US$D millions) ......................................................... 11
Table 5. Stakeholders ............................................................................................................................................... 13
Table 6. Protection targets and indicators (2019, 2020, 2021) ............................................................................... 31
Table 7. Education Targets and Indicators (2019, 2020, 2021) ............................................................................... 36
Table 8. Health Indicators and Targets (2019, 2020, 2021) .................................................................................... 41
Table 9. Nutrition Indicators and Targets (2019, 2020, 2021) ................................................................................ 43
Table 10. WASH Indicators and Targets (2019, 2020, 2021) ................................................................................... 44
Table 11. C4D Indicators and Targets (2019, 2020, 2021) ....................................................................................... 47
Executive Summary
The Government of Colombia (GoC) requested international assistance to address the Venezuelan Migration Crisis
(VMC) in 2018. It is estimated that more than a million Venezuelans transited through Colombia in 2018 and 2019
en route to other countries. Approximately 42,000 pendular migrants enter the country daily for work, study,
medical care, business or other activities. By October 2021, the number of Venezuelans crossing the Colombian
border had risen to 1,842,390. Some 500,000 Colombians have returned from Venezuela in recent years due,
among other things, to the labour force disruptions and employment generated by the COVID-19 pandemic and
associated public health restrictions. In February 2019, UNICEF activated the Level 2 (L2) VMC emergency
response, which coincided in 2020 with the unprecedented COVID-19 Level 3 (L3) emergency activation, which
heavily impacted all the countries in the region.
All these population movements – transit, pendular, returnee and intention to take up residence in Colombia –
present specific vulnerabilities to migrant children and their families and require a protective, rights-based
approaches. GoC has maintained an open-door policy and implemented various mechanisms for socio-economic
integration and access to rights and services for both migrants and host communities. Most recently the Estatuto
Temporal de Protección (ETP)1 was created with the intention of allowing Venezuelan migrants access to a range
of government services.
This Country Case Study considers UNICEF’s Response to the VMC in Colombia from both a humanitarian and long-
term development perspective. As part of the humanitarian response, UNICEF participates in the Grupo Inter
agencial sobre Flujos Migratorios Mixtos (the Interagency Group on Mixed Migratory Flows, GIFMM), it monitors
the situation of children and families on the move, provides humanitarian assistance and channels efforts and
resources to strengthen Colombia's capacities both as a transit country and one in which migrants are intending
to remain. Over the period covered by the L2 Emergency (February 2019-June 2020) and well into 2021, UNICEF
Colombia provided direct humanitarian assistance and sector coordination for populations on the move. Taking a
long-term perspective, it also provided technical assistance to the GoC at various levels and through a number of
key institutions to develop policies and capacities to receive and integrate this massive migrant population.
Evaluation purpose, objective and intended audience
The purpose of the evaluation and its five country Case Studies is to account for the results achieved by UNICEF’s
Response to the L2 Emergency activation, and draw out lessons learned and recommendations to guide UNICEF
future strategic and programmatic priorities for children on the move. The primary objective is to provide evidence
on whether the response to the VMC of the UNICEF Colombia Country Office(CO) has been appropriate, effective,
coherent, adequately coordinated, efficient and connected. It seeks to understand the enabling and constraining
factors and lessons learned t. The primary users of this evaluation are the UNICEF Offices in which country case
studies were carried out (Brazil, Colombia, Ecuador, Peru, Trinidad and Tobago); UNICEF staff supporting the
response in the Latin America and Caribbean Regional Office (LACRO) and in Headquarters (HQ); key partners,
government counterparts and affected populations.
Evaluation methodology
The analytical framework of the evaluation was constructed combining the criteria used by the Development
Assistance Community of the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD DAC) a with the
international human rights framework. In terms of quality standards, the evaluation refers to UNICEF’s 2020 Core
Commitments for Children2 as well its Six-Point Agenda for Children on the Move.3 It is utilisation-focused,
participatory and forward-looking with a view to shedding light on the results achieved so far and the approaches
to enhance UNICEF’s strategic and programmatic effectiveness for children on the move. The methodology
consists of mixed methods including document and literature review, semi-structured interviews with key
informants at national and local level, and field visits to consult with UNICEF field teams, partners, and
representatives of both migrant and host communities. A country visit was carried out from 25-30 October 2021,
allowing the evaluation team to take a route-based approach, visiting migrant settlements, host communities and
service Centres for those migrants en route in key areas most affected by the VMC: Barranquilla, Norte de
Santander, Arauca and La Guajira. For those stakeholders who could not be interviewed in the field, remote
interviews were organised using a hybrid research approach.
1 https://www.migracioncolombia.gov.co/visibles
2 https://www.unicef.org/emergencies/core-commitments-children
3 https://www.unicef.org/documents/global-programme-framework-children-move
2
Key findings and conclusions
UNICEF Colombia has participated in a complex response to the VMC, which has unfolded in a context of diverse
and multiple humanitarian needs and issues, not the least of which has been the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic.
During this period, UNICEF Colombia has appropriately adapted to the increasing VMC influx by extending its
presence, including by adding field offices, without which it could not have delivered a humanitarian response on
such scale. UNICEF’s emergency, sectoral and field teams must be given credit for their enormous efforts under
very difficult circumstances – handling two emergencies simultaneously. At a regional level, the evaluation has
questioned the overall rationale for a nationality-based response to the Venezuelan outflow. For ethically and
practically, there have been other migrant populations in need of the same humanitarian response, services and
advocacy from UNICEF. Using a gender analysis and gender equality lens it becomes clear UNICEF Colombia is
lacking in staff resources to address the breadth and scope of the VMC from a gender perspective. The VMC raises
specific challenges for children and adolescent girls and boys. While staff are doing their best, they are stretched
to the maximum and there are many programming areas where UNICEF could improve.
Appropriateness
Overall, UNICEF Colombia has developed and adapted a number of response strategies, objectives and
implementation modalities, which have been appropriate and relevant to the changing needs of migrant children
and their families along the migration route and which have included adaptations to the pandemic. UNICEF
significantly expanded its territorial presence through new field and satellite offices and engaging new staff to
meet the needs of the emergency and enhance its ability to actively participate in the GIFMM`s Response for
Venezuelans (R4V) in key border and transit areas. Working within the framework of the GIFMM-R4V platform, it
has invested in vital services, in particular around water, sanitation and hygiene (WASH) at the border, transit sites
and rural settlements. Aligned with the GoC policies, it has provided support to those Venezuelans who want to
remain in Colombia to register for the ETP, thus providing a pathway to local integration through access to work
permits, health coverage and other key entitlements and rights.
In the context of the pandemic, UNICEF Colombia’s extensive WASH expertise helped bridge two parallel
humanitarian responses (L2 VMC and L3 COVID-19) as well as a straightforward bridge between responses in rural
and urban settlements. However, in a number of cases, the appropriateness of and relevance of UNICEF strategies,
objectives and implementation modalities could be reviewed and revised, at both national and regional level, in
light of the scale and complexity of the VMC. As will be explored further in the Regional Synthesis report, in
Colombia, as in all five Country Case Studies, the evaluation notes a lack of a fully operationalised, overarching
regional strategy to address what was clearly a regional emergency. In its absence the Humanitarian Action for
Children (HAC) appeal has been the main tool for harmonising implementation approaches between COs
addressing the VMC.
UNICEF incorporated its policy on Accountability to Affected Populations (AAP) in all project cooperation
agreements with its implementing partners. Yet, the evaluation found limited opportunities for affected
populations to participate in programmes which affect their lives, and limited opportunities for UNICEF staff to
validate the needs and priorities of affected populations in a way not mediated by its partners. UNICEF Colombia
included migration as a key risk factor in its Emergency Preparedness Platform. However, in practice preparedness
measures would be greatly enhanced by creating a regional early warning system to inform UNICEF teams along
the migration route of significant population movements, giving them time to prepare. UNICEF’s internal
arrangements, including staffing, training, contracting, fundraising and managerial capacity could be strengthened
with a view to better reflect the scale and complexity of the VMC.
Effectiveness
At the output level, UNICEF Colombia achieved many of its intended targets and in 2019 was able to exceed
expectations in some areas. UNICEF and GIFMM-R4V partners were also able to show key results in terms of
supporting and promoting social inclusion, through providing technical support to operationalise the open-door
policy of the GoC. To a lesser extent, and somewhat unequally, some long-term results are also emerging in terms
of access to rights and protection, empowerment of migrant children, adolescents, and their families and access
to needed information and opportunities on their migratory journey. The evaluation team finds wide variations in
the capacity of UNICEF Colombia to achieve its targets. The response has been under-resourced and hence spread
thin, over many regions, many sectors, many different types of migrant and host populations, including Venezuelan
migrants, Colombian returnees as well as a handful of migrants from other countries. It needs to be recognised
that UNICEF Colombia has made strategic choices to focus its efforts on certain key border regions where it is able
to show greater effectiveness. UNICEF Colombia contributed at the national level to put in place the pre-requisites
for Venezuelan refugee and migrant children to enjoy their rights – in particular through the campaign to combat
statelessness, measures to ensure accessible birth registration in hospitals, and the roll out of the ETP. UNICEF also
3
supported positive messaging around respect for the rights of Venezuelan migrant children in order to challenge
xenophobic attitudes, which may have indirectly resulted in less targeting and discrimination against Venezuelan
refugees and migrants. However, efforts at the international (regional) level of the Quito Process (the name given
to the meetings and commitments established between Latin American countries to coordinate the VMC response)
to ensure a regional child protection protocol have stalled. Local efforts to operationalise effective child protection
monitoring and case management require strengthening.
Concerning education, UNICEF has not achieved the sector result formulated in its HAC 2019 or 2020 and, with
current funding levels, will not achieve the sector result of full integration into the national education system. Data
suggest that many children—both migrant and Colombian —continue to lack practical access to the national
education system. While the main intervention, círculos de aprendizaje, Learning Circles (LCs)4, has had many
positive aspects, it has not overcome systemic obstacles to access to formal schooling for children on the move.
This is one example where humanitarian investments and policy advocacy are needed to ensure the rights of
children on the move are respected. In the social protection sector, UNICEF rolled out a Humanitarian Cash
Transfer (HCT) in the second half of 2020 in response to the extreme vulnerability of migrant families to the
confinement and public health measures to control the spread of the COVID-19 pandemic. Future work on HCTs
in Colombia can build effectiveness and efficiencies by working more closely and in coordination with other GIFMM
partners also rolling out HCTs. In terms of long-term integration of children on the move, the Programas de
Desarrollo con Enfoque Territorial (PDET) or the Territorios Amigos de la Niñez approach have been promising but
need to be carefully monitored and evaluated to assess effectiveness for enhancing local integration and
empowerment of migrant children and adolescents in UNICEF-prioritised municipalities.
WASH has been the most visible face of UNICEF during the VMC response, overlapping with the COVID-19 L3
Emergency response. WASH actors led a strong response in terms of both sector coordination and programmatic
response, while linking humanitarian and development objectives. It was the bedrock upon which many other
UNICEF and R4V services and measures relied, as well as the spearhead for entry into new communities and
institutional relationships. Regarding health and nutrition, a common one package delivery strategy appears to be
both effective and efficient, and mobile clinics enhanced outreach to vulnerable groups from both migrant and
host communities. There could be stronger focus on Child Protection and gender-based violence (GBV) prevention
and response. The GIFMM-R4V platform ensured the availability of primary health services to refugees/migrants
at key border and transit points.
The Core Commitments for Children (CCCs) are one of the main UNICEF standards for measuring the effectiveness
of humanitarian response. A finding from the evaluation is that the CCSs are difficult to apply in some sectors in
Colombia and other UNICEF country responses as these operations align themselves with standards set by other
actors and those of national governments, not necessarily or fully consistent with the CCCs. This suggests the need
in Colombia and other countries in the region both for more training on how to locally apply the CCCs and
clarification at LACRO and HQ levels about the extent to which UNICEF expects the CCCs to be applied where these
are not aligned with existing national capacities and standards. In addition to the migration outcome indicators,
Communication for Development (C4D) indicators suggest a good progress from short-term activities towards the
longer-term sector result established in the 2019 HAC. The C4D/Communications strategy adopted by UNICEF
Colombia appears appropriate for the scale and nature of the emergency.
Coverage
The evaluation explored the internal and external factors that enabled or constrained UNICEF’s ability to provide
the most vulnerable Venezuelan migrants and refugee children, their families and host communities with needs-
based protection and assistances. Enabling factors were found to be UNICEF’s territorial presence in the areas
most highly affected by the VMC, and the quality of its staff and partners. Constraints include relatively low levels
of funding given the scale of the emergency, failure to form key vulnerability profiles and lack of strategies and
models designed to address vulnerabilities at scale given the geographical dispersion of children on the move.
Coverage is found to be the weakest aspect of the UNICEF Colombia and wider regional response: challenges of
resource mobilisation did not allow UNICEF to address vulnerabilities in line with the scale of the VMC.
The main factors affecting donor perceptions and willingness to fund UNICEF’s appeal and projects include: 1) the
ability to come up with innovative humanitarian initiatives and projects that address the needs of the most
vulnerable; 2) the ability to involve more donors (the US, sees itself as having given a disproportionate share of
VMC humanitarian financing); and 3) competition from other actors meaning that UNICEF has needed to
demonstrate its value for money as a UN agency. Donors have considered that UNICEF in some cases lacks specific
data and analysis needed to adequately target its programming towards those most vulnerable migrants and
4 For more information see section 7.1
4
children on the move, and to address serious protection risks, particularly those facing adolescent girls who fall
victim to trafficking and networks of sexual exploitation.
Coherence and coordination
UNICEF Colombia played a key role in engaging local and national actors on children on the move, and built new
capacities to address the rights of migrant children. Among the wide range of UNICEF VMC implementation
partners, 25 are Colombian organisations and 11 are community-based. This constitutes a positive contribution to
strengthening national capacity to address future emergencies and migration situations. The response continued
to be closely tied to the priorities of various national ministries and institutions, such as the Ministerio de
Educación de Colombia (Colombian Ministry of Education, MEN) and the Instituto Colombiano de Bienestar
Familiar (ICBF) and their requests for assistance. The extension of UNICEF’s presence through the opening of field
office, enabled UNICEF to better balance national priorities with local needs. Going forward, it will be important
for UNICEF to feed back to national institutions the gaps and barriers created by efforts to implement national
policies at the local level, and to generate creative solutions to overcoming these.
Two key gaps are noted: one in information gathering/management, the other in coordination. The two go hand
in hand. Effective coordination should put in place the mechanisms needed to generate information on
vulnerabilities. This information in turn should allow additional actors, funds and programmatic response to be
generated to provide complementary services to meet needs. In the VMC both functions are a patchwork - both
by sector and by geographic area. UNICEF’s field presence, while it has expanded, remains limited overall since the
scale of the VMC is national. This can generate significant information gaps in terms of UNICEF’s ability to perform
its coordination role.
Efficiency
UNICEF’s value added in the L2 response, and more generally for children on the move, is its mandate to defend
and advocate for child rights, regardless of nationality and migration status. VMC donors and other actors look to
UNICEF to set and uphold humanitarian standards for children on the move and their families while also providing
technical advice to government and other agencies around issues that particularly affect children. UNICEF’s multi-
sectoral mandate is an advantage, but also leads to its resources being spread very thin on the ground. UNICEF’s
value added also manifested itself in strengthening the capacity of its implementing partners in the area of
migration, which is a new issue which many civil society organisations have needed support to address. In general,
UNICEF’s programmatic interventions were designed based on its own mandate, strategic partnerships, including
those with UN, central and local government, civil society and NGOs. Only a few cases of duplication were detected
that should be easily corrected in the future. However, in a humanitarian situation like the VMC, it appears that
gaps are unavoidable until UNICEF and other partners can develop more strategic, scalable approaches and attract
needed donor support.
Connectedness
UNICEF Colombia’s strength is building on long-term partnerships with the GoC, long-term models and favourable
government policies to work on longer-term integration and capacity building. This is clearly articulated in UNICEF
Colombia’s new Country Programme, which identifies migration as one of its three components and adapts pre-
existing strategies to include migration as an additional protection risk facing children and adolescents in Colombia.
This is valid and well connected to UNICEF’s longer-term work to build capacity of Colombian institutions to ensure
inclusion and integration of migrant children and adolescents into national systems, social policies and protective
mechanisms. However, as migration is a dynamic phenomenon and UNICEF has not fully invested in its
humanitarian response capability, it is not clear that lessons learned from the VMC, including the importance of
paying attention to the conditions of those returning to Venezuela, will lead to UNICEF Colombia being better
prepared for future influxes and movements of returnees.
Good practices and lessons learned
Good practices noted in the UNICEF Colombia Case Study include:
 National roll-out of the ETP providing a multi-service registration opportunity for children and families
 The role of WASH as a strategic entry point to launch UNICEF’s work in communities impacted by migration
 UNICEF supported a localisation agenda by selecting and building capacity of local, regional, and national NGOs
without prior experience on migration issues
 Building Prevention of Sexual Exploitation and Abuse (PSEA) capacity among UNICEF partners
 Working with indigenous organisations in indigenous languages
 COVID-19 humanitarian cash transfer benefited families at a critical moment.
5
Lessons learned include:
 Field presence developed by UNICEF requires adequate consultation and engagement in the generation of
new proposals, identification of partners and a stronger advocacy agenda.
 Field teams and implementing partners who are new to UNICEF and humanitarian work should be provided
with training and support, particularly around the CCCs.
 UNICEF and GIFMM partners are learning that they need to invest adequately in information management
systems that will help to pinpoint the most vulnerable groups and develop strategies to address their
vulnerabilities.
Recommendations
Overarching recommendations at regional level
OR1- Senior management should go through an institutional reflection on whether nationality-based
migration policies are here to stay for UNICEF and the UN system as a whole.
OR2- Since mass population movements are not likely to go away, but rather to increase in the future,
UNICEF at country, regional and global level need to build capacity to ensure Early Warning Systems and
Preparedness measures are in place.
Country-specific recommendations
CS1- Ensure adequate tools and processes for AAP beyond the currently established delegation to
implementing partners (IPs).
CS2- Support the MEN and Departmental Secretariats of Education (DSEs) to develop a strategy to
identify out-of-school children and provide adequate response resources.
CS3- Advocate for and promote the rights and empowerment of adolescents on the move in all its
interventions, using a gender perspective and other differential factors to achieve better empowerment
and integration outcomes.
CS4- Invest in data and evidence on situation analyses, needs assessments and mapping key gaps in
coverage across sectors as a basis for future programming, while urgently addressing the gaps identified.
CS5- Update UNICEF Colombia’s advocacy strategy through a solid, SMART advocacy plan to ensure that
data and evidence generated from the field on the gaps in coverage and non-enjoyment of rights is
translated into verifiable advocacy actions with authorities at appropriate levels.
6
1. Background and context of UNICEF Colombia’s response to the Venezuelan Migration Crisis (VMC)
According to UNICEF5, in 2021 there were five million Venezuelans on the move, including 4.6 million who are
moving within the region. Approximately 3.4 million Venezuelans, including indigenous populations, are settled in
Bolivia, Brazil, Colombia, Ecuador, Guyana, Peru and Trinidad and Tobago.6 These countries host the most
vulnerable Venezuelans, including children and youth, with limited livelihood opportunities and poor access to
health, nutrition, education, protection and Water, Sanitation and Hygiene (WASH) services. With limited access
to safety nets, COVID-19 lockdowns disproportionately affected migrants and asylum seekers. Over the course of
the migration crisis, many migrants have also returned to Venezuela due to the COVID-19 pandemic and related
confinement measures and because they were unable to cover their basic needs. In 2021, UNICEF and R4V partners
were expecting over 135,000 returnees in the coming months.7
The National R4V Platform in Colombia GIFMM’s Joint Needs Assessment (JNA)8 conducted in June 2021 indicated
that 77 per cent of Venezuelan refugee and migrant households surveyed lacked access to healthcare9; 26 per cent
of children in surveyed households were not attending any type of school (online or in person); 24 per cent of
households faced food insecurity and 25 per cent used poor quality water. According to the JNA, 26 per cent of
refugees and migrants from Venezuela interviewed had experienced discrimination on the basis of their nationality
during the year.
1.1 Rights holders and duty bearers
From 2015, Colombia began seeing a steady increase in both the number of Venezuelan migrants as well as the
number of Colombians returning from Venezuela. Based on figures from Migración Colombia, of the 1,408,055
Venezuelan migrants who had settled in Colombia as of June 201910, some 26.8 per cent were under 18 years of
age. Migrant children and adolescents are especially affected by the migration flows due to limited access to
education and health systems and are exposed to the risk of commercial sexual exploitation and GBV.
By October 31, 2019, however, the Coordination Platform for Venezuelan refugees and migrants - R4V - led in
Colombia by the UN High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) and the International Organization for Migration (IOM),
was registering numbers much higher than those indicated by figures provided by the state agency Migración
Colombia.11
Geographically, Venezuelan migration has been concentrated mainly in the border departments (Norte de
Santander, Arauca, and La Guajira), Bogotá and the Atlantic Coast.12 In addition, many of the Venezuelan refugees
and migrants, as well as Colombian returnees who were living in Venezuela after fleeing armed violence in their
own country, arrive in marginalised areas. In these rural and peripheral areas there is low government investment
and presence, poor infrastructure, poverty, endemic armed conflict, protracted internal displacement and
vulnerability to natural hazards, in short exposure to what UNICEF Colombia refers to as “multiple affectations”.
Colombia requested international assistance to address the crisis in 201813. It is estimated that more than a million
Venezuelans transited through Colombia in 2018 and 2019 en route to other countries and approximately 42,000
pendular migrants enter the country daily for work, study, shopping, trading, health care and other reasons.
According to UNICEF Colombia’s current Country Programme Document (CPD)14, approximately 1,825,687
migrants and refugees from Venezuela were in Colombia in early 2020.15 16 According to the GIFMM, by October
2021, this number had risen to 1,842,390 Venezuelans.17 It is also estimated that some 500,000 Colombians or
5 UNICEF: Humanitarian Appeal for Children, Children on the move, including from the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela, and people affected by COVID19, 2021
6 R4V, 'Latin America and the Caribbean: Venezuelan refugees & migrants in the region', February 2021.
7R4V, ‘COVID-19 Flash Update October-November 2020’, 14 January 2021.
8GIFMM Joint Needs Assessment for population in destination (hereinafter JNA), Round 5, June 2021: https://www.r4v.info/es/document/gifmm-
colombiaevaluacion-conjunta-de-necesidades-junio-2021.
9The sample of 2,161 households surveyed via telephone was drawn from the databases of 20 participating GIFMM organisations. Since the households
surveyed have access to humanitarian assistance, these results are not necessarily representative of all Venezuelan refugees and migrants in Colombia.
10 R4V, Sit Rep Colombia, June 2019 :
https://www.google.com/search?q=Migracion+Colombia%2C+of+the+1%2C408%2C055&rlz=1C1GCEU_frCA927CA929&oq=Migracion+Colombia%2C+of+th
e+1%2C408%2C055&aqs=chrome..69i57.4101j0j15&sourceid=chrome&ie=UTF-8
11 A total of 1,630,903, of whom 641,825 were regular and 911,714 had exceeded their authorised stay or had entered the country illegally.
12 Other affected departments included Nariño, which reported a large backlog of migrants, and Vichada where, due to the limited capacity of the GIFMM
and the government, the situation was critical.
13 https://www.cancilleria.gov.co/sites/default/files/FOTOS2018/v2._resumen_documento_conpes_3950.pdf
14 United Nations Children’s Fund: Executive Board, Second regular session 2020 8–11 September 2020, Country programme document 2021-2024, Colombia.
https://sites.unicef.org/about/execboard/files/2020-PL13-_Colombia_CPD-EN-ODS.pdf
15 Of whom 799,373 possessed some form of regularisation mechanism or were within the legally permitted time frame to remain in the country.
16 CONSEJO NACIONAL DE POLÍTICA ECONÓMICA Y SOCIAL REPÚBLICA DE COLOMBIA, DEPARTAMENTO NACIONAL DE PLANEACIÓN: Documento 3950,
«ESTRATEGIA PARA LA ATENCIÓN DE LA MIGRACIÓN DESDE VENEZUELA» 23 noviembre, 2018.
17 GIFMM Colombia, Support Plan, October 2021:
https://reliefweb.int/sites/reliefweb.int/files/resources/Support%2520Plan%2520ETPV_DRAFT11062021_ENG_FV24062021.pdf
7
more have returned from Venezuela in recent years due, among other things, to the labour force disruptions and
employment generated by the COVID-19 pandemic and associated public health restrictions. All these different
types of movement scenarios – transit, pendular, returnee and intention to take up residence in Colombia –
present a different set of vulnerabilities to migrant children and their families and require a distinct set of
protective measures.
In the case of Colombia, the objectives of the request for assistance launched by the State in 201818, were (1) to
provide humanitarian assistance, and (2) to facilitate the social and economic integration of those migrants who
intend to remain in the country and support host populations and Colombian returnees through comprehensive
services.
The Government of Colombia (GoC) has maintained an open-door policy and has implemented various
mechanisms for socio-economic integration and to provide access to rights and services to migrants and host
communities. These include the Strategy to Address Venezuelan Migration (3950 (2018)) of the National Council
for Economic and Social Policy; Joint Circular No. 16/2018 on educational services for Venezuelan children; Decree
64, enabling access to social security and healthcare services; Decree 117/2020, creating the Special Stay Permit
for the Promotion of Formalization; and Decreto 216 of 1 March, 2021 to prevent statelessness.
The challenge in Colombia, as evidenced below, is not currently the legal or policy framework at the national level.
Rather, it is the wide gaps in resources, staffing, awareness and institutional mechanisms and other inputs needed
to operationalise national level policies at a local and practical level where migrants and refugees, as well as
members of the host community, urgently require services and protection. There is need for protective
mechanisms that empower, rather than constrain, those on the move and particularly adolescents seeking a better
life for themselves and their families.
1.2 Object of the evaluation and country case studies
UNICEF’s response to the Venezuela Migration Crisis (VMC) 2019-2021, both at country and regional levels,
constitutes the object of the evaluation. Through a regional lens and five country case studies in Brazil, Colombia,
Ecuador, Peru and Trinidad and Tobago, the overall evaluation will review the diverse ways that UNICEF has
responded to the VMC, given the specific opportunities and constraints of national contexts, government policies,
and through both its development and humanitarian interventions. The five case studies will shed light on good
practices and lessons learned from the experience of UNICEF country offices of responding to this now protracted
humanitarian crisis, and how UNICEF LACRO and HQ can better support COs in their response efforts. This report
constitutes the country case study of the UNICEF Colombia response.
Overview of UNICEF Colombia’s response to the VMC
This country case study explores UNICEF Colombia’s response to the VMC, seeking to identify good practices and
lessons learned that can shape future migration in the country and the region. Although the crisis was building
up19 over a number of years, UNICEF’s response the VMC in Colombia was officially triggered in 2018 in response
to the GoC’s formal and official request to the whole of the UN system for VMC intervention. A document prepared
in 2018 by the Consejo Nacional de Política Económica y Social (CONPES), Estrategia para la atención de la
migración desde Venezuela (Strategy for the attention to migration from Venezuela)20 sets out the national
government’s response to the needs of Venezuelan migrants and Colombian returnees in terms of health,
education, family welfare, protection, food and nutritional security and habitability and enjoyment of favourable
environments, coexistence and citizen security in reception municipalities and localities.
In 2018, the government itself committed approximately US$ 136 million to the response21 and noted a parallel
between Turkey’s reception of Syrian refugees, and Colombia’s reception of Venezuelan migrants in terms of the
scale and significance of the population movement. CONPES produced an accompanying Estrategia de Generación
de Ingresos para la población migrante proveniente de Venezuela y las comunidades de acogida22 (Income
generation strategy for the migrant population from Venezuela and the host communities) that proposes
18 https://www.cancilleria.gov.co/sites/default/files/FOTOS2018/v2._resumen_documento_conpes_3950.pdf
19Documento Conpes 3950 Estrategia para la Atención de la Migración desde Venezuela, November 2018, p. 15. The CONPES 3950 notes that although since
mid-2012 there has been an increase in the number of migratory operations at migration checkpoints with migration operations at migration checkpoints
with Venezuela, the increase was not very marked (Mejía, 2012; Migración Colombia; 2017). In August 2015, the Venezuelan president decreed the closure
of the border with Colombia, citing security reasons with Colombia. This measure was accompanied by the deportation of around 2,232 Colombian nationals
living in the border area and accelerated the voluntary return of more than 20,000 Colombians (Migration and Customs 20,000 Colombians (Migración
Colombia, 2018). Following the Venezuelan government's announcement to reopen the border as of August 13, 2016, Migración Colombia recorded in just
two weekends, the passage of 400,000 Venezuelans into national territory, mainly to buy food and basic necessities. The humanitarian response by the
Colombian government began in 2016.
20 https://www.cancilleria.gov.co/sites/default/files/FOTOS2018/v2._resumen_documento_conpes_3950.pdf
21 Documento Conpes 3950 Estrategia para la Atención de la Migración desde Venezuela, November 2018. P. 102
22 https://www.apccolombia.gov.co/proyectos/apoyo-la-implementacion-de-la-estrategia-de-generacion-de-ingresos-para-la-poblacion
8
alternatives for economic stabilisation and social integration for this population, This indicated why GoC requests
the support of the UN. In Colombia, the humanitarian emergency response preceded LACRO’s Level 2 (L2)
emergency activation by a number of months.23 The overall response is led by the GoC, with coordination provided
by UNHCR-IOM and the newly created GIFMM-R4V coordination platform. UNICEF is currently part of the Grupo
Inter agencial sobre Flujos Migratorios Mixtos (Interagency Group on Mixed Migratory Flows, GIFMM)24, which
periodically monitors the situation of the migrant population, both to provide humanitarian assistance and to
channel efforts and resources to strengthen Colombia's capacities as a migrant receiving country – both as transit
country and one in which migrants are intending to remain.
UNICEF Colombia has provided technical assistance to the GoC in its response to the migrant population since
2018. There have been three key areas:
1. UNICEF exercises technical and programmatic leadership for the response to the mixed migratory flow in
protection, education, WASH, health, early childhood care, among others.
2. UNICEF participates in the Migrant Children's Roundtable, which has made it possible to follow up on
critical situations affecting migrant children and adolescents and coordinate concrete actions in the host
territories. In addition, it co-leads the Education in Emergencies Cluster together with the Norwegian
Refugee Council (NRC) and Save the Children, as well as the WASH Cluster which it co-leads with Acción
contra el Hambre (Action against Hunger, ACH).
3. As co-lead agency, together with UNHCR, of the Communication for Development/Communication with
Communities (C4D/CwC) Task Force, UNICEF has sought to implement an AAP strategy and develop
messaging intended to address the needs and interests of the population in the migration process. The
Task Force, which currently has 17 members, belongs to the Protection of National Humanitarian Response
to the Mixed Migratory Flow from Venezuela group.25
The Task Force has three fields of action: (i) ensuring the delivery of relevant information to the population in
need, through available and meaningful communication channels; (ii) ensuring that humanitarian actors know,
manage and disseminate key information for populations in need; and (iii) ensuring that communities in transit,
with the intention to remain in Colombia and host communities, have access to accountability mechanisms that
allow them to evaluate the humanitarian response, especially the treatment received from humanitarian
workers.26
As noted above, UNICEF’s activities in response to the VMC have largely been carried out in key border areas:
including Norte de Santander, the Atlantic region (Barranquilla and La Guajira), Arauca along the Venezuelan
border, and Nariño on the Ecuadorian border. As will be further explored below this has been done through a rapid
expansion of presence in key border areas and along key transit routes in collaboration with other R4V partners.
In terms of expected results, these are outlined and explored in detail by sector in the Findings section below. Here
it is sufficient to note that response has placed a heavy emphasis on WASH – enabling R4V and communities
impacted by the VMC to have access to adequate water and sanitation services – as well as Child Protection,
Education, Health and Nutrition, C4D and Communications. A small pilot cash-based intervention under the Social
Inclusion sector was added in response to the COVID-19 pandemic. For a more detailed list of 2021 Implementing
Partners, see Annex 1.
UNICEF Colombia has worked closely with key government partners at national and sub-national levels. Among
others, these have included Migración Colombia, Gerencia de Fronteras, Ministerio de Salud, MEN, the Instituto
Colombiano de Bienestar Familiar (ICBF), the Registraduría Nacional (National Civil Registry) and the Procuraduría
General de la Nación27, a body charged with investigating irregularities in the function of GoC entities. Between
2019 and 2021, some 25 partners were engaged as implementing partners to participate in UNICEF’s VMC
response across sectors.28
In its new CPD 2021-2024, UNICEF Colombia has developed a Theory of Change (TOC) to support its role with the
GoC on the protection and inclusion of migrant and refugee children. This case study raises interesting questions
about how UNICEF understands and interprets the meaning of the “humanitarian-development-peace29 nexus”,
23 LACRO activated the L2 Emergency in response to the VMC in February 2019, some months after UNICEF Colombia had started to work in an emergency
response modality.
24 Originally the GIFMM which was within the Emergency Humanitarian Platform structure and then changed to the R4V platform. This change has had
consequences for the coordination of humanitarian response, since there are now two emergency humanitarian platforms in the country.
25 UNICEF Colombia: Strategy Note (internal) as part of the development of the new CPD 2021-2014.
26 Ibid.
27 https://www.procuraduria.gov.co/portal/
28 UNICEF Colombia. Migration Action Plan Templates 2019, 2020 and 2021 (internal documents)
29 IOM: Lessons Learned from Operationalizing the triple nexus, 2019 https://publications.iom.int/books/operationalizing-humanitarian-development-peace-
nexus-lessons-colombia-mali-nigeria-somalia
9
whereby a humanitarian and emergency context emerges within a long-standing development-oriented country
programme.
Table 1. Timeline of the Emergency and Response in Colombia
Timeline
From 2015 to Over 819,000 are estimated to have entered Colombia through formal and informal border
December 2018 crossings30
2018 GoC makes formal request to UN to support the response
April 2018 the UN Secretary-General provided direction for IOM and UNHCR to lead and
coordinate the regional response to the situation of refugees and migrants from Venezuela
UNICEF and other partners mobilised
Riohacha sub-office opened
HAC 2018 Regional Response by UNICEF LAC including Colombia
2019 L2 Regional activation
R4V platform operational
Emergency manager appointed
UNICEF Colombia Field Offices established in Arauca-Atlántico-Chocó-La Guajira-Nariño-
Nte de Santander, scaled up staffing of a joint development/humanitarian response teams
mainly UNVs.
Learning Circles contracted to attend to heeds of out-of-school children
CP safe spaces are opened in August-September 2019
2020 COVID 19 pandemic, L3 activation
Massive school closures and related protection problems
New CDP developed and approved with migration component
2021 New CPD with migration component in place
School reopening at 50% by October 2021, mostly completed by early 2022
Funding and partner mobilisation31
Frequent comparisons are made with the Syrian refugee crisis. Funding for the refugee operation in Turkey has
been many times greater than for the VMC on a per capita basis, allowing for both better coverage and more
comprehensive response. UNCEF requested US$ 91.13 million through the regional HAC for the period 2019 to
2021. A summary of sector requirements and funding gaps for 2019, 2020 and 2021 is provided below.32
Colombia´s HAC has been historically underfunded with a breakdown per sector showing that social inclusion,
WASH, health, education and child protection are among the sectors with the largest funding gaps.
In 2020, UNICEF Colombia received an additional USS$ 5.5 million for the COVID response. For 2021, the HAC
appeal was for US$ 36,890,000 and constituted a combined appeal for both children on the move and pandemic
response. Funding has been provided mainly by a handful of key donors: the Bureau of Population, Refugees and
Migration (BPRM), ECHO, Sweden, Canada, the UN’s Central Emergency Response Fund (CERF), internal UNICEF
emergency funds and some private and public donations. For more detailed information of key donors and
funding, see Annex 2.
30 UNICEF LACRO Migration HAC 2018.
31 The totals are presented in US$ without recovery costs. The amounts presented in this section are preliminary figures, as UNICEF presents its final amounts
in its annual financial reports.
32 Figures provided by UNICEF Colombia, since there were some discrepancies in using the Regional Sit Rep reporting.
10
Table 2. Funding Requirements and Gaps by Sector – 2019 (US$ millions)
Sector HAC Requirements Allocation Gap %Gap
Health 6.54 1.76 4.78 73%
Nutrition 0.5 0.51 - -
Education 5.87 1.47 4.4 75%
WASH 7.56 2.03 5.53 73%
Child Protection 4.99 2.34 2.65 53%
Social Inclusion 0.69 0.03 0.66 96%
Advocacy/Comm 1.12 0.28 0.84 75%
C4D 0.85 0.32 0.52 62%
Cross Sectoral 1.03 1.08 - -
TOTAL 29.14 9.81 19.33 66%
Table 3. Funding Requirements and Gaps by Sector – 2020 (US$ millions)
Sector HAC Requirements Allocation Gap %Gap
Health 3 0.99 2.01 67%
Nutrition 0.83 0.31 0.53 63%
Education 4.53 0.77 3.76 83%
WASH 4.6 1.72 2.89 63%
Child Protection 4.37 1.13 3.24 74%
Social Inclusion 0.64 0 0.64 100%
Advocacy/Comm 0.94 0.03 0.91 97%
C4D 1.18 0.1 1.08 92%
Cross Sectoral 2.01 0.42 1.58 79%
TOTAL 22.1 5.46 16.64 75%
Table 4. Funding Requirements and gaps by sector – 2021 (US$D millions)
Sector HAC Requirements Allocation Gap %Gap
Health 3.9 1.62 2.28 59%
Nutrition 3.34 0.9 2.44 73%
Education 9.26 2.14 7.12 77%
WASH 3.89 1.98 1.91 49%
Child Protection 8.67 3.13 5.54 64%
Social Inclusion 5.71 0 5.71 100%
Gender 0.18 0 0.18 100%
Advocacy 0.64 0 0.64 100%
C4D 4.3 0.54 3.76 87%
Cross Sectoral - 0.9 - -
Communication - 0.12 - -
TOTAL 39.89 11.33 28.56 72%
11
2. Purpose, objectives and scope of Colombia CO case study
2.1 Purpose
The purpose of the Venezuela Migration Outflow evaluation is to account for the results achieved between January
2019 and June 2021 and draw lessons learned and recommendations that will guide UNICEF’s future strategic and
programmatic priorities in the region and in Colombia, including the new Regional Office Management Plan and
relevant Country Office (CO) Program Documents. The primary users of this evaluation are the UNICEF Offices in
each of the countries, UNICEF staff in the regional office and in HQ supporting the response and LACRO,
Government counterparts and targeted beneficiaries including children, adolescents and their families. Secondary
users include UN agencies, civil society and other implementing partners, including other national and
international organisations, donors, the private sector, host communities, and research agencies with interest in
the evaluation findings.
For the purposes of the overall regional evaluation, this case study focuses on:
● The evolution of the Colombia Response from the activation of the L2 Emergency in February 2019 to the
present, including the development of UNICEF Colombia’s new CPD in 2020, development of migration
Theory of Change, and the challenges and opportunities encountered in its approach to programming
along the humanitarian-development nexus. Although there was no initial TOC for the migration response,
there was a 2018 Strategy developed for the HAC. Based on this and other documents, the evaluation
team has developed a TOC found in Annex 3.
● Colombia’s efforts to ensure access to basic WASH, health, and education services, as well as child
protection and GBV services, which have included capacity building and reinforcement of local structures.
● In terms of reaching the most vulnerable populations, a focus is how appropriate has been the response
provided to the most vulnerable, including the caminantes (the term used to describe migrants on foot)
and indigenous people in Venezuela in terms of age, gender and culturally appropriate instruments and
strategies.
● UNICEF has avoided duplicating existing systems making it valuable to assess the challenges addressed, in
terms of capacity building, linking emergency humanitarian and development actions and integrating them
in long term planning processes.
● Of interest of the evaluation is the relationship between UNICEF Colombia response and key standards –
including the CCCs and the application of the Children on the Move frameworks, the challenges and
opportunities experienced and how they are factored in UNICEF COs as a new long-term paradigm.
● Explore upstream and downstream advocacy and capacity building, route-based approaches, key transit
areas and border crossings services and protection, services and assistance in urban settlements,
indigenous communities and social cohesion/tensions with local host communities.
2.2 Objectives
As per the evaluation Terms of Reference (ToR, see Annex 4), the primary objective of this case study is to evaluate
the extent to which UNICEF is providing adequate, effective, and timely response to the crises generated by the
outflow of migrants from Venezuela to Colombia since February 2019, and to better enabling and constraining
factors and lessons learned.
Besides assessing the emergency response, the case study also investigates UNICEF actions to open opportunities
to establish localised solutions, as well as more long-term solutions to the integration of migrants through
institutions and systems of duty bearers.
It also seeks to analyse the extent to which changes in social norms, including those related to gender and
xenophobia, are envisioned, what strategies are in place and the extent to which they are measurable. The
evaluation has a strong gender and equity focus component, exploring how and to what degree UNICEF has been
considering gender dynamics, such as socio-economic status, ethnic groups, and other relevant variables in its
design, planning and implementation.
The evaluation identifies good practices, innovative approaches and lessons learned and seeks to develop, in a
participatory manner, forward looking recommendations to strengthen UNICEF’s results, with a special focus on
reaching the most vulnerable groups. The evaluation provides evidence on whether UNICEF’s Regional Response
to the VMC has been and continues to be appropriate, effective, efficient, coherent, coordinated and connected.
2.3 Scope
Temporal Scope: This evaluation covers UNICEF’s response to the Venezuela outflow crises in Colombia, from the
time the Level 2 Corporate Emergency Activation Procedure (CEAP) was triggered in February 2019 to its
deactivation in June 2020, as well as the overlapping period with the Global L3 CEAP activated in March 2020
12
following the COVID-19 outbreak (January 2019 to June 2021). As most field missions were carried out during the
last quarter of 2021, it was agreed with LACRO to extend the timeframe beyond the deactivation of the L2 VMC
Emergency until December 2021.
Criteria scope: The evaluation covers the evaluation criteria adapted to humanitarian interventions used by the
Organisation for Economic Co-Operation and Development Development Assistance committee (OECD-DAC in line with
guidelines developed by the Active Learning Network for Accountability and Performance in Humanitarian Action
(ALNAP)33: appropriateness, effectiveness, efficiency, coherence and coordination, coverage and connectedness.
Geographic scope: The Venezuelan migration outflow evaluation has as its geographic scope the LACRO regional
response, including five country cases studies of which Colombia is one. The evaluation has considered information
and documentation from both national level (Bogotá) and subnational levels, and involved field visits to UNICEF
sub-offices and regions heavily impacted by the VMC – including Norte de Santander (Cucuta and Villa Rosario);
Barranquilla; La Guajira and Arauca.
COVID-19: the evaluation includes an assessment of UNICEF’s COVID-19 adaptations to the migration crisis
response.
2.4 Stakeholders
As primary stakeholders, we include the affected population, as well as UNICEF staff and implementing and
government partners engaged in the response. In addition, secondary stakeholders have been identified and
included as external to UNICEF in the table below.
Table 5. Stakeholders
Level Internal to UNICEF External to UNICEF
Headquarters - Sr. Management, Office of -UNHCR, IOM, the United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA) and UN Women
Level Emergency Programmes - Donors (including United States Bureau of Population, Refugees, and
(EMOPS), Children on the Migration (BPRM), ECHO, and the Government of Canada)
Move (Geneva)
Regional Level - UNICEF Sr. Management, -UN Partners: UNHCR, IOM, UNFPA, UN Women, UN Office for the Coordination
Emergency and Technical of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA)
Advisors - Regional R4V Platform members
- Donor representatives
National Level -UNICEF Sr. Management -UN Partners: UNHCR, IOM, UNFPA, UN Women
and Section chiefs, sector - National government partners in key ministries and government agencies
specialists, Emergency and - R4V Coordination members
Technical teams (Migration - Implementing partners
technical team) - Donor representatives
- Partners in media and other opinion influencers
Sub-national - UNICEF Field-Office and -Municipalities
level satellite teams, including -Implementing partners
different sector specialists - Beneficiaries of UNICEF-funded - programmes
-Representatives of Host – Communities, including by gender and ethnicity
(women, men, indigenous)
- R4V Coordination members under WASH, Education, Child Protection (CP) Area
of Responsibility (AoR), C4D
- local media/influencers
3. Evaluation criteria and questions
Using OECD/DAC and ALNAP criteria the evaluation has incorporated two cross-cutting approaches: a human rights
approach (HR) and a gender perspective. The evaluation has assessed the extent to which the human rights, gender
equality, equity and intercultural approach for girls, boys and adolescents has been incorporated into the
implementation of the VMC response
The evaluation questions have been validated by the reference group and arranged in an evaluation matrix (see
Inception Report and Annex 5 for a complete list of the evaluation questions). The evaluation team employed the
same questions for all case studies to ensure harmonisation.
33 ALNAP (2016), Evaluation of Humanitarian Action Guide
13
4. Methodology of the Colombia country case study
The methodology applied for this Country Case Study is the one approved in the inception report (IR) for the overall
evaluation process. The evaluation has defined an analytical framework with all applicable standards of reference
to children on the move, the core of the response to be evaluated. The analytical framework has been constructed
combining OECD DAC criteria with the international human rights framework, in particular:
 Minimum Standards for Child Protection in Humanitarian Action34;
 Guidelines for Integrating Gender-Based Violence Interventions in Humanitarian Action35;
 The Global Compact for Migration36
 UNICEF Guidelines on the Protection of Child Victims of Trafficking37
 The Inter-Agency Network for Education in Emergencies (INEE)
 UNHCR’s Framework for the Protection of Children38
 UNICEF’s Six Point Agenda for Children on the Move.39
Particularly relevant are the CCCs and the Global Humanitarian Standards. In terms of quality standards, the
evaluation refers to UNICEF’s 2020 CCCs as well a relevant policy guideline for children on the move. 40
The evaluation is utilisation focused and participatory, with an emphasis on learning. It is forward-looking with a
view to shedding light on the results achieved so far and the possible strategic and programmatic priorities in the
region in the search for durable solutions for migrants and communities.
For this Colombia case study, in the absence of a ToC for the VMC response in Colombia, the evaluation team
reconstructed a ToC, covering both humanitarian and development dimensions, validated during the Inception
phase (ToC for Colombia in Annex 3). The ToC has been used to explore the underlying theoretical aspects of the
linkages between humanitarian and development aspects of the response.
The methodology consisted of mixing various methods as presented below. In particular, the country case study is
based on extensive document and literature review, semi-structured interviews with key informants at national
and local levels, and field visits to consult representatives of both migrant and host communities.
A country visit was carried out from 25-30 October 2021, allowing the evaluation team to visit different sites in
Barranquilla, Norte de Santander, Arauca and La Guajira, meeting project participants (referred to in the ToRs as
beneficiaries) and members of concerned institutions. In-person and remote interviews used a hybrid research
approach (see agenda in Annex 8). According to the Administrative Registry of Venezuelan Migrants, nearly 80 per
cent of migrants are concentrated in seven departments and municipalities, with Bogotá having the largest number
of migrants, followed by Norte de Santander, La Guajira and Atlántico. For this reason, the evaluation focused field
visits on UNICEF activities in the Venezuela-Colombia border areas of Barranquilla, Cucuta and Villa Rosario, Arauca
and La Guajira, as well as investigating services provided to migrants along the main routes taken by caminantes.
This subgroup of migrants is considered among the most vulnerable due to the risks to their physical safety and
health that they incur undertaking a long and arduous journey on foot to cross Colombia to find work in other
urban centres or further afield, in Ecuador, Peru or as far as Chile.
4.1 Document and literature review
In the data collection phase, the team conducted an extensive review of country-level, LACRO and other
documentation on the coverage and quality of humanitarian assistance relevant for each country case study. The
desk review included the information provided by LACRO and the CO, available in shared folders, sometimes
internal and non-public documents, monitoring data, operational contracts and IP reports, contextual data of the
RRMP, R4V platform, academia, GoC and other sources (see Annex 7). This in-depth analysis allowed the evaluation
team to create a framework to measure progress on collective (regional or cross-border) and individual (country-
level) efforts and capture lessons learned and good practices. The evaluation team also reviewed quantitative data
sources to assess the effectiveness of the response and to determine the magnitude of protection and other
challenges facing children on the move and their families. The (CCCs and UNICEF’s Global Programme Framework
34 https://spherestandards.org/wp-content/uploads/CPMS-2019-EN.pdf
35 https://gbvguidelines.org/en/
36 https://www.iom.int/global-compact-migration
37 https://gdc.unicef.org/resource/guidelines-protection-child-victims-trafficking
38 https://www.unhcr.org/protection/children/50f6cf0b9/framework-protection-children.html
39 https://www.unicef.org/children-uprooted/agenda-for-action
40 https://www.unicef.org/documents/global-programme-framework-children-move
14
on Children on the Move41 provided benchmarks against with the effectiveness and appropriateness of the
response have been assessed.
4.2 Context analysis and timeline
During the data collection phase, the evaluation team conducted individual country-level context analyses as part
of each country case study, to identify and analyse the different contextual factors, including the political response
to the migration influx, the on-going armed conflict in Colombia, and the pandemic response among other factors
impacting each country operation. This included the identification of challenges and adaptations, such as
qualitative or quantitative description and analysis of the local economic, political, institutional, and socio-cultural
context so as to understand how local factors might affect outcomes across the countries where UNICEF
implements its activities.
4.3 Country visit
From October 25-30th, 2021 the evaluation team met UNICEF teams and partners in Bogotá, Barranquilla, Cucuta,
Villa de Rosario, Arauca, Riohacha, Maicao and various informal settlements of migrants in La Guajira and one
Wayuú community. The evaluation adapted a purposive sampling strategy, selecting field locations that allow the
evaluation to capture key facets and maximise learning from the Response. As per the ToRs, the Evaluation Team
(ET) took a route-based approach, which examines how UNICEF has responded at transit and border points as well
at destination areas (see Inception Report). Among criteria shaping selection of the locations and people to consult
were learning potential, investment by UNICEF, types of populations assisted, location on the migration route,
delivery modalities and access. The agenda of field visits is found in Annex 8.
4.4 Semi-structured key informant interviews (KIIs)
In total 53 semi-structured interviews (36 with females and 17 with males) were carried out (on-site and remotely)
with key in-country informants (both at national and field level) based on the stakeholder analysis in the IT and
adapted during the data collection phase in Colombia. Interviews were undertaken with UNICEF CO and FO staff,
implementing partners, government counterparts, multilateral agencies, bilateral donors and civil society
organisations (see Annex 6 for list of interviewees).). This included 18 UNICEF staff, 15 government counterparts,
12 representatives of implementing partners and eight representatives of multilateral and donor agencies.
Additionally, group discussions were held with field office staff in each of the areas visited to get their overview
and identify challenges, gaps and lessons learned. Group discussions in the field were also carried out with parents
and representatives of both migrant and host communities(see below). A generic interview guide (Annex 9) guided
the Colombia case study. Interview guides were kept as simple and as brief as possible without compromising
quality, giving the highest levels of sensitivity and respect for beneficiaries and communities, and staff, informed
by the Age, Gender and Diversity (AGD) approach42. Qualitative evidence from the interviews was analysed
according to emergent categories of analysis, such as similar themes or issues raised by multiple respondents and
through an initial qualitative analysis.
4.5 Engagement with families of children on the move and host communities
Focus group and informal discussions with representatives of both migrant and host communities involved in
UNICEF funded programmes and activities at sub-national level —including both female and male migrants and
refugees, and adolescent girls and boys on the move—were carried out in all field locations visited. Group
discussions with women representatives targeted specific issues. For example, in Cucuta a group discussion with
pregnant and lactating women was organized to learn about perceptions of services supported by UNICEF. Group
discussions with parents, children and adolescents were held, among others, about their experience in the Círculos
de Aprendizajes43 and CP for Venezuelan children. During the field visits, the evaluation team was able to conduct
approximately 15 interviews and small group discussions with a total of 50 participants, including children and
adolescents. The ET conducted age-disaggregated interviews, based on International Review Board (IRB) approved
research protocols and interview guides (see Annex 10 and 11 for IRB approval and interview guides for discussion
groups). All public health recommendations, such as masking and social distancing, as well as other ethical
protocols, were respected.
4.6 Feedback loops and validation process of the case study
This report has been submitted to LACRO and the CO, and went through a validation process:
41 https://www.unicef.org/documents/global-programme-framework-children-move
42 Following our AGD approach the ET included a diversity of participants, including more than ten focus group discussions with beneficiaries from host and
migrant communities, including a balance of both men and women, as well as children and adolescents in a range of settings along the migration route. See
Annex 6.
43 A means by which migrant children and adolescents, often alongside Colombians, may access formal education although not regularly attending a normal
school. https://www.unicef.org/colombia/historias/dentro-del-c%C3%ADrculo.
15
1) LACRO and CO staff provided written feedback to this report, addressing inaccuracies, possible gaps in
information or misinterpretations.
2) Validation workshop: the ET organised a workshop with CO and LACRO staff in September 2022 to further
refine conclusions and recommendations and to address any remaining information gaps. This workshop
allowed for recommendations and action plans to be validated and co-created, and to encourage learning
and ownership of the evaluation results.
5. Limitations of the case study
Limitation Action to minimise
Lack of a referenced ToC for the humanitarian response. A ToC The ET has outlined a provisional ToC to be validated through
exists for the new CPD after 2021. the evaluation process.
Lack of a formulated strategic plan for the VMC in Colombia or The response is articulated as part of the R4V platform, the
at LACRO level including objectives, longer-term intended Regional Migration Response Plan (RMRP) and the UNICEF
outcomes and outputs with related activities and progress regional HAC and shares objectives and monitoring and
indicators44 The fact there is no clearly identified gender evaluation (M&E) arrangements. The ET has reconstructed a
strategy for the response makes it difficult to identify UNICEF’s working framework to assess progress to outcomes, based on
approach to gender equality as a cross-cutting issue. the HAC and makes reference to the CCCs and UNICEF’s Gender
Action Plan as overarching frameworks.
Short field mission: the mission was limited to five days in To mitigate this risk, the ET comprised three senior consultants,
Colombia by three team members, specifically to areas most all highly experienced with the Colombian context and
affected by the VMC: Barranquilla in Atlántico region, Cucuta institutional landscape. The team was able to split up and cover
and Villa Rosario in Norte de Santander and Riohacha and complementary aspects in multiple locations while following a
Maicao in La Guajira. common methodology.
Lack of quantitative data on the prevalence of key protection The ET has relied on other secondary data from government,
problems facing migrant and refugee children, comprehensive R4V and other sources in an effort to gauge the magnitude of
vulnerability analysis and assessments to determine the needs relative to programmatic responses and coverage of
number of children most at risk at national level. UNICEF programmes.
Concerns of staff around participating and sharing views To protect key informants, the text below will be intentionally
frankly with the ET. formulated at a high level, without providing details that might
link informants to any specific situational information that might
have been shared.
At regional level an online survey was carried out among The survey results were analysed at regional level and reported
UNICEF staff. However, sample size was limited at national in the regional cross-country synthesis report. Any results
level. pertaining to Colombia are included in that report
6. Ethical and gender considerations
The Case Study design and implementation follows the standards set out in the UNEG Ethical Guidelines45 for
Evaluation (2008)46 and the UNICEF Procedure on Ethical Standards in Research, Evaluation and Data Collection
and Analysis (2021).47 The ET has sought through its interviews, document review, focus group discussions and
analytical frameworks to fully operationalise its obligations to demonstrate independence, impartiality, credibility,
and accountability in accordance with UNEG ethical standards. The ET confirms it does not have any conflict of
interest.
The evaluation team rigorously ensured that all participants were informed about research objectives,
participation was voluntary, and privacy, confidentiality and wellbeing were respected. The ET robustly ensure
girls, boys, women and men were allowed equal opportunity to participate in the assessment. In practice the
evaluation had good participation from mothers and single mothers, with more limited participation from fathers
of migrant and refugee children. Overall, as shown in Annex 6, more women and girls participated in focus group
discussions than boys and men.
With respect to ethical approaches to managing evaluation participant data the evaluation methodology meets all
ethical and UNICEF standards while collecting data with vulnerable groups. All research steps, processes and tools
44 While the HAC contains many elements of an action plan, it is considered by UNICEF LACRO that the HAC is an appeal and cannot be considered as an
approved strategic plan.
45https://www.alnap.org/system/files/content/resource/files/summary/UNEG_Ethical_Guidelines_for_Evaluation_2020.pdf
46 http://www.unevaluation.org/document/detail/2866
47 https://www.unicef.org/evaluation/documents/unicef-procedure-ethical-standards-research-evaluation-data-collection-and-analysis
16
received approval from an external IRB review (See approval in Annex 10). They are aligned with the
recommendations of the initiative on Ethical Research Involving Children (ERIC).48 This case study has ensured:
● Respect for dignity and diversity Differences in culture, local customs, religious beliefs, gender, disability, age
and ethnicity were noted. We took steps to minimise any risk of disruption to the respondents, provided
ample notice and respected privacy.
● Rights: We ensured that participants were treated as autonomous agents and were given the time and
information to decide whether they wished to participate, and not pressured into participating. The
participants were selected as per the defined sampling methodology (See Inception Report for further detail).
● Redress: Participants were provided sufficient information to seek redress and how to register a complaint.
● Confidentiality: We respected the respondent's right to provide information in confidence and made them
aware of the scope and limits of confidentiality. Names and any other sensitive information have been
anonymised.
● Data security: Data has been stored systematically and securely and in line with DARA’s data protection policy,
which has been updated to be fully compliant with the 2018 General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR)49
standards. Data has been stored in a way that makes it available and clearly accessible only to the -ET. If
requested and following appropriate anonymisation, the data will also be shared with UNICEF. Data will be
retained for the period of the evaluation and then destroyed.
7. Findings
Findings are structured against evaluation criteria. Under each criteria the ET responds to related overarching and
specific questions. Each criteria sub section ends with synthesising related strengths and challenges.
7.1 Appropriateness
UNICEF CO’s presence within the response has been highly appropriate, important for advocating with partners
and governments on behalf of Venezuelan children on the move and raising their profile within collective response
efforts.
EQ1 To what extent did UNICEF’s Regional Office develop and adapt an integrated intervention logic (i.e.,
Theory of change/strategy for the regional response) that was appropriate and relevant to the changing
dynamics of the outflow and the needs of COs?’ will be treated in the synthesis report as it refers to regional
analysis.
EQ2. To what extent did UNICEF Colombia develop and adapt response theories of change, strategies,
objectives and implementation modalities that were appropriate and relevant to the changing needs of
migrant children/families, opportunities, capacities and circumstances in border, transit and urban/rural
settlements, including adaptations to the COVID-19 outbreak.
Summary of key findings:
 Overall, UNICEF Colombia has developed and adapted a number of response strategies, objectives and
implementation modalities, which have been appropriate and relevant to the changing needs of migrant
children and their families along the migration route, including adaptations posed by the COVID-19
pandemic.
 UNICEF has significantly expanded its territorial presence to enhance its ability to actively participate in the
GIFMM-R4V response in key border and transit areas. Working within the framework of the GIFMM-R4V
platform, it has invested in vital services, in particular WASH, at border, transit and rural settlements.
 Aligned with the GoC policies, UNICEF is providing specific support for ETP registration for those Venezuelans
wishing to stay in Colombia.
 In the context of the pandemic, UNICEF Colombia’s extensive WASH expertise has served well as a bridge
between parallel two humanitarian responses (L2 VMC and L3 COVID 19 response) as well as a link between
humanitarian and development modalities in rural and urban settlements.
 In a number of cases the appropriateness of and relevance of UNICEF strategies, objectives and
implementation modalities could be reviewed and revised, at both national and regional level, in light of the
scale and complexity of the VMC.
Appropriateness of the territorial strategy and enhanced presence of UNICEF Colombia
The nature of the migration flows in Colombia have changed and evolved over time and UNICEF’s response has
endeavoured to keep pace with the changing needs of migrant children and their families. UNICEF adopted a
48 https://childethics.com/
49 https://gdpr-info.eu/
17
strategy to expand its presence that was appropriate and relevant, enabling UNICEF Colombia to engage at local
and departmental levels and to establish a permanent field presence. However, this strategy has not been without
its growing pains.
In 2018, UNICEF Colombia had three offices: its national office in Bogotá, as well as two field offices (in Quibdo,
Choco, and in Riohacha, La Guajira). UNICEF Colombia began its response activities in February 2018 in three
departments along the eastern border (Arauca, Norte de Santander and La Guajira) that were initially most
affected by the migratory influx. The agency gradually expanded its geographical reach until it covered a total of
eight departments at the end of 2018 (Bolivar, Atlántico and Magdalena, Nariño and Putumayo were added). The
Ministry of Foreign Affairs urged inclusion of urban areas of departments along the Caribbean coast so as to
address the growing phenomenon of in-transit migrants and caminantes. In 2019, UNICEF Colombia further added
the urban areas of Bogotá, Medellín and Cesar department. As a result, four new field offices opened (Norte de
Santander (Cucuta), Atlántico (Barranquilla), Arauca, and Nariño (Pasto)). Furthermore, activities were rolled out
in three other locations (Vichada, Amazonas, and Putumayo)50 with support of focal points to accompany
implementing partners. The rapid expansion and scaling up of UNICEF’s presence involved hiring a large
contingent of new staff and consultants, mainly UN Volunteers (UNVs). Colombia office staff grew from 50 in 2017
to 117 in 2021. The expansion, as explored below, also led to the engagement of 25 new implementing partners.
KIIs and documents reviewed, at different times and in different urban and rural contexts, show Colombia has
required a response that includes humanitarian interventions, resilience programming and protection of migrants
at the border, in transit to other countries and at destinations. In practice, as migrants tend to move freely
between these different migratory spaces, it is not always easy to distinguish services for each group. Pendular
movements between populations living along the border itself, and larger movements of Venezuelans returning
to their country due to the pandemic, together with public health restrictions, further complicated processes of
planning a timely and appropriate response at all points along the migration route. In urban centres, such as
Medellín, Cartagena, Barranquilla, and Bogotá (where nearly one quarter of all Venezuelan migrants have settled),
there is less need for traditional humanitarian activities. Accordingly, UNICEF Colombia has placed emphasis on
protection actions like prevention of recruitment into armed groups in Arauca, Nariño, Putumayo and Norte de
Santander. In communities nearer to the Venezuelan and other border areas, where government presence and
services have historically been scarcer, UNICEF and partners, in agreement with local authorities, have
endeavoured to do more to meet the basic survival needs of migrants and host communities.
Map 1. UNICEF Colombia geographic scope of work, 2021
Although according to KIs, without expanding
its territorial presence UNICEF Colombia
would not have been able to achieve the
results it has shown to date, there are
opportunities that could have enhanced the
appropriateness of UNICEF’s field presence:
● Enhance capacity to deliver a quality,
principled humanitarian response at scale:
Increased territorial presence has enabled
UNICEF to actively lead and participate in
local level coordination processes and
support to local government and civil society
institutions. Nevertheless, according to KIIs,
field staff are stretched by the magnitude of
the task at hand, the need to take on multiple
roles, and also by operating under COVID-19
constraints. Newly recruited teams have not
benefited from extensive orientation and
training on what UNICEF considers are the
needs of a principled humanitarian response,
and what makes a humanitarian response
different from a longer-term development modality.
50 There was never an intention to open offices in these three departments but to have specific activities and to have a focal point that could enable work of
implementing partners.
18
● Develop new and locally relevant models that meet local needs and can be brought to scale by other actors.
KIIs showed a territorial approach is relevant as UNICEF utilises its presence to build its programming efforts
around local partnerships, opportunities and needs. However, in general, interviews with field staff suggest
that the appropriateness and relevance of maintaining a strong territorial presence is contingent on further
decentralisation when drafting funding proposals.
● Utilise the information and evidence drawn from the field to enhance advocacy at the national level: a
clear advantage of the expanded presence at field level is gathering evidence that can then be translated into
advocacy for policy and normative changes at the national level. Unfortunately, according to KIIs, small group
discussions and document reviews, over the course of the humanitarian response, information gaps51
continue to exist that impede effective advocacy on public policy at the national level.52 There have been
however several examples of field interventions feeding into national level advocacy efforts, such as drop-in
centres, the route activations in GBV and ETP registration.
● Feed into a localisation agenda: The extended territorial presence developed through the response has in
some cases allowed for the identification and capacity development of local partners, such as the
Corporación para la Investigación y Desarrollo de la Democracia (CIDEMOS) and others who have been
working in the regions affected by the migration flows and whose capacity to respond to similar future
emergencies has been enhanced.
Appropriateness of the route-based approach
The route-based approach53 developed via the GIFMM-R4V appears to be highly appropriate and relevant to the
context, with some exceptions that are explored here. UNICEF participates in the border areas largely through its
participation on R4V established Espacios de Apoyo (EAs). EAs started as a regional initiative to provide accurate
information, orientation and basic services in response to urgent physical, emotional and psychological needs of
Venezuelans on the move.54 EAs provide services for pendular migrants, caminantes, those who have entered
Colombia and intend to remain in a particular area and Venezuelans returning home, for example due to the
pandemic or in the run-up to Christmas holidays.
Border areas: R4V Espacios de Apoyo
The ET visited three EAs (Puente Francisco de Paula Santander; PISB-CENAF and Paraguachón in La Guajira) and
observed that each of these formal border crossings provides a comprehensive range of services around WASH,
rehydration, primary healthcare, vaccination, family planning, nutritional assessment, psycho-social support,
protection case management, legal clinic, humanitarian transport and child friendly spaces. UNICEF contributed to
the supply and maintenance of WASH infrastructure: toilets, showers, handwashing, and rehydration stations.
These WASH installations are central to the entire migration response. According to interviewees each agency that
occupies a space at the EAs covers its own share of the cost of the upkeep of the centre.
The ET noted most EAs were also equipped with Child Friendly Spaces providing such activities such as singing,
dancing, play and workshops about parenting). Informants reported, however, that these spaces do not provide
day-care services. If parents are not present children are not allowed to attend, thus preventing mothers from
undertaking other tasks.
UNICEF partnership with implementing partners such as Significarte and CIDEMOS in La Guajira and Norte de
Santander, respectively has developed a strategy to prevent violence arising from the prevalence of Venezuelan
street children. Drop-in centres function as violence prevention spaces where families can leave their children
aged between six and 17 in the care of a team of professionals, experts and trained by UNICEF. Families participate
in the spaces at pre- arranged time. The ET became aware of adaptations to this model in response to the pandemic
when several support centres were closed. UNICEF continued to implement one in Riohacha and opened two
more, one in Maicao and another in Villa del Rosario. This is a demonstration model of prevention and approach
to violence, including GBV and family separation for unaccompanied or separated children and adolescents with
51 Key information gaps can be attributed to a number of factors: lack of data on the scale of child protection and other phenomena at a national level; lack
of partners actively sharing case information and lack of data collection processes and analysis of this data. These gaps exist regarding the numbers and
locations of out-of-school children, as well as on UASC by region, among other areas, see text below.
52 UNICEF: Informe Final Evaluación Programa de Cooperación UNICEF COLOMBIA (2015-2019) p.51
53 Among the first to use the concept of the route-based approach is the International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies (IFRC) which defines
it as “an important complement to the overarching migration approach, which is based on needs, informed by rights and bound to the Movement’s
Fundamental Principles. A route-based approach informs a deeper understanding of the humanitarian and protection needs of migrants by analysing the
vulnerabilities arising from the geographical and human dimensions along migration routes, relevant contextual elements, and their interactions with
vulnerabilities factors related to a migrant’s profile and status. This allows the IFRC to better assist and protect vulnerable migrants and to adapt their
interventions to fast-evolving operational realities”. See https://ifrcgo.org/africa/img/Sahel/IFRC%20route-based%20approach%20-%20EN%20-%20final.pdf
54 https://www.refworld.org.es/pdfid/5e5d62194.pdf
19
specific protection needs. It can be noted however that as with the EAs these initiatives have not addressed the
needs of parents in terms of providing a safe space in which under-fives can be left.
The ET noted the absence of actors with a specific focus on child protection such as the case of the ICBF. UNICEF
partners reported that cases of refoulement55 children are not uncommon. This adds to protection problems as
minors unable to enter Colombia at an official border crossing are forced to use trochas, the name given to the
myriad trails or footpaths by thousands of irregular crossing points have been created along the long Venezuela-
Colombia border. UNICEF staff told the ET that UNICEF has tried unsuccessful to convince ICBF to staff an office at
the EAs. While there are Comisarias de Familia or Defensores de Familia and ICBF sub offices asked to deal with CP
cases informants reported they are overwhelmed by demand for services and UNICEF is working to strengthen
their capacities. There are protection UNVs who regularly visit these EAs but are not permanently stationed at
them. The ET was made aware of cases of at least one minor refouled by Colombian migration authorities and
where the presence of UNICEF or CP partners would have been helpful to help remind authorities of their
obligations under international law.
As explored further below, a number of partners, including donors, identify UNICEF’s dual role a humanitarian
actor and a development actor supporting longer-term processes of institutional capacity building. UNICEF
Colombia sees its role, quite rightly, as being to strengthen institutional response capacity and promote a focus on
the rights of migrant children while seeking to complement and support state actions and those of other
cooperating partners. Whereas state CP systems can take years to develop capacity to handle a significant influx
of new child protection cases, actions are needed today to ensure that children’s rights and protection are
guaranteed. UNICEF Colombia has taken steps towards this particularly through implementing drop-in centres.
UNICEF’s presence at Puntos de servicios along the caminantes route
In addition to the EAs, the GIFMM-R4V Coordination Platform has also established a series of Puntos de servicios
as part of the response to the caminantes. In comparison with many of the first to leave Venezuela subsequent
migrants have among the most vulnerable generally exhausted resources and have thus been unable to buy airline
or bus tickets and travel in greater comfort and safety. Among them are the poorest Venezuelans from the most
vulnerable and marginalised communities but alongside them are also highly educated former middle-class
families who have lost their jobs and homes due to hyperinflation and economic collapse. The caminantes
phenomenon originated in Venezuela and has spread to Colombia where the poorest migrants and refugees try to
make their way to areas of employment and/or to reunite with family members that have gone ahead. It has
spread across Colombia and further to Ecuador, Peru, and as far as Chile.56 While there are several different routes
taken by the caminantes, one of the main ones is from Cucuta to Bogotá along which there are reportedly 17
recognised puntos de servicios.
The ET visited a the Punto de Servicios at Chinacota called La Don Juana. This s provides a range of services to
migrants and refugees, including hot meals, primary healthcare, accommodation, hygiene kits, a small child
friendly space and lactation room, washrooms and showers, Wi-Fi, GBV response, child protection, psychosocial
support and spiritual accompaniment. One of UNICEF’s main contributions to La Don Juana is maintaining the
washrooms and showers, which were found to be clean and functional. However, at the time of our visit these
WASH facilities were not being used extensively as the number of caminantes had been greatly reduced over the
course of the pandemic. This space also showed UNICEF’s work and added value in bringing unaccompanied
children closer to the protection system and promoting institutional response by bringing the protection needs of
children on the move to the attention of the local Comisarias de la Familia.
In Arauca the ET visited service points at the bus station and on the caminantes route (La Antioqueña) and in Tame
(La Milagrosa), where UNICEF provided Child-Friendly Spaces, information, CP, C4D and Psychosocial Attention
(PSA) mechanisms defined with the implementing partner. The existence of the EAs and the Puntos de Servicios
along the main migration routes demonstrates one facet of how the GIFMM-R4V platform has sought to meet the
changing needs of migrants. According to UNICEF and implementing partner informants the network of reception
and service centres has capacity to serve migrants both leaving Venezuela as well as migrants as they return to
Venezuela from other urban centres in Colombia or elsewhere.
A particular challenge identified by partners has been management of cases of unaccompanied and separated
children (UASC) along the migration route. The CP system in Colombia was, prior to the VMC, already stretched
and in rural areas responsibility for case management in the case of an UASC falls to the Commissioner of the
55 Non-refoulement is a fundamental principle of international law that forbids a country receiving asylum seekers from returning them to a country in which
they would be in likely danger.
56 In Brazil, by contrast, caminantes is less noticeable as the Brazilian government provides voluntary aerial relocation programmes to resettle families
throughout the country, thus reducing the number of families having to walk long distances.
20
Family who is named by the mayor or the Defender of the Family, who is a staff member of ICBF. Additionally, the
law states cases must be resolved and closed within a specified amount of time. According to UNICEF partners, the
experience with caminantes highlights the weaknesses and under-resourcing of the system. A adolescents on the
move want to avoid being included within El Proceso Administrativo de Restablecimiento de Derechos (the
Administrative Process for the Re-establishment of Rights, PARD) because this likely means they will be prevented
from proceeding to their destination,. The overworked Commissioners and or Defenders of the Family may be
loath to open new cases because they are under pressure to resolve them quickly despite not having the personnel
and financial resources to do.57 Overall, the protection system for the caminantes and network of service centres
is inconsistent due to the fact that COVID-19-related and other sporadic border closures have forced migrants to
use trochas. Through observations, informal conversations and KIIs the ET learned that a significant informal
economy has grown up around these irregular crossing points. Caminantes themselves and response partners at
different locations cite the advantages of using the trochas over regular crossing points. With trochas no official
documents are demanded and the costs of crossing are lower. It is evident that the scale of irregular crossings can
be assumed to be many times more than those at regular crossings. According to informants, once a person with
the intention to transit to other countries has crossed irregularly into Colombia, their motivation becomes to
reduce contact with the Colombian authorities because of fear of unnecessary delays and other consequences.
Therefore, protection measures and service points set up to assist the caminantes from GBV and other forms of
violence or risks to health and security, which can be monitored by the local police and migration officers, may be
avoided by the very people they have been set up to serve.
Presence in urban and rural settlements
As with other GIFMM-R4V partners, UNICEF has also established a limited presence in urban and rural settlements
in border areas where Venezuelan migrants and Colombian returnees have established themselves. The ET was
able to see various CP spaces – one in Villa del Rosario called Espacio Alternativo de Cuidado y Acogida para la
Niñez y Adolescencia (EACANNA) operated by the regional NGO CIDEMOS, another in Riohacha operated by the
Bogotá based NGO Significarte, as well as one in Barranquilla where child-friendly spaces (CFSs) were provided and
adolescent mobilisation allowed for awareness, increased coverage and addressing structural challenges in a
particularly deprived neighbourhood. These spaces have been created by UNICEF and other partners to deliver
services to children at risk and to offer emergency accommodation for UASC and children impacted by the
pandemic. In Riohacha and Barranquilla, the ET interviewed mothers and children participating in UNICEF-
sponsored activities. For parents, these involved workshops on parenting and the need to prevent violence against
children. For youth, these had to do with prevention of GBV, leadership, and communications.
Appropriateness of UNICEF Colombia’s preparedness measures
UNICEF Colombia, having worked for decades on issues of internal displacement as a result of the armed conflict,
has been more prepared than other COs to adapt to the migration outflow. UNICEF Colombia’s entries into the
UNICEF Emergency Preparedness Platform (EPP)58 indicate the extent to which, prior to the L2 being activated, the
CO had identified and were prepared to respond to the threat of a migration crisis similar to the VMC. It is
important to remember that by 2018, the VMC itself was well underway, and Colombia had already been
significantly impacted. The 2018 Colombia entry in the EPP briefly analyses migration from Venezuela as a serious
risk. While no specific sector response scenarios were laid out, it appears that UNICEF Colombia had met 18 out of
25 of UNICEF’s Minimum Preparedness Standards. UNICEF Colombia’s EPP scenarios are currently being reviewed
and updated.
Appropriateness of emerging Results Framework on Migration in the CDP 2021-2024
Initially the L2 response to the VMC did not have a ToC to guide its overall implementation at CO or Regional
Levels, and UNICEF does not typically build ToCs in the context of its emergency responses. Rather, emergency
responses are guided by humanitarian and programming standards, such as the CCCs, and in this case, UNICEF’s
Global Programme Framework on Children on the Move.59 As the context evolved and given the scale of migratory
influx and the nature of the request from the Government of Colombia for UN agencies to address migration as a
factor of development within the United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework (UNSDCF)
framework, UNICEF Colombia defined specific results (outcome and outputs) as part of its 2021-2024 Country
Programme (see Box below).
57 See the discussion above on the need for UNICEF to develop creative solutions that do not undermine the authority and obligations of the State, but find
ways to supplement its capacities in the context of a large-scale migration crisis or other humanitarian response. As described above, in other country contexts
this is where UNICEF has promoted the engagement of other child protection actors which might be engaged by government to temporarily supplement its
capacities and to help resolve cases in a timely manner.
58 https://www.unicef.org/media/122581/file/Fact-Sheet-UNICEF-Emergency-Preparedness-Funding-Initiatives.pdf
59 https://www.unicef.org/documents/global-programme-framework-children-move
21
The creation of a migration pillar within the new CPD facilitates the linking of humanitarian and development
actions and ensures that humanitarian responses to the VMC will be sustained and developed over the coming
four years. This is very positive from the point of view of transitioning from humanitarian modalities towards
sustained activities for integration of migrant populations into Colombian society, social systems and economic
activity. However, as explored in the sections below, it may be an opportunity for UNICEF to reconsider some of
the strategic approaches that have been adopted since the L2 VMC activation to ensure that CPD outcomes and
results will eventually be achieved in the most effective and efficient way (see Section on Effectiveness and
Efficiency below).
EQ3: To what extent were UNICEF’s plans, actions and key decisions informed by the active participation and
voice of affected populations? Were different types of beneficiaries consulted and included in the response?
Summary of key findings:
 UNICEF has made significant efforts to build feedback loops into the work of implementing partners as a
form of AAP and UNICEF has also led and positioned AAP within the RMRP and HRP at the request of the
lead agencies.
 While the ET finds that UNICEF Colombia has created valuable tools and training for IPs to help them
understand and implement AAP, there no evidence that UNICEF itself has carried out systematic
consultation with affected populations with the purpose of informing UNICEF’s planning processes and key
decisions. UNICEF staff members interviewed rather assert that UNICEF is not set up for such a processes of
participatory response planning.
 UNICEF Colombia, and also other regional COs, may need to improve mainstreaming accountability to
affected populations into its programme planning and decision-making, if it is to align itself with the CCCs,
particularly around participation of women and girls and conformity with global AAP guidance.
 Some participation of community leaders has been promoted by implementing partners in Barranquilla,
Arauca, Riohacha, Norte de Santander among other locations. KIIs, discussions and focus groups with
beneficiaries suggest that UNICEF’s programming approach often leads to gaps and needs identified by
affected populations not being addressed.
To the credit of UNICEF Colombia, it has invested heavily in interpreting and contextualising UNICEF’s global
guidance on AAP.60 Currently all Project Cooperation Agreements (PCAs) indicate the responsibility of partners to
ensure AAP, gender equality, prevention of sexual exploitation and abuse (PSEA) and C4D are transversal elements
in any UNICEF intervention. Based on its experience with the response to the VMC to date, in May 2020, UNICEF
Colombia’s C4D section published helpful guidance to its implementing partners on the principles and practice of
AAP and undertook extensive measures to incorporate AAP into all PCAs with implementing partners. As stated
in UNICEF Colombia guidance:
As a humanitarian principle, it is a priority to generate a culture of Accountability to the Affected
Population in all processes, agreements, and contracts with implementing partners in order to ensure
feedback mechanisms and strengthen participation in all territories. On the one hand, through the
sensitization of decision makers and those who define indicators and components in the processes, in order
to guarantee the obligatory nature of the actions carried out by all the Implementing Partners. In this way,
inclusive and participatory processes are generated, with dignified treatment for the entire affected
population61
UNICEF’s C4D team identified a number of cases where direct consultation with the population led to changes in
the way that services were delivered. In UNICEF Colombia’s 2020 guidance62, two cases are cited:
 The Family Orientation Point is located in the municipality of Los Patios (Norte de Santander). The migrant
population receives food packages, including fresh produce intended to be consumed immediately. When
asked for feedback beneficiaries said as caminantes in transit, they would prefer non-perishable food that
would last for several days and be consumed along the way. When this information was presented to
UNICEF it was agreed to change the food package.
 The NGOs 5ta con 5ta and Horizonte de Juventud, in the municipalities of Puerto Santander and Villa del
Rosario, respectively. These NGOs oversaw implemented FGS and making of participatory videos. They
served as catalysers to organise more relevant schedules to ensure attendance and to carry out community
60 UNICEF: Accountability to Affected Populations: A Handbook for UNICEF and Partners. June 2020.
61 UNICEF Colombia: Rendición de Cuentas a la Población Afectada/Accountability to Affected Populations – AAP Lineamientos para su implementación.
P.11
62 Ibid
22
integration activities with children, adolescents, and youth.
In addition, UNICEF Colombia has created a PCA with the Fuerza de mujeres Wayuu (Force of Wayuu Women)63
which enables them to have direct input into project design and delivery.
UNICEF Colombia also established a very comprehensive AAP reporting matrix for partners. The example that was
shared with the ET only contained positive comments. None require any action on the part neither for the
implementing partner nor UNICEF.
The ET was able to confirm that implementing partners (IPs) understand AAP as a responsibility given to them as
part of the PCAs. UNICEF’s work with a number of partners, including with indigenous organisations, has also
included the production of content to deliver relevant information in the appropriate language of both host and
migrant communities. However, the essence of AAP is that adherence does not only apply to partners, but also
applies to UNICEF as an international humanitarian actor. AAP should not be considered as only, or mainly, a
partner’s responsibility.
UNICEF’s global guidance on AAP suggests that accountability and participation of affected populations is not only
a matter of concern for UNICEF IPs but should also be reflected in UNICEF’s own programming choices and
decision-making). Within the CCCs, Gender Equality commitment 2 makes clear the importance of direct
engagement with women and girls on project design and delivery:
Community engagement and AAP with girls and women: Adolescent girls, women and their respective
organizations are actively engaged in the design and delivery of programmes.
The ET finds that at country level, this aspect of AAP seems to be difficult to operationalise Interviews with UNICEF
staff indicate that this is simply not realistic and not the way that UNICEF designs its programming. In the words
of one staff member:
There are really two or three main factors that affect UNICEF’s programming in the humanitarian response.
These are the budget, having partners to implement and having the existing models that we have worked
with before. By the time we get to meet the affected population, most of the elements of our programme
are already set and funded.
It appears that UNICEF’s planning processes are not structured to require or encourage participatory planning
processes and the direct participation of beneficiaries. Some level of participation by community leaders exist in
informal settlements (invasiones). The ET found this has helped to identify more vulnerable household specific
vulnerabilities.
UNICEF and its IPs continue to use suggestion boxes and other satisfaction measurement tools and are working
to ensure more extensive opportunities for feedback from project beneficiaries, in all places visited by the ET
evidence suggested limited participation of affected populations at the planning stage and in key decision-making
within the VMC response. This significantly limits the scope, utility, and relevance of consultative and participatory
processes in terms of allowing affected populations to be part of the process of defining programmes and services
that are most needed in a manner that benefits the greatest number of migrant and refugee children and families.
While the current efforts are valid, it appears according to KIs from UNICEF and partners, that affected populations
are only in a position to suggest minor adjustments to existing programmes once these are already up and
running.64 Further, the current process of putting the main responsibility for dialogue and gathering feedback from
beneficiaries onto IPs does not take into account existing power differentials between service providers and
beneficiaries that might make people feel afraid, shy or otherwise reluctant to give critical comments on service
delivery.65 It is recommended that UNICEF should follow the lead of UNHCR in introducing a procedure of
participatory assessment with affected populations in order to ensure that is own staff and programme personnel
do not lose touch with the lived experiences and perceptions of affected populations.
63 https://www.forestpeoples.org/en/partner/fuerza-de-mujeres-wayuu
64 This finding is also reflected in UNICEF 2020 Humanitarian Review, which states: “Accountability to affected populations (AAP) is critical to effective UNICEF
humanitarian responses, to ensure that crisis-affected populations receive accurate information, provide actionable feedback and participate in programme
design. Despite recent improvements, AAP is still not central enough or sufficiently coherent in UNICEF’s humanitarian work…UNICEF often only engages
with affected populations once programmes are running. While complaints and feedback mechanisms do exist to cover programmes, these also need to
ensure that feedback is acted on” p. 13
65 Under the Harmonized Approach to Cash Transfers (HACT) framework, programme visits are included to ensure that UNICEF staff can independently verify
work of IPs and gauge satisfaction of beneficiaries. However, in discussion with UNICEF teams, it is clear the project visits allow little time to be spent with
direct beneficiaries of programmes, and that this is not their main focus. During COVID-19 restrictions, project visits were more limited, with even less time
spent in direct consultations with affected populations.
23
EQ4: Did the design of interventions take into account specific barriers linked to gender and societal
expectations, challenges faced by minorities (for example indigenous migrants), vulnerable groups (for
example unaccompanied children or children with disabilities, women and pregnant women, etc.)?
Summary of key findings:
 The design of interventions, in some cases, specifically targets pregnant women and lactating women, and
includes children with disabilities and UASC.
 In response to COVID 19 restriction measures, UNICEF adapted programmatic and humanitarian responses
to address specific barriers.
 Some UNICEF interventions do not appear to have documented whether and how they helped to overcome
barriers faced by gender, minorities, and other vulnerable groups because there has not been sufficient
analysis or consideration given as to how to reach them. Data on this has not been provided to the ET.
 The scale and complexity of the emergency, including the COVID-19 pandemic and its public health
restrictions, have generated significant gaps in coverage that have not been overcome within the timeframe
and resources provided for within the L2 Response to the VMC.
 Overall, there are major information gaps that seem to prevent UNICEF from designing specific measures to
overcome barriers to access to key interventions and services. There is little to no information on how
UNICEF has addressed specific barriers facing children with disabilities, indigenous and afro-Colombian
children, LGBTQ+ adolescents and other marginalised groups.
 Vulnerability criteria and analysis would allow UNICEF to target specifically those most at risk.
Overcoming specific barriers to enhance access to services and information by vulnerable groups
Below are a few examples of how UNICEF Colombia has sought to pragmatically overcome barriers to access to
services and information by vulnerable groups.
Mobile Health Services – community health campaigns and outreach activities
Mobile clinics have allowed health teams to go to Venezuelan migrants and host communities in key affected
communities, providing improved access for children with disabilities for example. A further positive step has been
the focus on services to pregnant adolescents and teenage mothers. Other VMC studies have reported women
being too overwhelmed with basic survival needs and income generation to find time to see a doctor, either for
their own needs or those of their children. These mobile health services were designed to combine detection of
malnutrition as well as setting up comprehensive workshops for new lactating mothers. One informant told the ET
that “mobile clinics could and should have also been designed to give a more comprehensive intersectoral
response, including GBV prevention and response to maximise effectiveness for vulnerable groups.”
Unfortunately, the ET did not have a chance to see the mobile health centres in action since by the time of the ET
visit the methodology had already been revised. (see Sections on Effectiveness and Efficiency below).
Additional child helpline services
In 2020 in response to increased CP and GBV risks associated with families forced to remain at home due to the
COVID-19 pandemic, UNICEF increased support to ICBF’s existing child helpline. This enabled it to better respond
to increased demand. While not specific to the VMC, UNICEF’s support increased the capacity of new and existing
actors to respond and provide proper follow up within the national CP system. While it is beyond the scope of the
ET to verify the extent to which Venezuelan refugee and migrant children at risk may have benefited from this
measure, it is not unlikely that some did. According to the ICBF three out of four calls received request psychosocial
support for children and families, one in four relate to critical situations. About 53 per cent of the calls are from
girls and 47 per cent from boys. UNICEF has also engaged in capacity strengthening, providing training to ten child
helpline operators on CP, child rights, child safeguarding, PSEA, corporal punishment, mental and psychosocial
support, responding to violence, talking to adolescents and suicide prevention.
Small-scale initiative in cash-based intervention for families through Learning Circles (LCs))
As a measure to overcome barriers to accessing online learning and to keep children from dropping out during the
pandemic a small-scale initiative was carried out to provide cash to families registered in UNICEF-funded LCs. The
project was designed to take into account the emergency needs of vulnerable families, as well as the characteristics
of the LC programme. The goal was initially to reach 779 families, made up of migrants and hosts in Arauca, Cúcuta,
Riohacha, Fonseca and Barranquilla providing them with resources to meet their basic needs and to prevent school
abandonment in response to pandemic shocks. However, due to duplications with other cash transfer programmes
operated by other GIFMM partners, the target was changed to 769 families, also including families in Bogotá. With
this measure, coverage was provided everywhere that LCs were being implemented. In the end, 731 CA families
benefited from cash and other services, including data units for children’s online learning, kits for nursing and
24
pregnant women and Covid-19 Prevention Hygiene kits. They had a total value approximately equivalent to US$
408.12
C4D: Communications in indigenous languages
One approach to re-programming in both programme and humanitarian interventions has been an expanded C4D
strategy – in Spanish and five indigenous languages - focused on ensuring that communities have access to relevant
and meaningful information. This was designed to help minimise VMC and the COVID-19 rumours and promote
safe behaviours. The emphasis on diversity led to outreach activities to people without digital literacy or access to
either the internet or electricity. These enabled families to identify risks, symptoms and make informed decisions
on COVID-19 prevention and other aspects of violence, mental health and distance learning.
WASH and survey of needs for school reopening
As a joint initiative between the emergency and WASH working groups, eight Secretariats of Education were
supported by UNICEF and other partners to carry out a survey of educators and administers of educational
institutions to understand their requirements regarding to WASH for school reopening. This has been a measure
to overcome the barriers to access to education experienced due to pandemic related school closures. WASH and
Education sectors are collaborating to support the Secretariats of Education to gather information needed to
advance school opening. While this survey provides a reconfirmation that a major gap exists in terms of access to
education, it does not provide the detailed evidence needed by authorities (such as specific numbers of out-of-
school children, localities, and households) to address it. WASH has played a critical role in supporting a number
of schools to meet the requirements needed to reopen safely and according to standards set by MEN.
On-going critical barriers identified to be overcome
Despite efforts undertaken by UNICEF Colombia to design and redesign intervention strategies that addressed
pandemic and other barriers for vulnerable groups, overall, the evaluation finds little information on how UNICEF
has addressed specific barriers facing adolescent girls and boys, children with disabilities, indigenous and Afro-
Colombian children, LGBTQ+ adolescents and other marginalised groups. There are important information gaps
and limited vulnerability analysis of specific needs and barriers faced by these groups. Lack of information and
analysis appears to prevent UNICEF from designing specific measures to overcome barriers to accessing services.
Hence it is important to identify the barriers which Venezuelan migrants face in accessing services provided by
UNICEF and other response providers and how these barriers might be overcome. During conversations with
affected populations, UNICEF staff and partners, the following barriers to accessing basic services and rights have
been identified:
Barriers accessing the right to education
Informants reported that the lack of documentation or knowledge of how to access the educational system
combined with real or perceived lack of school spaces to create barriers accessing the public education system in
2018 and 2019. These constraints intensified as a result of the pandemic, compounded by the inability of parents
to provide devices needed in response to the switch to on-line learning. The pandemic has dramatically increased
the number of out-of-school children, both migrant and Colombian.
In July 2021 UNICEF with NRC started to try to quantify numbers of children out-of-school. Surveys carried out with
NRC support indicated that there continue to be significant numbers of Venezuelan children out-of-school. Their
vulnerability is compounded by the inability of their parents to know how to enrol them in an official or alternative
learning programme. A major barrier that will be explored in greater detail below is the access to formal schooling
– both prior to and during the pandemic. Conversations with parents in the LCs, together with other KIIs, indicated
that access to education for many Venezuelan migrant children remains out of reach. Despite the lack of legal
impediments for Venezuelan children to register in Colombian schools, there are long-term systemic access now
multiplied by the VMC: lack of adequate classrooms, insufficient teachers, lack of documentation for migrant
children, lack of information as to which schools have spaces available, xenophobia and lack of funds to pay for
school uniforms and books. This is compounded by lack of awareness among teachers and school administrators
regarding the right to education accorded by the GoC to Venezuelans.
Colombian education policy establishes preschool as compulsory for five-year-old children. A UNICEF informants
reported that, many children do not start school on time due to such factors as cultural beliefs or the geographical
location of the school. This results in overage school entry creating a potential dropout risk. This particularly
impacts children and adolescents on the move from Venezuela, who may have been out-of-school for some time
while waiting for an available school space. UNICEF is not yet systematically addressing some of the fundamental
25
barriers to accessing education, which begins first and foremost with having information on who is out-of-school,
and where and what the actual barriers are.66
Now, three years into the L2 Emergency, evidence suggests there are still large numbers of children out-of-school
(see section on Effectiveness – Education below). A 2021 IOM-led study67, co-authored by UNICEF, of street
children in Riohacha, Cucuta and Villa de Rosario found some 40 per cent of those between the ages of four and
ten were not attending school. A more detailed study by the Danish Refugee Council68 adds another dimension by
analysing differences between newly-arrived migrants and those who came from Venezuela more than five years
ago. This evidence clearly shows that the newly-arrived, those who came during the period corresponding to the
L2 emergency, were experiencing much more difficulty accessing education than were those who had arrived more
than five years earlier.
This analysis identifies the significant differences in vulnerability between the needs of newly-arrived migrants in
comparison with migrant families who are by now much better established. It should help UNICEF and other actors
to focus their attention and humanitarian investments at scale, including advocacy for the implementation of
government policies which allow for universal access to education, including for vulnerable children on the move.
This should be tailored to new arrivals (less than one year in the country) with strategies designed to overcome
their specific and documented vulnerabilities in terms of lack of access to healthcare, education, housing, and
other basic services. To date the ET has seen no vulnerability criteria created by UNICEF that reflects evidence
generated by these studies.
Barriers for vulnerable groups, including adolescent mothers, pregnant and lactating women, indigenous, children
with disabilities and other groups
While there are specific programmes for pregnant and lactating mothers around ante natal care, a barrier to access
is lack of childcare options for small children so that mothers can have the time and space to get the care that they
need. This topic was raised in several FGDs with mothers during the course of the ET visit. In addition, a number
of barriers to access are documented in the literature.69 These include lack of documentation, child labour,
trafficking and sexual exploitation and limited access to housing or evictions during the pandemic. Unfortunately,
it is not possible currently, based on data received, to assess the extent to which UNICEF’ response has assisted
these specific groups to overcome multiple barriers that can exist to their participation.
There is a lack of formulation of specific interventions for children with disabilities (CWD). During field missions it
was observed that there are ongoing barriers for these children across rural and urban settlements and on the
route of the caminantes. UNICEF has promoted some initiatives targeting indigenous communities. For instance,
in La Guajira, UNICEF has co-led the education working group advocating for a differential approach with the
indigenous population. UNICEF has carried out ethno-education activities (including travelling backpack and
translations into Wayunaiki) to reach these indigenous populations. Furthermore, UNICEF has implemented C4D
activities providing information in indigenous languages. There has also been a GIFMM initiative to support the
binational indigenous community in Cucuta to develop their own school in response to the migration influx of
several of their community members from the Venezuelan side of the border. This is the type of concrete action
on access to education for indigenous communities that UNICEF could be promoting in other communities.
EQ5: How appropriate were UNICEF’s internal arrangements at RO and CO levels for the
management/staffing/leadership/capacity development/technical support (including human resources,
tools, protocols, fundraising and managerial capacity/surge capacity, etc.) to address the context, scale and
complexity of the Venezuelan outflow?
Summary of key findings:
UNICEF’s response to the VMC required the development of new methodological proposals, the implementation
of rapid humanitarian actions in prioritised areas and management of an increased volume of resources in a
very short time. The demands of this response generated a great deal of individual and institutional stress,
exacerbated by the COVID-19 pandemic and public health restrictions. UNICEF’s internal arrangements including
staffing, contracting, fundraising and managerial capacity could be strengthened with a view to better reflect
the scale and complexity of the VMC.
This question considers some of the inputs required to generate outputs and outcomes of the reconstructed ToC
66 According to UNICEF, it is important to complement this statement with the reasons why this information was not available. In order to have a census of
out-of-school children, it is necessary to have a universe of the population, which in the period under evaluation did not exist due to the lack of official data
on the migrant population.
67 https://dtm.iom.int/reports/colombia-dtm-focused-refugee-and-migrants-children-long-stay-or-street-situation
68 https://www.r4v.info/en/node/88868
69 https://dtm.iom.int/reports/colombia-dtm-focused-refugee-and-migrants-children-long-stay-or-street-situation
26
for the response (see Annex 3). UNICEF Colombia’s response to the VMC, given available resources, has required
a rapid adaptation of the CO’s capacity to ensure high-level expertise and advocacy on key issues. This has included
the opening of new sub-offices and deploying teams in other new geographical areas. In 2018 the Riohacha office
was opened, followed by Cucuta in 2021, with deployment of teams in Barranquilla, Nariño and Arauca. In order
to staff this rapid expansion, the staff contingent grew from 50 in 2017 to 117 in 202170, largely in response to the
demands of the VMC. See Annex 12 for more detailed information about UNICEF Colombia personnel.
According to UNICEF records, most of these staffing increases have been among UNVs. This has generated
additional work in contracting and retaining for a small number of staff at the management level. This rapid
expansion overlapped with the pandemic. In line with UNICEF´s pledge to stay and deliver in humanitarian crisis,
the CO faced additional risks and stress in responding to the emergency in accordance with the CCCs while also
implementing a comprehensive duty-of-care policy. UNICEF Colombia could review the balance between newly
recruited junior staff and the management positions needed to supervise and orient them.
Need for orientation and training on humanitarian principles and practice
As noted, the expansion in coverage has been positive in terms of positioning UNICEF Colombia to have a presence
as a relevant actor in the response, something that according to UNICEF Colombia team members and partners
could not have been achieved by having staff from Bogotá operating from a distance. On the other hand,
informants reported that UNVs have been hired with short-term contracts, and some lack prior experience either
with UNICEF or in humanitarian operations of this scale. While UNICEF Colombia has made the strategic choice to
not have specialised emergency teams at field level (but, instead, to have both emergency and development
responses carried out by the same personnel) this strategy depends for success on thorough induction into
humanitarian principles and approaches, and how and when these might be different from those around a longer-
term development approach (see Effectiveness section below).
This context would normally require significant levels of training, accompaniment and orientation in the hiring
process. However, according to KIIs, this has been taking place in an internal and external organisational context
in which responsibilities are often unclear and overlapping. Those familiar with UNICEF’s own internal standards,
such as the CCCs, believe they are not sufficiently guided on humanitarian principles, humanitarian coordination,
and institutional expectations around an emergency response. Perceptions gathered from UNICEF teams in the
field are echoed in the 2020 Office of Internal Audit and Investigations (OIAI) Internal Audit:
There were opportunities for improving ongoing channels of communication and support between the field
teams and the Bogotá country office, as well as more visits to support UNVs in the field. In the survey of
the UNVs, the audit also noted concerns were raised regarding the definition of their roles and recognition
of their contributions.
Constrained emergency capacity to support in humanitarian delivery
UNICEF Colombia has a small emergency team at CO level71 to oversee a growing number of field offices, staff and
complex emergencies, programmes, donors and logistics. This includes two fixed-term emergency staff members
(National Officer- NOB and NOA).72 According to a UNICEF KI, the Colombia Office added the NOA position to
create additional capacity for emergency response and support emergency preparedness, using Other Regular
Resources (ORR) instead of emergency resources to improve funding stability.
As will be explored in greater detail in the Regional Synthesis report, UNICEF LACRO and HQ share responsibility
for the limited funding and related staffing constraints that have impacted the VMC response.
Technical support, expertise and sharing of good practices at CO and RO levels
KIIs have identified that more technical support on emergency response is needed and would be valued both from
CO and regional level sector specialists. The ET was able to identify that technical support is needed in key areas
such as Education in Emergencies (EiE) and Child Protection in Emergencies. Regarding the latter, UNICEF
Colombia received an experienced international Head of Section whose past experience in emergencies will likely
be of great value to the CO. From the point of view of LACRO, EiE officers from the regional office have been in
constant communication with education management in Colombia CO and have given technical advice and
support since the beginning of the crisis. This has included EiE capacity development training and interexchange
meetings with other national education coordination mechanisms. UNICEF`s Education Section would benefit
from an injection of new ideas and approaches that could address learning needs at scale and at the same time
resolve long-standing challenges in the education sector, building on the opportunity presented by the VMC to
71 This team is comprised of three: two fixed term (1 NOB and 1 NOA) and a UNV.
72 In UN jargon NOA refers to a staff member appointed with no work experience required and NOB to somebody with a minimum of two years work
experience.
27
generate evidence and policy recommendations to support the sector (see section on effectiveness below).
Capacity for gender analysis and programming
UNICEF Colombia has identified a wide range of gender issues related to the VMC including, among others, GBV,
trafficking, sexual exploitation and early unions that pose specific protection risks to women and girls. These issues
are signalled repeatedly in UNICEF’s appeals and documents. UNICEF Colombia has also firmly committed to
analysing the migration response through a gender lens. In 2018, the CO developed a ToC to transform social
norms related to GBV against children. This was based on the study results "social norms prevalence related to
GBV against children". This ToC was adapted in 2021 to be implemented in Villa del Rosario during the migration
response. KIIs feel that UNICEF at CO and LACRO level has not invested adequately in ensuring there is staff
capacity for integrated gender analysis, gender equality and a gender transformative approach in all VMC sectors
into the humanitarian and development aspects of the response to the VMC across sectors. This is also expressed
in UNICEF’s evaluation of Gender Action Plans in 2020, in which UNICEF Colombia participated. Colombia CO also
conducted a gender analysis of children on the move in 2021. However, to the ET, KIs expressed that there are
too few UNICEF team members with gender expertise.
UNICEF Colombia’s gender officers’ role is very broad and their responsibilities are too wide. In terms of Gender
and PSEA, the gender officers have supported interagency coordination, GBV prevention, capacity building, SOPs
development and strengthened access to services as well as institutional strengthening. As UNICEF has brought
on numerous new IPs, much time has been dedicated to helping strengthen the capacity of partners to meet
UNICEF’s PSEA requirements for contracting purposes. While this is an important task it limits their role in capacity
building and the development of gender strategies for both the humanitarian and development response. Since
last year, the CO has conducted an analysis of the management of the PSEA system and established a strategy for
its sustainability. This implied designing or adjusting the system's processes: to strengthen the roles and
responsibilities of the actors involved, to establish measures to finance human resource needs, to strengthen
institutional capacities among partners and develop institutional and programmatic guidelines for PSEA.
Partner contracting mechanisms and limited resource mobilisation
During KIIs both government and NGO partners described challenges they face in participating as partners in
UNICEF’s VMC response. These are not new and have to do with the very short funding cycles of humanitarian
funding. IPs noted that it is not possible to deliver a year’s worth of activities in the short, three-month window
between the time that funds are disbursed (in May, June or July for example) and the time they are expected to
begin reporting on outputs.73
Appropriateness
Key Strengths Key Challenges
Establishment of field offices in key border areas allows UNICEF Limited information and evidence generation as a basis
access to new opportunities for evidence gathering and for influencing public policy in key sectors and addressing
generation as a basis for improving its response specific needs and barriers
Preparedness: In 2018, UNICEF Colombia had identified migration Limited funds to expand the response further.
as a key risk factor and had met 18 out of 25 Minimum
Preparedness Standards, according to the EPP
Route based approach operationalised through participation in Limited consultation and participation of affected
GIFMM-R4VCentros de Apoyo and Puntos de servicios along the communities in project design and implementation.
migration route providing support to caminantes
Anchoring of migration response within longer term Confusion about UNICEF’s definitions of system
development process as per CPD 2021-2024 allows humanitarian strengthening and nexus programming and current
response to be transitioned into longer-term development approaches for linking humanitarian response with long-
planning. term development modalities.
7.2 Effectiveness
The evaluation of the effectiveness of UNICEF’s response is guided by the following overarching question: To what
extent did UNICEF’s response to the VMC achieve, or can be expected to achieve, its objectives and results,
73 According to UNICEF staff, it is important not to lose sight of the fact that UNICEF globally has a HACT framework and procedure for partnering with IPs
and therefore the procedures established by the organisation for resource transfers must be complied with.
28
including any differential results across groups, (including by gender/age/ethnicity) across border, transit, urban
and other settlements? This section will address the different specific evaluation questions under this overarching
question, systematically reviewing achievements by sector.
EQ6. To what extent did UNICEF’s response to the VMC achieve, or can be expected to achieve, its objectives
and results, including differential results across groups (including by gender/age/ethnicity) across border,
transit, urban and other settlements?
EQ7: How effective has UNICEF been in responding to the influx of Venezuelan migrants with regards to:
a) Supporting UNICEF- bolstered access to their rights and protection: child and social protection, education,
prevention of GBV, early childhood development, health, nutrition and WASH services for migrant, refugee
and host community children
b) Supporting and promoting inclusion and integration by ensuring access to national social services and
humanitarian/social cash transfers; the regularisation of children’s and families’ legal status; strengthened
social policies and national/local integration capacities.
c) Generating a sense of empowerment for migrant children, adolescents and families in terms of having
access to information and opportunities.
Summary of key findings:
At the output level, UNICEF Colombia has achieved many of its intended targets and in 2019 was able to exceed
expectations in some areas. At the outcome level, based on the reconstructed ToC at the regional level, UNICEF
and GIFMM-R4V partners have been able to show key results in f supporting and promoting social inclusion,
through providing technical support to operationalise the open-door policy of the GoC. To a lesser extent, and
somewhat unequally, some long-term results are also emerging in terms of access to rights and protection, as
well as the empowerment of migrant children, adolescents, and their families to access needed information and
opportunities on their migratory journey.
 On a sector-by-sector basis, the ET finds wide variations in the capacity of UNICEF Colombia to achieve its
targets.
 The response has been spread very thin, over many regions, many sectors, many different types of migrant
and host populations, including Venezuelan migrants, Colombian returnees as well as a handful of migrants
from other countries - all with limited funding. UNICEF Colombia has chosen to focus its efforts on certain
key border regions where it is able to show greater effectiveness.
 Regarding CP UNICEF Colombia has contributed at the national level to put in place the pre-requisites for
Venezuelan refugee and migrant children to enjoy their rights – in particular through the campaign to
combat statelessness, measures to render accessible birth registration in hospitals and the roll out of the
ETP. UNICEF has also supported positive messaging around respect for the rights of Venezuelan migrant
children in order to challenge xenophobic attitudes which may have indirectly resulted in less targeting and
discrimination against Venezuelan refugees and migrants. However, efforts at the international (regional)
level as part of the Quito Process to ensure a regional CP protocol have stalled. Efforts at the local level to
operationalise effective CP monitoring and case management require strengthening.
 As far as education is concerned UNICEF has not achieved the sector result formulated in its HAC 2019 or
2020 and with current funding levels, will not achieve the sector objective of full integration into the
national education system. Education is waiting. KIs, field observations and document reviews suggest that
many children continue to lack practical access to the national education system, and to the main
intervention, LCs. Current resourcing constraints inhibit a sufficient and effective response given the scale
of the VMC.
 Regarding social protection, there was a sector result formulated for Social Inclusion in the 2019 HAC, but
it was not until 2021 that a specific indicator was put in place. UNICEF first rolled out a Humanitarian Cash
Transfer (HCT) in the second half of 2020 in response to the extreme vulnerability of migrant families due
to the confinement and public health measures to control the spread of pandemic. This was seen by
beneficiaries and UNICEF as a very positive experience, but, due to funding limitations, one that was too
limited in scale in relation to the needs. It was not adapted for families in transit (as per the sector result),
but rather for families who were established and already benefiting from other programmes as they were
registered in UNICEF-Funded LCs. Future work on HCTs in Colombia can build effectiveness and efficiencies
by working more closely and in coordination with other GIFMM partners also rolling out HCTs. The
Programas de Desarrollo con Enfoque Territorial (PDET) or the Territorios Amigos de la Niñez approach is
also promising, in terms of its potential for bringing about long-term integration of migrant children and
adolescents in priority communities.
 Analysing WASH compared to performance against targets in 2019, it appears that UNICEF Colombia’s
WASH Sector results were significantly impacted by the pandemic. Nonetheless, the ET finds that WASH
29
has been the most visible face of UNICEF during the VMC response, and also as it overlapped with the
COVID-19 L3 Emergency response. The WASH sector led a strong response in terms of both sector
coordination and programmatic response, while linking humanitarian and development objectives. It has
been the bedrock upon which many other UNICEF and R4V services and measures have relied, as well as
the entry point for new community and institutional relationships.
 On health and nutrition it became clear to the ET that a common strategy to deliver health and nutrition
services as one package appears to be both effective and efficient. The mobile clinic concept has enhanced
outreach to vulnerable groups from both migrant and host communities. In addition to the mental health
elements proposed for the clinics, there could be stronger focus on CP and GBV prevention and response.
The GIFMM- R4V platform has ensured the availability of primary health services to refugees/migrants at
key border and transit points. Health services provided in transit and at border points are not covered by
UNICEF Colombia. UNICEF’s programming is mainly directed to refugees and migrants in rural and urban
settlements.
 On the centrality of the CCCs to UNICEF humanitarian responses the ET finds that CCCs are difficult to
operationalise in parts of the response. These operations have to be aligned with standards set by other
actors and those of national governments, which are not necessarily or fully consistent with the CCCs. At
the very least, this suggests the need in Colombia and other countries in the region for more training on
how to apply the CCCs in the national context and clarification about the extent to which UNICEF at global
and regional level expects the CCCs to be applied
 In addition to the migration outcome indicators, C4D has indicators that carry over from one year to the
next. These indicators suggest a good progress from short-term activities towards the longer-term sector
result established in the 2019 HAC. The C4D/Communications strategy adopted by UNICEF Colombia
appears appropriate for the scale of the emergency.
This section will address EQs 6 and 7 as a continuum as they complement each other. Achievement of results at
the output level is gauged through the level of achievement of the intended objectives through the progress of
measurement indicators as well as alignment between results and UNICEF’s own standards, particularly in relation
to CCCs and the Programme Framework for Children on the Move. The ET in its reconstructed regional ToC has
also proposed three longer-term outcomes. Document reviews, field visits and KIIs were utilised to establish the
extent to which UNICEF’s programming is likely to lead to these three longer-term outcomes:
• children on the move have access to rights and protection;
• children on the move are included and integrated through access to national services and programmes, the
regularisation of children’s and families’ legal status; strengthened social policies and national/local
integration capacities and
• children on the move have a sense of empowerment in terms of having access to improved information and
opportunities.
Regarding the meeting of shorter objectives for the L2 Response, the ET relies on LACRO’s Humanitarian
Performance Monitoring (HPM)indicators. A challenge is that these are not consistent by year, as HPM indicators
change year to year. Changing indicators makes it difficult to compare progress in the response from one year to
the next.
Child Protection
The output level result formulated in the HAC 2019 is as follows:
Sector results formulated as in HAC 2019
Children on the move are protected from violence, exploitation, and abuse in Colombia through
direct interventions, as well as awareness and campaigns (indirect interventions)
This results formulation from the 2019 HAC suggests that in order to evaluate the extent of its achievement we
need to consider both the direct role of CP interventions on the part of UNICEF and those indirect interventions
which have been mainly led by C4D and Communications to counteract xenophobic attitudes and create positive
messaging in favour of integration of refugee and migrant children. This section first explores direct CP
interventions the contribution of C4D and communications functions to the indirect interventions to address
xenophobic attitudes and create awareness about the needs of children on the move will be reviewed in the C4D
section below.
The table below shows that the specific targets and indicators for the sector have changed each year of the
response, making any kind of comparison difficult. However, it is clear that the effects of the pandemic, among
30
other factors, have significantly reduced UNICEF Colombia’s ability to reach its target. The pre-pandemic reporting
shows a significant level of over performance, whereas the two subsequent years show a concerning, but
understandable, level of under-performance.
Table 6. Protection targets and indicators (2019, 2020, 2021)
2019 2020 2021
Protection
Target Achieved Target Achieved Target Achieved
# of children benefiting from programmes to prevent
and address violence, abuse and exploitation 130,000 180,620
(including GBV), being mobilised and strengthened
# of children, adolescents and women accessing GBV 6722
148,000
risk mitigation, prevention and response (5%)
# of children accessing mitigation, prevention or
13,91774
response interventions to violence, abuse and 120,000
(12%)
exploitation
# of children and caregivers accessing mental health 27,310
179,477
and psychosocial support (15%)
# of unaccompanied and separated children accessing 316
750
family-based care or suitable alternative (42%)
# of children identified in need of specialised services
1363
who are referred to health, social welfare and justice 360
(379%)
services
# of children, adolescents and women received GBV
6535
response services, including risk mitigation 5290
(123%)
interventions and prevention
Protection-related challenges and access to services and rights have been addressed at a number of different
levels by UNICEF. At the international level there have been efforts to build transnational agreements on CP
through the Quito Process and at the national level legislation, promoted by UNICEF, UNHCR and IOM, in favour
of enhanced protection and rights.
Quito process and the Regional Protocol for Children on the Move
At the Quito V meeting, the GoC with technical support from UNICEF, IOM, UNHCR, and Instituto de Políticas
Públicas en Derechos Humanos (IPPDH), presented a motion to prepare a Regional Protocol for Children on the
Move. This was adopted and the commitment was included in the Quito V resolution, mandating the creation of
a technical governmental task force to work on drafting the Regional Protocol. In 201975, UNICEF’s support and
leadership to promote this protocol was seen as critical to ensure that international standards related to the
children on the move were included and that the proposal provided a comprehensive policy framework based on
international standards for the protection of children, including the Six Policy Asks as found in UNICEF’s
Programme Framework for Children on the Move.76 Unfortunately, over the period covered by this evaluation, it
appears that UNICEF’s technical leadership on this regional protocol has proven difficult to maintain. While UNICEF
Colombia’s leadership for the regional protocol was very strong, when the presidency of the Quito Process passed
from Colombia to Peru, the capacity and commitment to following through with this initiative at the CO Peru level
encountered difficulties. The issue of reduced UNICEF leadership on this ambitious agreement will be explored in
the context of the evaluation’s Regional Synthesis Report. This clearly both has to do with UNICEF’s leadership at
the regional level, and also the declining level of governments’ commitments to the process.77
Advances in national legislation for regularisation and prevention of statelessness
74 According to UNICEF, for 2020 only GBV is reported, not the total number of children and adolescents targeted in the protection HAC (prevention against
all types of violence). In 2019 the report was only a few. Hence the difference.
75 UNICEF Colombia, Country Office Report, 2019.
76 UNICEF: Programme Framework for Children on the Move, year 2017
77 UNICEF Staff have clarified that the GoC and UNICEF Colombia, as well as LACRO have championed the protocol and have not waned in their support and
technical leadership. However, some governments in the region did not support this initiative, so now the plan is to develop guidelines which could have
more political support. These political processes depend to only a limited extent on UNICEF’s leadership and advocacy and to a much greater extent on
governments in the region.
31
UNICEF Colombia – in partnership with UNHCR and IOM – has been effective in supporting Colombia’s open-door
policy to the reception of Venezuelan migrants with the intention of settling in Colombia with needed mechanisms
and legislation to prevent statelessness of Venezuelan children born on Colombian soil, as well as to develop the
framework for an ETP which in theory allows Venezuelan migrants access to basic health and other social services.
In August 2019, the GoC extended the right of nationality to all children at risk of statelessness born to Venezuelan
parents between January 2015 and September 2021. UNICEF-IOM-UNHCR joint advocacy and technical assistance
during the process of design of this administrative measure was recognised by the government and set the basis
for a fruitful joint partnership during the roll-out phase. In 2020, despite the pandemic, UNICEF continued to
support timely birth registration through the government-led initiative Primero la Niñez to prevent statelessness
with support from IOM, UNHCR and UNICEF. UNICEF supported the National Registry Office (Registraduría
Nacional del Estado Civil) and Ministry of Health to strengthen the training, staffing, and equipping of public
hospitals in border provinces with high birth rates of Venezuelan children. issuing registration during the
pandemic, ensured that migrant children could obtain the civil registry status immediately upon discharge from
the hospital. As of 27 December 2020, 50,741 children were granted Colombian nationality, of whom, 21,454 were
born between August 2019 and December 2020, according to the National Registry Office. All partners consider
these interlinked interventions as a very successful approach to the prevention of statelessness among
Venezuelan refugee and migrant children.
In February 2021, the GoC announced a new initiative to provide a ten-year ETP to Venezuelans with the intention
to remain in the country. The ETP provides access to basic services including the national health system and
COVID-19 vaccination plans, and regularisation of the status of many Venezuelans who had entered the country
illegally. According to UNICEF and IP informants, the ETP represents a major milestone as it allows for longer-term
solutions, including access to formal employment which in turn serves to reduce the need for humanitarian
assistance and pave the way to Colombia’s post COVID-19 economic recovery. These measures on prevention of
statelessness and the development and roll-out of the ETP are directly contributing to UNICEF’s short-term
humanitarian and longer migration outcomes on access to rights and inclusion in national protection systems for
migrant children and their families.
During field visits, the ET observed that UNICEF was collaborating effectively with other agencies to facilitate the
roll-out of the ETP through jornadas de inscripción (registration days) at various locations where mobile teams
provide support to the registration process. They help Venezuelan migrant families complete an online pre-
registration procedure followed up in 2022 by a formal appointment. Discussions with beneficiaries highlighted
that the process is quite long, and the waiting time significant and growing. Those conducting their pre-registration
in October, at the time of the ET visit, were having to wait six months or more for a follow-up appointment to
proceed further along the registration process. This implies that effective protection offered by the ETP in terms
of access to regularisation and other forms of social service coverage is still for the future unless UNICEF and other
partners invest in the expanding the capacity of Migración Colombia to process pre-registrations more quickly. A
lesson learned from the process, according to UNICEF partners, is that initial pre-registrations and those done by
individuals were often not done by family groupings. This meant that one or both parents could be pre-registered
without any or all their children, leading to gaps and disparities within the same household. GIFMM-R4V partners
participating in registration events highlighted that they are trying to overcome weaknesses in the system by
ensuring that all family members are registered together. This is where accompaniment of families in the
registration process is contributing to better outcomes for children.
Local protection challenges and issues
The major advances on the regularisation of the status of migrant children and their families and measures to
prevent statelessness at the national level are not systematically mirrored in terms of access to rights and
protection at field level. Here CP risks are many and the capacity of institutions to address them are highly limited.
GIFMM partners have identified a number of trends – including sex trafficking and sexual exploitation of
Venezuelan children, rising rates of early marriage/unions and teenage pregnancy, child labour and recruitment
into street gangs and armed groups. All these risks largely fall below the radar and are difficult to detect by all
agencies. UNICEF as lead agency in this area of responsibility, is looked at to provide guidance and reinforce the
overall response and coordination between CP and humanitarian actors. Through document review, interviews
and informal discussions with Venezuelan migrants, the ET notes that pandemic a restriction measures, including
school closures and periods of confinement, increased numbers of children in the streets and caused rising rates
of evictions of Venezuelan families in the border areas due to job losses and collapse of local economies.
A gap identified by the ET and UNICEF partners is the lack of an experienced CP presence apart from Child Friendly
Spaces by ICBF and/or UNICEF at key border crossings where highly vulnerable UASC might be identified. The
Centros de Apoyo and Puntos de Servicios are shared by a large number of GIFMM-R4V actors who are each
32
providing different types of support and facilitating a range of services, including humanitarian transport,
counselling, health and nutrition. Various actors commented that they were unsure or reluctant regarding the
referral of cases of youth who they suspected could be unaccompanied children. In some cases, NGOs providing
services and support see their role as facilitating that young migrants reach their destination. It is clear from group
discussions and KIIs in Cucuta that there are differences between UNICEF and ICBF on the one hand and some R4V
partners on the other regarding whether it is always in the best interest of the child, particularly in the case of
adolescents, to refer the case to ICBF when they can be handled more quickly and effectively by humanitarian
partners.78 According to some partners, the ICBF process of restitution of rights is slow, cumbersome and could
be considered punitive to adolescents on the move who are clear about their destination and want to get there
as quickly as possible. There is clearly a need for UNICEF to generate evidence to address this tension, to document
the challenges and benefits of the PARD process for children and adolescents and make the case for how it can be
improved in the case of children and adolescents on the move.
This ambivalence of GIFMM partners reporting CP cases to the authorities and ICBF is reflected in the wide gap
between case counts reported by GIFMM partners in R4V reporting on CP cases and the statistics provided by ICBF
on cases where a restitution of rights (or PARD) process has been carried out. ICBF statistics show that the number
of CP cases managed by ICBF over the period of the VMC rose from 300 in 2017 to more than 3,000 by the end of
2021. Currently ICBF has 3,700 open CP cases across the country of Venezuelan refugee and migrant CP requiring
PARD. The vast majority of these cases are for cases of parental neglect due to the complete or temporary absence
of adults responsible for the care of children or children spending a lot of time in the streets. These are all
conditions that are likely exacerbated by pandemic-related school closures and the fact that Venezuelan parents
often have to bring their children to work with them, leave them with older siblings or to their own devices for
long periods.
All these protection risks have been well documented by GIFMM partners. However, these cases are relatively
few when compared with the reporting provided by GIFMM partners in coordination platforms. According to
UNICEF, which consolidates CP reporting for only three Departments of the country, in Arauca alone, in 2021,
GIFMM partners reported 1,329 UASC – 650 unaccompanied and 679 separated.79 These are far more than the
244 cases for the whole country that were referred and processed by ICBF. Arauca is the only Department for
which UNICEF was able to provide consolidated figures. According to UNICEF, these results and discrepancies,
have made ICBF aware. Joint actions to be undertaken involve searching for and strengthening of foster homes as
a family-based protection modality, support for the identification of unaccompanied children, technical assistance
so that the PARDs are open, and the protection measures lead to family reunification. The enormous challenges
are acknowledged, and actions have been implemented to reduce the gaps. However, what is mainly lacking is
the resources needed to address the scale of the CP challenges.
This differences between the figures and discrepancy between ICBF and GIFMM statistics highlights the great
challenge of collecting data and. GIFMM partners are reluctant to refer CP cases to ICBF, both because they believe
that they can handle cases better and more efficiently on their own, and also because they are concerned that
ICBF’s processes will not ultimately lead to a solution that is in the best interest of the child. Furthermore, there
is no comprehensive overview of CP cases as a basis for coordination planning and programming.
According to ICBF officers at the local level, despite the fact that they are mandated by law to handle all CP cases
of Venezuelan refugee and migrant children, they simply do not have the practical means to do so. In Cucuta, an
ICBF staff member took a somewhat rigid attitude on the support for UASC children, regardless of their age:
For ICBF, a child is a child. If we cannot trace their family, we have to find a place for them where they can
be safe. That is normally in a group home, institution, or alternative arrangement. They will remain under
the care of the Colombian state until they reach the age of majority.
While in Cucuta the subject of non-referral of cases to ICBF is a matter of conflict within the Working Group on
Child Protection (Mesa de la Niñez) in La Guajira ICBF officials took a less doctrinal attitude, seeing it as a relief if
GIFMM partners found their own solutions and only referred to ICBF those cases that they could not handle on
their own. Whatever the pragmatic solution found at the local level, there are evident challenges and gaps that
UNICEF has endeavoured to address.
 UNICEF, in the framework of emergency response, seeks to apply the CCCs, although ultimately the
78 According to UNICEF staff, an example of the above is the creation of para-statal routes or procedures. UNICEF has taken a strong position for identifying
bottlenecks in order to strengthen the response capacity of those jointly responsible for child protection (including humanitarian and development actions),
not for promoting parastatal responses.
79 Source: UNICEF/GIFMM: This includes 623 girls and 706 boys. UNICEF should verify if boys are getting the attention that is needed, as in many migrant
crisis boys are more at risk of being allowed to go off on their own.
33
fulfilment of those commitments lies more with state actors than it does with UNICEF.
 Actions and training and technical assistance processes have been developed for the application of the CCCs
with staff, members of the area of responsibility for CP, the protection cluster, UNICEF partners and
institutions.
 Colombia has a protection system defined in national norms, including the Code of Childhood and
Adolescence, Law 1098 of 2006. It establishes the competencies, roles and functions of public servants,
including the Administrative Authorities (Defensoría del Pueblo, Family Commissariats and Police
Inspectorates), and of actors co-responsible for the protection of children.
 UNICEF sees that the system has multiple challenges and gaps that have increased with the migration crisis
including lack of technical and financial capacities. The ET recommends that UNICEF explore with ICBF an
approach to creating partnerships with civil society organisations that will allow the state to meet its
obligations.
 Since 2018, UNICEF Colombia has proposed and developed a strategy to strengthen institutional capacities
and improve the response of State institutions. UNICEF has provided:
o Technical assistance for the design of the care route for migrant children.
o Technical assistance for the adaptation of the route for the care of unaccompanied migrant children.
o Actions to promote the identification, access and accompaniment of migrant children and adolescents
at risk or with violated rights, such as unaccompanied migrant children.
o Local protocols to operationalise the routes.
o Technical assistance for the consolidation of information on unaccompanied children identified in
Arauca and Norte de Santander (areas where UNICEF leads the migrant children's roundtable).
o Conferences, workshops and preparation of technical documents to strengthen the administrative
authorities and other civil servants.
In 2022, an agreement was reached with ICBF to include in UNICEF's technical assistance actions a component to
review the information system, so that it includes the variables for identifying cases that are being handled by the
members of the local GIFMM. It seeks to ensure that children who do not access the protection system do not
continue to be made invisible. This is the most important step which the ET recognises that UNICEF needs to
embrace at an earlier point in the response.
In addition, UNICEF has a training course for public servants to promote the comprehensive protection of migrant
children. It has a module on children's access to the protection system, as part of the strengthening of the case
management strategy.
UNICEF Colombia recognises there is still a long way to go in terms of achieving the integrated case management
system as outlined in the CCC. While referral pathways exist and UNICEF has actively encouraged their use, they
are not systematically being followed. Multiple information or case management systems exist, but they are not
integrated, and each actor appears to be maintaining their own.
Child Protection Centres / Safe Spaces and the introduction of home-based, foster care arrangements
According to UNICEF and other partners, a key challenge has been to address the need for temporary housing and
accommodation for children and migrant families who are in transit or in the streets due to poverty, evictions and
other risks highlighted during the pandemic. According to UNICEF reporting, at the beginning of the pandemic,
one drop-in centre for unaccompanied children and street children in La Guajira was converted into temporary
shelter for exceptional emergency situations, for a maximum 15-day period, under ICBF supervision. Biosecurity
protocols for the centres were developed in collaboration with health authorities and the Pan American Health
Organization (PAHO). Self-care measures were taught to children and their families and health care routes were
designed and activated as needed. With Government of Canada support, a new drop-in centre operated by
EACANNA in Villa del Rosario, Norte de Santander was created. A total of 638 migrant children and their parents
were accommodated by these CP care centres in 2020.
In October 2021, the ET was able to visit two such centres: the EACANNA Centre in Villa del Rosario, Norte de
Santander, and a similar centre created in Riohacha, la Guajira, operated by Fundación Significarte. By the time of
the ET visit, there were no longer any place to stay in the EACANNA centre, which had been turned over for use
by the Learning Circles programme and was now functioning mainly as an alternative learning centre. At the same
34
time, the ET was told that temporary accommodation for UASC and families continues to be insufficient.80 A
question which arises is why spaces designed to provide temporary accommodation are no longer in use for that
purpose. Part of the explanation provided to the ET is that UNICEF is following the guidelines issued by the Alliance
for Humanitarian Action on not creating institutional care during the pandemic, and so needs to move away from
institutional accommodation towards home-based foster care situations. However, it is clear that this transition
has been extremely difficult. According to available 2021 reporting in the first quarter of 2021 only 11 children
were accommodated in foster care. Donors also highlight the high cost of maintaining these Safe Space Centres
and the need to identify a longer-term exit strategy for UNICEF.
Evidence generation and advocacy around child marriage and early unions (CMEU)
In the border areas, a phenomenon of concern to many actors in the VMC is what they perceive as increasing rates
of child marriage/early unions among Venezuelan, girls primarily but also boys in some cases.81UNICEF and IP field
staff report seeing rising numbers of young girls forming unions with older males, as a basis for survival and
stability. This is a pattern well known in Colombian society, but poverty, lack of access to education and
vulnerability of Venezuelan adolescents can place them at higher risk of entering unions at an early age. Gender
experts point out that in Colombia, early marriage as young as 14 years old, is permitted by law with parental
consent. A 2021 ruling by the Supreme Court upheld the notion that those as young as 14 may form unions and
be considered as married even without parental consent. Here UNICEF along with government institutions, civil
society and UN agencies submitted technical notes to advocate for the articles to be declared unconstitutional in
line with the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child (UNCRC) and the Convention on the Elimination of all Forms
of Discrimination against Women (CEDAW).82 UNICEF staff highlighted other advocacy and technical assistance
efforts around CMEU:
i. inclusion of specific measures on CMEU in the current National Development Plan;
ii. specific interventions made by UNICEF in the Congress to discuss two of the of bills to eliminate the
exceptions of the civil code on CMEU;
iii. convening since 2018 a round table with government institutions, UN Women, UNFPA and Plan
International, to address and eradicate CMEU;
iv. Colombia CO undertook the first study on CMEU (2010-2019) in the country, to be published in 2022.
According to agencies such as UNFPA, UN Women and other UNICEF partners, early unions are impacting
Venezuelan migrant girls in a wide range of ways, blocking access to education, and putting at risk their health,
lives and futures. Maternal mortality is one of the leading causes of death for girls aged between 15 and 19 in
Colombia. Risk of maternal death doubles in mothers under the age of 15. However, adolescent pregnancy is not
just a public health issue but an issue of rights, CP and social protection. It is recognised as one of the main factors
that perpetuate poverty in developing countries, since it increases the gender gap, socioeconomic inequalities and
vulnerability and exclusion.
Inattention to the prevalence of street children
It appears that the vast majority of child rights violations are happening in the streets. Some key protection risks
are simply related to the fact that so many children are out-of-school and lacking the skills and opportunities to
earn a living later in life. At the time of the ET’s visit in October 2021, depending on the region, between half and
three quarters of schools were still closed. This was largely because MEN requirements for social distancing and
hand washing were so high that schools could not make the investments in improved infrastructure (washrooms)
needed to meet them. Being out-of-school, according to many respondents is a key factor which leads to children
being unprotected, spending time in the streets where they are exposed to violence, drug use, sexual exploitation,
and other risky behaviours.
Effectiveness – Child Protection
Strengths Challenges
80 UNICEF staff agree with this analysis. There has been a reduction in places or quotas for accommodation because the conditions of the pandemic facilitated
the return to the new normal and because the service was specialised to meet the requests for support from the administrative authorities and the ICBF -
another example of the search for complementarity in the state response.
81 https://data.unicef.org/resources/profile-of-child-marriage-and-early-unions-in-latin-america-and-the-caribbean/
82 https://www.un.org/womenwatch/daw/cedaw/
35
Legislation and development of capacity in hospitals Ongoing gaps and tensions around the handling of CP cases,
to ensure birth registration and nationality to particularly for UASC. While UNICEF is trying to strengthen the
children of Venezuelan parents capacity of the GoC it should be acknowledged that one of the
biggest challenges is the lack of diplomatic relations between
Colombia and Venezuela. Hence UNICEF also works with the
International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) on cross border
issues.
UNICEF support for roll-out of the ETP Lack of integrated and inter-operable case management
information system
Articulation of the Ruta for UASC that includes child’s Institutional presence of UNICEF should be reinforced at CAs to
decision regarding whether to enter an provide orientation to GIFMM partners, Migración Colombia
administrative process and ICBF on the best interest determination and handling of
UASC, particularly adolescents
Partnership with Fundación Renacer, specialised in Insufficient and inadequate protective services/spaces for street
tourism-related sexual exploitation of children. children
Evidence generation and advocacy on child marriage
and early unions
Education
Sector results formulated as in HAC 2019
Children on the move and from host communities are integrated in the national education
system
Table 7. Education Targets and Indicators (2019, 2020, 2021)
2019 2020 2021
Education
Target Achieved Target Achieved Target Achieved
# boys and girls on the move, including adolescents 30,758
40,000
accessing non-formal learning activities (76%)
# children and adolescents accessing formal and non- 20,088
17,500
formal learning activities (115%)
# under fives benefitting from early childhood 44,473
79,618
development activities (56%)
# children accessing formal and non-formal 53,540
111,449
education, including early learning (48%)
1919
# children receiving individual learning materials 39,624
(5%)
As can be seen above, there is no indicator that can be tracked for the full period of the evaluation. The closest is
the indicator on children accessing formal and non-formal learning activities in 2020, which is then mixed in 2021
with children also accessing early learning. Furthermore, the conceptual link between sector results in the 2019
HAC, which clearly focuses on integration in the national education system, and the various HPM education
indicators is not particularly strong. HPM indicators cover a wide range of different types of activities, some which
are the distribution of learning materials and early learning activities that do not directly translate into actual
integration into the national education system. In fact, a significant part of UNICEF’s investment in education in
emergencies falls outside the formal education.
UNICEF has undertaken a range of interventions in education, such as giving out educational supplies and at home
learning resources during the pandemic. As highlighted by UNICEF staff, it is important to add that the delivery of
educational materials contributes to the ability of children to continue learning by providing access to Although
access to education is a fundamental challenge to the GoC for the inclusion of the migrant population, pandemic
related dropouts are also a challenge
Barriers to access to formal education
36
Since the beginning of the VMC various documents have highlighted the challenges around accessing schooling
for Venezuelan refugee and migrant children. There has been mainly anecdotal evidence and local surveys as a
basis for determining the extent of the problem. In 2018 and 2019, UNICEF began to seek out educational
alternatives to address the growing concern that children of the VMC were falling more and more behind in their
studies. In its 2019 humanitarian action plan, UNICEF Colombia sought to raise US$ 5,835,000 for two activities:
 maintenance of 50 alternative learning spaces and the establishment of new alternative learning spaces
(including distribution of educational kits, psychosocial support, teacher training in GBV prevention)
 provision of educational services to children on the move via the " or flexible learning models to integrate
them in schools.
The reason for this was that although the Colombian Constitution and national normative frameworks ensure
access to education for all children, nationals or otherwise on Colombian soil, in practice Venezuelan refugee and
migrant children and their families have experienced a series of difficulties to register in the system (lack of
documentation, information on paperwork involved, lack of school spaces, of funds to pay for registration,
uniforms, books, discriminatory attitudes on the part school administrators, etc.) Furthermore, Colombian
regulations specify that children who are two years or more older than the appropriate age cannot integrate in to
a normal classroom, thus creating the need for children severely behind in their studies to be brought up to the
grade level that corresponds to their age group.
Over the three years of the response, various publications have offered estimates of the large numbers of
Venezuelan migrant children not registered in school, spending much of their days in the streets where they are
exposed to a range of protection risks.
The decentralised nature of the Colombian education system coupled with the persistent lack of hard data on the
actual numbers of children not registered in school generates an obstacle to effective advocacy for more
educational resources (mainly staff and classrooms) by Departmental and Municipal Secretariats of Education
within MEN.83 All of these factors create a perfect storm of lack of access which over time is leaving children
behind.84
Creation of alternative learning spaces and Círculos de Aprendizaje (LCs)
UNICEF Colombia’s main response to this situation has been to reintroduce, adjust and adapt a model that was
first developed some 20 years ago to address the needs of children forcibly displaced by the long-standing armed
conflict. The círculos de aprendizaje model was developed by the NGO, Fundación Escuela Nueva.85 It involves the
creation of alternative learning spaces with specially trained teachers administered by UNICEF’s IPs. The purpose
of these spaces has been to provide an intensive catch-up period to enable students after six months to be
integrated into a regular class at their appropriate age group. Thus a child assessed to have a grade four level but
who is 12 or 13 years old needs to complete the grade levels required to function in a grade six class. Needless to
say, this kind of intensive learning, in small groups of o more than 15 learners, is expensive and requires much
personal attention from teachers. Although the LC model has existed for more than 20 years and is an approved
methodology of the MEN, the ET understands it has not been financed by the Secretariats of Education
themselves, due to the fact that per student costs are so high.
Since 2020, which was the first full year of implementation, the LCs have not been functioning at capacity, but
rather using remote/online modalities. In part this has been due to school closures during the pandemic and other
delays. By the time of the ET visit in October 2021, some of these centres had been reopened as allowed for by
the guidelines provided by the Secretariats of Education.
A full evaluation of the LC model in terms of its impact, effectiveness, efficiency, and appropriateness as a response
to the VMC would be an important contribution from UNICEF, but this is far beyond the scope of this evaluation.
Here we can consider only a few dimensions of the effectiveness of the model. According to the CCCs, the strategic
result from humanitarian interventions is that children and adolescents have access to inclusive, quality education
and learning in safe and protective environments. In terms of key CCC benchmarks set the ET finds the following:
 Children and adolescents have equitable access to inclusive and quality learning opportunities
While the ET only has limited information observations and discussions with partners of children in the LCs would
83 According to UNICEF staff although it is true that there are no resources being made available at the national level for the expansion of teaching staff, the
education secretariats in each Department do have within their functions to generate alternatives to respond to the demand for education according to their
administrative and contextual particularities.
84 According to one KI: “Producing evidence of the need for teaching staff does not guarantee a solution. There are many cases where this is already in place
and the teaching staff have not been made viable. Likewise, the migrant population is one of the most mobile in the country and, consequently, the studies
of children outside the system become obsolete in a short period of time”.
85 https://escuelanueva.org/
37
suggest that the quality of education received is good. Small groups of learners (the ET witnessed groups as few
as four or five due to social distancing requirements) with a lot of individual attention from their teachers is a
good indication that the method is effective for strong progress of learners within the Colombian curriculum. Very
limited data provided by the World Bank also suggests that in some cases, the progress of learners in LCs was
greater than for learners within normal classrooms. Teachers have received training from Escuela Nueva to ensure
that they are well aware of the programme methodology. During the pandemic, LC learners were provided with
a number of added supports that learner sin local schools may not have had data packages to ensure they could
connect to online learning, home delivered packages of learning materials, and regular follow up calls from
teachers to assess programmes and learning difficulties. There is little doubt that the quality of education received
by LC learners was as good, if not better than that received by children participating in the national school system.
The model is inclusive in the sense that it receives both Venezuela migrant and Colombian children. However, it
is not inclusive in the sense that few spaces are available, and there is a long waiting list for learners who want to
access the services. Furthermore, UNICEF’s education response does not provide an educational option for
continuity of education for adolescents.86 The LCs are for children up to 14 years of age. After that, adolescents
are essentially on their own- Informants reported that there are only adult learning centres, for which there are
virtually no spaces available. There are limited services available for children with disabilities. In particular the
needs of children with autism and other learning disorders were mentioned by parents as not having been
addressed.
 Safe learning environments/mental health and psychosocial support
Overall, the spaces visited by the ET were safe, respecting key security and COVID-19 requirements. Services were
available if needed for gender and age-appropriate psycho-social support.
 Continuity of Education for all children ensured/children on the move and from host communities are
integrated in the national education system
The weakness of the model in relation to the VMC is that it is only available to a small number of learners, in
specific locations, under the assumption that learners can be quickly transitioned to new a regular classroom.
Under the present conditions in Colombia, this does not seem to be a valid assumption. Small group discussions
with parents in two LCs in October 2021 showed that most of them had children who had been in the programme
for a while and had not yet transitioned to a regular school. There are various explanations for this from the
parents – either that the child is having difficulty being brought up to the level of their age group, or that even if
they are up to the right level, there is no space available for them in a local school.87 Also some parents prefer for
them to stay as they may have older or younger siblings at the centre. Clearly, LCs are too few, with too few spaces
and have been too slow to transition to provide an effective response to the VMC.
Data shows that by early 2020 some 489 learners had transitioned to other schools. This was lower than expected
due to the pandemic. But by the end of 2021, there were 1,109 in LCs and 680 in transit to other schools. Some
of these are new learners, but as we have seen above, many of them are carried over from year to year. The ET
considers that overall numbers are too small to have had a significant impact on number of children and the rate
of turnover for the previous LC circle would need to be significantly increased.88
The LC model also does nothing to enhance the capacity of the GoC to address the structural challenges that have
hindered access of Colombian children to the educational system for generations. One of the main bottlenecks is
non-availability of sufficient spaces to meet the needs of all learners and providing the additional resources in
terms of teaching staff and classroom space to ensure that all children have a place in a school, even if this means
having multiple shifts in the same school. The nature of the Colombian school system and the creation of new
schools depends largely on private initiative, rather than state leadership.89 UNICEF, together with other
organisations during the period under evaluation, has made the educational situation of migrant children visible
locally through the education in emergencies roundtables and nationally through the education in emergencies
cluster and in the needs mapping for the formulation of the RMRP.
Under the leadership of the Education Working Group, NRC with UNICEF and the Departmental Secretariat of
Education in Norte de Santander developed a survey for teachers and school administrators so as to understand
the needs of schools prior to their reopening after the pandemic. This was later replicated in eight other
departments. One of the 100 or so questions on the survey attempted to understand how many children in the
86 According to UNICEF, the largest demand in the early period was for primary education, and demand from education of adolescents has grown over time.
87 According to UNICEF, during the pandemic many schools blocked the transfer of Venezuelan students.
88 According to UNICEF, there are multiple variables during the pandemic that need to be factored in. The impact in development and learning also needs to
be carefully considered, rather than looking mainly at coverage. For this reason the ET is recommending an impact evaluation of the model, to understand
both the benefits and constraints of the LC model under current conditions.
89 This is not to discount some limited investments supported by MEN’s Fondo de Infraestructura.
38
areas surrounding each school did not have access to the school system. Given that these schools are in a border
region, it is likely that many of these children are Venezuelan migrants, but the survey did not ask about
nationality. The survey indicates that in some municipalities, educators are aware of significant numbers of
children who are not registered in school. These are mainly areas where no LCs are established. Such information
is anecdotal and not systematic enough to motivate the MEN to take the urgent action needed to ensure
integration into the national system for all children who need it.90
There is an evident and urgent need to respond to the needs of out-of-school Venezuelan and Colombian children.
While it can be said that UNICEF is currently providing a small part of the response, according to KIs and observers,
this is not sufficient.91 The educational strategy promoted by UNICEF could be an interesting contribution for a
national or international NGO but does not correspond to the type of information generation and strategic
intervention that is needed, given the scale and nature of the VMC. UNICEF Colombia and LACRO should maximise
sharing of experiences by countries within the region to determine the role that UNICEF can play to assist the MEN
to develop an online system, and how to meet needs through rationalising the use of existing and new donor
resources in a manner that will ensure that every child who needs it is able to find their place in a school at the
appropriate level, without waiting.
Specific vulnerabilities: risks associated with out-of-school adolescents and children in transit
As the EQ6 refers specifically to the effectiveness of the response for Venezuelan children and families in transit,
it is noteworthy that UNICEF’s response in education has not endeavoured to address the needs of children on
the move in transit to other countries. The ET considers this as a concern, because every day, week, month, or
year that a child is out of school has direct consequences for their longer-term development and realisation of
their potential. It is also noteworthy that since much of the L2 Emergency service delivery was being carried out
in parallel with the COVID-19 school closure and confinement measures, it might have occurred that just as
regularly schooling could be carried out online, that children in transit might also have been given access to online
learning services. In this case, it will be of interest to consider how education for Venezuelan children in Trinidad
and Tobago was provided despite access to the formal school system, and uniquely through online means.
The LCs only serve children up to the age of 14 after which there they have no formal educational solutions for
them. A child who has been out-of-school for years and is trying to catch up to integrate in the formal educational
system to complete her/his secondary studies, in theory could be abruptly cut off. There are few if any options for
integration into adult educational settings and without a secondary school certificate and exams, there route to
higher education is cut off. According to several KIs, this is where UNICEF needs to harmonise a protection and
education strategy – because out-of-school adolescents who do not have access to learning programmes and
work-related training opportunities become more vulnerable to recruitment by gangs and armed groups and
trafficking networks. Adolescents on the move are also vulnerable because they are often seeking out
employment and income generating opportunities and require supportive and protective networks in order to do
so in a manner that ensure their physical and social protection.
According to several KIs, it is important for UNICEF to consider solutions that can be implemented at scale to
ensure that education is available in a reasonable timeframe to all learners. The ET was shown a small
encampment where GIFMM partners were assisting a bi-national indigenous community that has seen its
numbers swell from the VMC to develop a school for around 200 hundred learners.92 This required MEN to accredit
a number of indigenous teachers who were not formally trained or certified thus generating more functioning
classrooms and ensuring indigenous content is incorporated into the curriculum. This type of solution could be
scaled up to allow temporary schools to be created to absorb the large numbers of children currently out of school.
These might in time become permanent. This is the essence of a humanitarian response. Services are needed
today. Education cannot wait.
Effectiveness – Education
90 According to UNICEF staff, although MEN is aware of the large gaps in access that exist for the migrant population, increasing educational spaces involves
recurring expenses, which in turn require an adjustment to public expenditures in Colombia, so this is not a policy change that will be implemented in the
short term. From the ET’s point of view, it is important for UNICEF to demonstrate that it is carrying out the needed advocacy to have these spaces created,
and looking for creative solutions with GIFMM partners to help the state finance, on a temporary basis, the missing educational spaces, until adequate public
expenditures can be mobilised. This would be required if the 2019 desired outcome for integration of children on the move and host community into the
public school system is to be achieved.
91 According to UNICEF staff, it is important to contrast this statement with the percentage of funding in the education sector and from the perspective of
HAC (humanitarian response) and compare it with the education sector (other actors). UNICEF’s funding for education falls below what is received by other
partners.
92 UNICEF has pointed out that this response was introduced within the framework of protecting the rights of ethnic peoples, which does not necessarily
work for the rest of the population. The ET sees that creating sufficient educational spaces should be a priority for UNICEF and all humanitarian
39
Strengths Challenges
Strong collaboration with Departmental and Municipal Too many children are still unable to access to public
Secretariats of Education in border areas education, particular challenges for adolescents
Strong NGO partners like NRC and Escuela Nueva Lack of information needed to mobilise additional resources
from MEN
The mandate to generate evidence about what is needed Slow and limited response, given the scale of the VMC -
in a particular context, to propose new models suited to UNICEF’s role in the LC could be left to NGOs to focus on new
the humanitarian needs. strategies
Social inclusion:
Sector results formulated as in HAC 2019
Migrant children and their families benefit, during their transit, from social protection
initiatives that allow them to continue their route toward their country of destination in a safe
manner.
In the LACRO HAC 2019 and 2020 there were no indicators established for HCTs and only in 2021, for the first time,
did UNICEF Colombia participate with an indicator on social cash transfers Therefore there is currently no way to
assess progress against objectives set. It is noteworthy that the indicators do not allow the ET to measure progress
to the identified result.
In 2020, with support from BPRM), and as a measure to keep children enrolled in alternative learning programmes
and to overcome barriers to accessing online learning, a four-month small-scale initiative was implemented to
provide cash to families registered in LCs. The project was designed to take into account the emergency needs of
vulnerable families, as well as the characteristics of the CA programme. The short-term objective was to keep
learners in this alternative learning programme in school and benefiting from online learning so as to address the
risks of dropping out due to hardships imposed by the pandemic. In the medium-term it was expected that the
cash-based intervention (Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, Trans, Intersex and Queer, LGBTIQ+) would strengthen the role
of UNICEF Colombia to advocate for the inclusion of migrant children in the parallel systems of humanitarian
transfers and their harmonisation with the social protection system. The goal initially defined for the component
was 779 families, drawn from the migrant and host population in Arauca, Cúcuta, Riohacha, Fonseca and
Barranquilla with resources to meet their basic needs. However, due to duplications with other cash transfer
programmes operated by other GIFMM partners, the target was changed to 769 families with the inclusion of the
city of Bogotá. With this measure, coverage was provided in all the territories where LCs were being implemented.
In the end, 731 families benefited from cash and other services with total value of approximately equivalent of
US$ 408.12, including data units for children’s online learning, kits for nursing mothers and pregnant women and
COVID-19 Prevention Hygiene kits.
This limited experience with HCTs provided UNICEF and partners with a great deal of information and insight into
the day-to-day lives of Venezuelan migrant families, based on an intake survey and exit survey at the end of the
project. This allowed UNICEF Colombia to conclude that the measures put in place were to some extent effective
in maintaining LC learners’ engagement with the programme despite the move to online learning. This information,
it is hoped, can by effectively utilised by UNICEF Colombia as a basis for ongoing advocacy within the GIFMM
network, with donors and also with Colombian state actors.
The end-of-project survey also indicated a high degree of beneficiary satisfaction. The ET notes that in all
conversations with parents in other locations, they appear to be extremely dedicated to ensuring educational
continuity with or without support from UNICEF and other partners. Respondents requested more information or
notifications about fixed dates of disbursement, if possible, at the beginning of each month so as to enable them
to plan to payment rent. Survey respondents estimated that the number of hours dedicated by learners to their
studies increased. During the pandemic, between the baseline and the end of the project, there was an average
increase of 13 per cent increase in both the time spent studying and the time spent accompanying the child’s
learning by parents and/or caregivers.
According to KIs and UNICEF reporting there were a number of lessons learned from this rapid roll-out of the HCT.
These are detailed in Annex 13:
40
Social inclusion
Strengths Challenges
UNICEF rapidly rolled out a COVID-19 Scope of programme was very limited, not necessarily targeting the
appropriate HCT programme reaching 731 most vulnerable
households
UNICEF gained valuable experience in the The CBI scope was re-defined as a result of coordination that
development of HCT programmes identified potential duplications and the new design took this into
consideration.
Effective, for the most part, in keeping children UNICEF to focus on preventing school abandonment, rather than on
already registered in LCs engaged duplicating CBI where other actors are already engaged.
Engagement with local authorities (e.g., Future iterations of the CBI component should include GBV risk
indigenous leadership) assessment and mitigation measures, as well as increased access of
women and girls to a range of needed services and skills training (cash
plus).
Targeting women as key recipients for the HCT
Longer-term work on social inclusion at the Taking into account the intentions, contexts, and timeframes for the
municipal level through PDET. different iterations of the Hemos y Derechos/TAN strategies, that
UNICEF carry out an evaluation of the impacts and results of its
engagement with municipalities in order to assess and identify the
successes and opportunities for improvement.
Health and Nutrition:
Sector results formulated as in HAC 2019
Health: Boys and girls, adolescents, and women on the move and in host communities equitably
access essential health services with sustained coverage of high-impact preventive and care
interventions
Nutrition: Pregnant and nursing women and girls and under-five boys access nutrition in
emergency services (micro-nutrients and care for acute malnutrition).
Reported below are the different HPM indicators on which UNICEF Colombia report between 2019 and 2021. It
should be noted that in UNICEF Colombia’s HAC workplan there are a number of indicators that are not taken up
in the LACRO level HPM Indicators.
Targets have been established in light of the RRMP and UNICEF Colombia calculates them on the basis of
population estimation for the persons of concern (# of women, children adolescents, etc.). They are consistent
with the ones retained by all partners in the R4V instruments. However, this raises some questions on its variability
over time, and whether there has been overlapping reporting, leading to an inflation of the numbers. For example,
is the number of children vaccinated against measles a subset of Indicator 1 on # of boys and girls accessing at
least the minimum set of vaccines? It is important that the use of two very similar and potentially overlapping
indicators does not lead to double counting of beneficiaries.
Table 8. Health Indicators and Targets (2019, 2020, 2021)
2019 2020 2021
Health
Target Achieved Target Achieved Target Achieved
# of boys and girls accessing at
42,259
least the minimum set of 31,250 n/a n/a 36,912 5,290 (14%)
(135%)
vaccines
# of children (aged 6-59 3,424
11,066 5735 2,676 (47%)
months) vaccinated against (31%)
41
measles
#. of children and women
24,837
receiving primary healthcare in 127,114 40,68393 21,206 (52%)
(20%)
UNICEF-supported facilities
# of health workers reached
with personal protective 1,140 240 (21%)
equipment
In the 2019 HPM, UNICEF Colombia only reported on the results of vaccination, but vaccination was part of a
broader strategy to reach migrant children and women through UNICEF-funded mobile health units94 in seven
different locations prioritised by the Ministry of Health in areas heavily impacted by the VMC. These units worked
as an expansion of existing services in public hospitals and provide primary health and nutrition services to under-
five children, pregnant and lactating mothers, and pregnant girls under 14 as well as adolescents who also required
access to the protection system. Services included: vaccination, growth and development monitoring, pre-natal
care, nutritional triage, outpatient treatment for acute malnutrition, micronutrient supplementation of pregnant
and lactating women and adolescents, de-worming, psycho-emotional support, follow-up care and rehabilitation
(SSR), nutrition and breastfeeding counselling and educational activities to prevent illness aimed at patients,
families, and caregivers. According to KIs, UNICEF Colombia was able to outperform its humanitarian targets in
the area of vaccination by complementing a GoC-led vaccination campaign designed to address a serious measles
outbreak. That campaign allowed UNICEF to reach more children than expected through support to a pre-existing
vaccination roll-out.
By 2020, the COVID-19 pandemic had significantly slowed the pace of delivery of the response. Both humanitarian
and development-oriented interventions related to the VMC response were re-programmed considering both the
need for heightened biosecurity and emerging vulnerabilities seen in migrant and host populations resulting from
the economic downturn. Health interventions for children and pregnant women through mobile and health clinics
in border areas continued but included provision of Personal Protective Equipment (PPE) to health workers and
training developed according to Ministry of Health guidelines. In response to the pandemic UNICEF also developed
guidelines on pregnant women, postnatal and new-born care tailored to different care modalities. These include
mobile, telemedicine and institutional services. Understanding the concerns related to COVID-19 transmission in
hospitals, UNICEF adapted the health strategy to outreach to children, pregnant and breast-feeding women in
border towns with Venezuela on access to essential health services, through house-to-house visits and in health
centres. This included measles vaccinations for 2,765 children and the delivery of micronutrients for 7,548
pregnant women. These were necessary pandemic responses. It is important to note that UNICEF was able to
make needed adjustments to ensure the safety of both patients and health practitioners. However, as seen from
the table above, 2020 targets were seriously impacted by the pandemic, as, it is likely, were those for 2021.
Throughout the VMC Response the health strategy has required various adjustments based on lessons learned.
From the outset the contracting of the health service provider was done based on estimates of market costs and
provided for additional staff hired by the service provider to carry out outreach services to Venezuelan migrants.
According to KIIs, this method was more costly for UNICEF, but generated more targeted services for migrant
communities. After a visit of UNICEF’s Internal Audit Office, it was advised that UNICEF Colombia should change
the manner of contracting health services providers to ensure that UNICEF Colombia was paying a fair price per
patient and move to a fee for service contract with rates that are comparable to those paid by other institutional
clients. This approach opens the door for the Entidad Promotora de Salud/ Institución Prestadora de Servicios
(EPS/IPS) to serve the migrant population at any service delivery point. It does not depend on the capacity of a
single team. The EPS/IPS can increase its teams with the resources it receives. However, according to UNICEF staff,
the challenge of this method is that health service providers were no longer compelled to hire additional staff,
and often used the overstretched team to serve an expanded number of patients.95 This implies a trade-off
between quality of services and greater efficiency (further discussed under Efficiency below).
A further challenge is that UNICEF is providing a very basic package of primary care services, which does not take
into consideration the range of health needs of refugee/migrant children and their families. In the course of field
93 Based on the combined programme for migrant- and conflict-affected populations.
94 See UNICEF: Situation of Maternal and Child Health Services among Venezuelan Migrants and Refugees in the context of COVID-19 in Colombia, January
2022
95 One interviewee noted that “At the outset, UNICEF was covering the cost of the staffing and other inputs for the clinics. When we moved to the fee for
service model, the health center had to make its own decisions about how to use its resources – this did not always improve the quality of services and may
have led to longer wait times and more frustration on the part of the host community that felt now the pressure added by having to wait in line with migrants.”
42
interviews and small group discussions, parents noted that no form of specialist care for chronic illnesses was
provided. UNICEF clarified that IOM and UNHCR manage much larger resources for health services and can identify
partners that may have resources for the treatment of chronic illnesses, such as HIV/AIDS. UNICEF’s financial
capacity to provide health coverage is considered very small in relation to the scale of the needs and coverage
that can be provided by other GIFMM-R4V partners. UNICEF should endeavour to address the
coordination/overlap with other partners, while providing technical capacity building and oversight on key areas
of the health response which relate to children under five primary care, immunisation, and nutrition as well as
pre- and ante-natal care.
During field visits the ET learned that a common strategy to deliver services of health and nutrition as one package
appears to be both effective and efficient. These could also include CP and GBV prevention and response. The
GIFMM-R4V platform has ensured the availability of primary health services to refugees/migrants at key border
and transit points. UNICEF’s programming is mainly directed to refugees and migrants in rural and urban
settlements, with the exception of border crossings in Arauca, Villa del Rosario and Ipiales.
Table 9. Nutrition Indicators and Targets (2019, 2020, 2021)
Nutrition 2019 2020 2021
Target Achieved Target Achieved Target Achieved
# Targeted caregivers (men and women) of boys and girls 0- 33,000 136,939
23 months with access to Infant and Young Child Feeding (415%)
(IYCF) counselling for appropriate feeding
# of caregivers of children under five reached with IYCF 84,738 42,506
counselling (50%)
# under fives screened for malnutrition 13,903 5256
(38%)
# children aged 6 to 59 months with severe acute 520 302
malnutrition admitted for treatment (58%)
# primary caregivers of children aged 0-23 months receivied 36,238 12,722
IYCF counselling (35%)
# of children aged 6 to 59 months screened for acute 22,215 5920
malnutrition (27%)
UNICEF’s programming in the area of nutrition was generally designed as an add-on to UNICEF’s primary health
programming, covered by the same contracts with public hospitals and involved parenting workshops provided in
conjunction with ICBF. In the area of nutrition, a question that arrives again is around the value of changing HPM
indicators every year. This makes monitoring of progress and results challenging and appears to add very little of
substance to the information being gathered. As a general recommendation, it would be of greater value to tie
HPM indicators to the CCCs, rather than modifying the wording of the indicator with each new HAC96 while allowing
room for context/country specific and quality indicators.
In practice, the nutrition response changed little over the period. In 2019, activities were based out of locally
contracted public hospitals in the main border areas in which UNICEF was working. In the public hospitals, UNICEF
provided for primary level care in maternal-child health and nutrition, through mobile health teams for primary
health care in prioritised municipalities.97 There was special emphasis on girls and adolescent mothers between
10 and 14 years of age as well as strengthening ICBF and local health service providers aiding nursing mothers and
young children through a series of post-natal workshops for mothers and caregivers. In 2020 and 2021 activities
appear to have remained much the same. However, two new ones were added specific to the humanitarian
response. Efforts were made to systematise information on the nutritional situation (prevalence of malnutrition
with an emphasis on girls, boys, adolescents, pregnant and lactating women) and identify lessons learnt to adjust
the response according to the humanitarian situation. Additionally, there was strengthening of local coordination
spaces, providing technical assistance to local authorities, contributing to training of NGO teams and institutions
96 While 33,000 was established as the target for these activities in the 2019 HAC, there UNICEF reports more than 4 times as many people benefited. Here
it is suspected that the indicator used has something to do with this discrepancy. It would be good to identify what this indicator is really measuring - is
“access” interpreted as being all users of these public health structures or all caregivers of infants in all municipalities? By 2020, for a very similar indicator
which specifies caregivers reached, the result is more realistic, but now only have of the targeted population for that year.
97 These being Arauca (Arauca), Norte de Santander (Villa del Rosario) Nariño (Ipiales), La Guajira (Maicao y Uribia), Cesar (Valledupar, Pueblo Bello),
Magdalena (Santa Marta), Bolívar (Cartagena), Atlántico (Barranquilla y/o Soledad).
43
that participate in emergency nutrition response- The overall aim was to develop interventions in accordance with
public laws and long-term sustainability.
Along the migration route, particularly at the CAs and Puntos de Servicios UNICEF also had PCAs with implementing
partners for nutritional screening of children and supplements. For the ET, UNICEF’s precise contribution in these
settings is unclear, due to the fact the same donors both support UNICEF’s humanitarian programming as well
contracting directly with the same partners, such as Acción contra el Hambre (ACH). It is therefore challenging to
disaggregate the impact of UNICEF’s contribution to nutrition vis a vis that of other actors contracted directly by
donors or working as IPs for other UN agencies such as UNHCR, IOM or UNFPA. What is known is that various
lessons have been learned regarding the distribution of food and nutritional supplements in the context of human
mobility.
Effectiveness: Health and Nutrition
Strengths Challenges
Outreach to communities through mobile units Risks of duplication with other UN and GIFMM partners
Development of relay system for nutritional Limited referrals and management of Chronic and complex
supplements for underweight children along the conditions
migration route.
Need for UNICEF and other partners to offer nutritional
support in response to human mobility via use of electronic
vouchers
WASH
Sector results formulated in UNICEF Colombia HAC 2019
WASH: Boys and girls, adolescents, and women on the move and in host communities equitably
access essential WASH services.
The formulation of this result from the 2019 HAC appears as an explicit focus on the CCCs and establishes the
concept of accessing water, sanitation and hygiene in a context specific way. This is a positive linkage that the ET
considers would be good for other sectors to emulate. As already mentioned, WASH’s HPM indicators have also
changed over time, making progress towards results challenging to assess.
Table 10. WASH Indicators and Targets (2019, 2020, 2021)
2019 2020 2021
WASH
Target Achieved Target Achieved Target Achieved
# of people (men, women, boys and girls) with
daily access to WASH services at service delivery
points (health centres, shelters, migration points 13,000 37,032
and transit points as per agreed standards
(according to context)
# of population with daily access to WASH service
15,000 16,502
in settlements
# of people with access to clean drinking water at
7,327
community level, including access to water 17,186
(43%)
through water filters
# of persons accessing key hygiene items 11,589
42,226
(27%)
# of persons accessing a sufficient quantity of safe 26,824
73,800
water for drinking, cooking and personal hygiene (36%)
# of people reached with critical water, sanitation
66,569
and hygiene supplies (including hygiene items) and 73,800
(90%)
services
44
Thanks to KOBO monitoring data shared by UNICEF, it is clear that significant effort has been made in WASH over
the years of the response. In 2019, UNICEF signed eight agreements with IPs to implement WASH initiatives in
rural, urban, and peri-urban settings. There were five additional agreements in 2020 and a further three in 2021.
Between 2020 and 2021, UNICEF and partners recorded some 780 site visits to service and maintain WASH
installations. It included actions in 51 municipalities and some 260 rural, urban, and peri-urban localities.
The sheer number of WASH points created and maintained during this period speaks to a very high level of activity.
The ET was able to visit several of these sites. The WASH strategy and installations are highly appropriate, effective,
and necessary as one of the key pillars that enable the entire migration response. The UN, government, and NGOs
who carry out the R4V response activities could not be operational without WASH. The COVID-19 pandemic has
also highlighted the importance of WASH in order to prevent the spread of the virus, but also secondarily to ensure
that schools, other public spaces and service points for migrants have been able to reopen or continue to serve
the public. As further described below, KIs confirm that UNICEF Colombia is seen by partners to have a strong value
added as a technical partner and sector lead in WASH. The agency is acknowledged to have developed effective
tools for costing and planning WASH infrastructure that is valuable both for the GIFMM as a whole, for individual
sector partners, also for host communities and local government partners.
The ET visited a number of WASH installations at the Espacios de Apoyo, which appear to be well constructed,
clean and in good working order, with separate toilets for women/girls and men/boys that were well lit and had
adequate security. In general, the facilities meet and/or exceed UNICEF’s and other humanitarian minimum
standards. The significance of WASH installations at border areas are well adapted and aligned with needs related
to the COVID-19 pandemic, including hand washing stations upon entrance and exit. While the ET notes that most
of the CCC standards are met, there are some CCCs that could present problems given the nature of the VMC. For
example, the CCC which notes that “a maximum ration of 20 people per functioning shared toilet98…” does not
seem relevant or attainable in the current context. According to UNICEF, it is preferable to refer to installed
capacity rather than a specific number of users.99 In particular, school toilets and those in the Centros de Apoyo
may receive many more than that in a given day. It would be helpful for the WASH sector at HQ level to review the
CCCs and other sector standards in light of the scale and type of services provided in such a mass migration
situation.
VMC response and preparedness
It is clear from KIIs that the usage of WASH facilities has varied extensively over time as waves of migrants have
waxed and wanted. The visit of the ET corresponded with a very low period when there were few migrants utilising
the spaces and services. However KIs informed the team about periods when the Espacios de Apoyo were filled
with migrants seeking a safe place to spend the night. The situations were described as very extreme: families
sleeping on the floor, open defecation and urination because there were insufficient toilets to meet the demand
of the thousands of migrants arriving within a few hours. A particular example was shared about the convergence
of migrants at Rumichaca, at the border crossing with Ecuador as migrants arrived desperate to cross the border
before new visa restrictions were introduced. UNICEF and IPs working in the WASH sector have responded
heroically to accommodate migrants and to maintain services through moments of high demand. As one KI noted:
We were simply not prepared for the arrival of 10,000 migrants overnight at Rumichaca. We needed to be
provided a bit of lead time to know what to expect and to be organised with the right level of infrastructure
once they began to arrive.
Interviews and informal discussions suggest that an effective WASH strategy for a route-based approach to
migration requires a good planning and an early alert system to inform service centres along the migration route,
which is something that did not exist when it was needed most and still has not been place either by GIFMM
leadership or UNICEF (see discussion on Coordination below). According to a KI the different sectors together with
GIFFM put in place contingency plans in December 2020 for COVID-19. On their own, the UNICEF WASH sector
team and other R4V partners put in place an informal WhatsApp group to communicate between themselves
about numbers of migrants on the move. It is somewhat alarming that in the context such a massive population
movement, neither GIFMM nor UNICEF at LACRO level has seen fit to create a formal early alert system to ensure
that within countries and across borders, all operations and key partners were provided with information needed
98UNICEF. Core Commitments for Children in Humanitarian Action, June 2020. P. 62
99 Aquí el referente de capacidad instalada https://colombia.immap.org/capacidad-instalada-wash/
45
to effectively plan and prepare for various waves of population movements as seen in the VMC. The lack of an
early alert system emerges as one of the key strategic gaps in this operation at CO and regional levels.100
WASH and community engagement
WASH is one of the main sectors and mechanisms for community engagement and participation, through direct
engagement of community WASH committees. This is a good practice of sector coordination, where the C4D sector
successfully coordinated, accompanied and coordinated community engagement and participation activities. The
WASH sector has a good track record where IPs and community actors come into direct and frequent contact,
allowing UNICEF to have better insight into broader community dynamics, problems, and solutions through the
structuring of community committees responsible for maintenance, repair, and payments for WASH services. This
is a contribution that would merit more study and evaluation to understand the many dimensions of WASH as an
entry point of migration settings.
Who doesn’t like a clean washroom? Leveraging WASH to achieve other strategic and operational objectives
UNICEF Colombia teams clearly understand the strategic role that WASH can play both in emergency response as
well as in the transition to development where longer-term integration of Venezuelan refugee and migrants will
require significant investments in water, sanitation and hygiene, particularly in rural and peri-urban areas where
they are settling areas such as La Guajira. In such laces rainy and dry seasons lead to intense period of flooding
and water shortages. Water management is one issue, if not handled properly, that has the potential to become
a point of conflict between host communities and migrants. Therefore, WASH’s role and strategic importance in
paving the way to effective and peaceful integration of Venezuelan refugees and migrants should be made even
more explicit in UNICEF’s new CDP and the continuation of the emergency response.
According to KIs, this investment has a cost. Among UNICEF Colombia investments in WASH are those made in
common R4V spaces: the Centros de Apoyo and Puntos de servicios where UNICEF has been present from the
beginning of the emergency. After three years, according to KIs, the cost of this investment is being felt:
maintaining activities and points of attention in many different locations is costly in terms of supplies and labour.
There appears to be no clear exist strategy in place or any national level actor to whom these installations will
eventually be turned over. According to UNICEF KI, there have been attempts to make the shift, for example
Paraguay in Guajira and La Antioqueña in Arauca, but the authorities and other actors do not want to get involved
precisely because of the costs. There is also a desire to return to a more long-term strategy and refocus UNICEF
investments in communities and settlements where it can bring a more integrated approach – working across
sectors towards common objectives, as proposed in its new CPD.
The ET also had the opportunity to visit a number of schools where UNICEF’s WASH capacity was mobilised to
assist in the school reopening process, because many schools did not meet MEN standards in terms of toilets and
hand washing facilities to allow them to reopen. This was seen as a positive and much appreciated step by
beneficiaries, school leadership and administrators, allowing schools to open without having to make significant
investment in new infrastructure.
Effectiveness WASH
Strengths Challenges
Hygiene promotion and response to COVID-19 High Cost of maintenance and no exit strategy for UNICEF
Well connected to standards, such as CCCs Lack of strong linkages between WASH and other
operational and strategic objectives, such as inclusion of
Venezuelan children in educational system
Participatory processes and WASH committees
established
Communication for Development (C4D):
100 According to UNICEF staff, this is an important factor. The dynamics of the migration flows are continuously changing and depend on political factors (such
as the opening and closing of borders) and economic and social factors (such as the increase in conflict in border areas). The ET agrees and sees these factors
as precisely those that UNICEF along with other migration actors should be monitoring to inform on-going modelling, planning and preparedness for future
massive population movements. As shown below, UNHCR and the World Bank have invested in global modelling and monitoring of such movements, which
UNICEF can and should be privy to.
46
Sector results formulated as in HAC 2019
Children and their families have access to life saving information and protective practices on
access and use of services
Table 11. C4D Indicators and Targets (2019, 2020, 2021)
2019 2020 2021
C4D
Target Achieved Target Achieved Target Achieved
# of affected population in targeted areas
6,491
actively participating in accountability 8,000 11,112 10,980
(59%)
mechanisms supported by UNICEF
# people reached in affected areas with
messages on life saving skills and protective
100,000 234,150 67,570 167,357
practices and behaviours, as well as on
information on access and use of services.
# of people in host communities participating in
community activities on the prevention of 10,506
18,000
xenophobia, promotion of inter-cultural (58%)
dialogue or inclusion
# of people reached with messages on access to 126,248
40,633
services (311%)
C4D has been supporting the VMC Response in a number of ways, suppling messages to Venezuelan migrants,
providing a broad communications strategy and outreach to Colombians to address the potential rise in
xenophobic and discriminatory attitudes. This was seen to be an important risk factor facing the response, as was
misinformation – both for migrants as well as for Colombian host communities. In 2019, in response to these risks,
UNICEF rolled out C4D activities that were intended to raise awareness about risks for the migrant population;
and, to track and address rumours and misinformation among migrant families.
It also rolled out a robust accountability strategy to ensure feedback from migrants and host communities
participating in UNICEF funded programming (See discussion on AAP above). With the support of the then UK
Department for International Development (DFID), UNICEF introduced KOBO so that IPs can gauge the real-time
opinions of migrant families regarding quality of services, information and the treatment received from
humanitarian workers. Such reporting continues to be mediated to some extent by partners themselves. C4D
actions reportedly reached over 88,000 individuals in 2019 throughout a coordinated approach with UNICEF
Venezuela. The ET may have raised some concerns above about the roll out of the AAP by UNICEF Colombia, but
this does not detract from the significant investment that this sector has made both in messaging around the
migration crisis as well as messaging during the COVID-19 public health crisis.
According to UNICEF Colombia, one of the key lessons learned around COVID-19 response in 2020 relates to the
importance of local content development for Risk Communication and Community Engagement, enabling
community media to provide locally produced and accessible messaging around the pandemic. Among other
things, UNICEF Colombia designed the C4D strategy Somos Enlace (We are link) based on community radios and
alternative communications platforms to ensure families have access to relevant information on COVID-19
prevention. The radio is the platform with the most reach in Colombia, according to the Ideas para la Paz
Foundation, and community radios are the only media available in half of Colombia’s municipalities. UNICEF
partnered with five local, community and youth-based organisations, two of them indigenous, to roll-out a
communication strategy with locally produced information available and meaningful to the communities and
reflecting their culture and values. This information was produced in a participatory way, involving radio, printed
and social media and face-to-face interactions for remote indigenous groups. The strategy included 40 community
radios and alternative media in 19 departments, reaching families with key-life saving information to address the
47
COVID-19 public health emergency.101
This appropriate combination of communication channels allows UNICEF to reach families in remote zones who
speak and read different languages and who lack internet access or electricity. This has been through indigenous,
Afro-Colombian, migrant, rural, youth, and LGTBIQ radios and alternative platforms.
Effectiveness - C4D
Strengths Challenges
AAP incorporated in all programmatic documents and IPs operational AAP mechanisms established are not necessarily
projects affecting or engaging UNICEF in its own accountability
to affected populations
Engagement with community mobilisers and media producers in 19
Departments
Social media and radio channels for information and awareness raising
EQ8: To what extent did UNICEF’s situation monitoring, monitoring of the quality of the service, real-time
monitoring, accountability mechanisms at the migrant/host community/ and government service levels, lead
to improved effectiveness of the response at CO/RO levels
Monitoring and reporting on the humanitarian response relies on HPM indicators. The ET finds that there are
many areas in which inaccuracies can be introduced as the system is currently designed. The HPM system also
does not fully allow for issues of quality and inclusivity of services to be monitored
UNICEF has established systems for accountability to affected populations which involve ensuring that partners
are gathering beneficiary feedback on existing programmes. The ET considers that this system is a good first
step in AAP but does not include sufficient analysis to capture why potential services users may be unable to
access or utilise the services as they are currently designed.
It is recommended that UNICEF and other partners are able to access and utilise data generated by the ETP
registration process to monitor and measure gaps in services and protection to the Venezuelan migrant
population.
Accountability mechanisms
As highlighted above, UNICEF has taken responsibility for implementation of its AAP policy. UNICEF provides
technical and methodological support and monitors the quality and effectiveness of how the mechanism is
applied. Contractually, AAP is passed on to implementing partners through partnership agreements, and it
appears that most of the monitoring data gathered, including via KOBO, is provided via IPs. It has provided good
quality tools and presentations and has provided training to IPs on the importance of AAP and approaches to
carrying it out. This has been led by the C4D section area and has effectively demonstrated that there are cases
where programme adjustments and improvements have been made based on surveys carried out by IPs and
feedback from beneficiaries. The ET has reviewed a number of IP generated documents related to these tools and
approaches and considers all to be of good quality.
However, based on discussions with KIs and beneficiaries interviewed, there are concerns that some key principles
of AAP are being lost. Here the M&E function can play a vital role, in carrying out independent consultations with
programme beneficiaries to ensure that that beneficiary feedback is not filtered by IPs. UNHCR has a strong policy
and commitment to carrying out such consultations, participatory assessments, and surveys with beneficiaries in
various parts of the country. UNICEF appears not to be fully engaged in these exercises, at times participating and
at times not. The reasons for this are not clear, but KIs confirmed that AAP is an area that is relatively new for
UNICEF and not one where it yet has adequate processes in place.
Monitoring the quality of programming and advocacy role
Monitoring of the response is established through the framework of HAC and HPM monitoring systems This
101 This included a number of pillars: a first pillar focused on strengthening capacities of community and local alternative media; fostering resilience,
empowerment, and community integration; and ensuring AAP mechanisms. The capacity strengthening pillar includes thematic guidelines about UNICEF
priorities, technical communication guidance and equipment, in order to enhance relevance and sustainability. The second pillar consists of participatory
media production, with children, adolescents, teachers, parents, and caregivers involved in production. It also includes a community rumour tracking where
media producers identify rumours that negatively affect their communities. This helped inform the capacity building sessions as well as editorial boards,
where producers prioritise production. The third pillar, AAP mechanisms, refers to ensuring community feedback to evaluate the relevance of the information
produced and response to additional demands.
48
includes establishment of indicators for specific activities, based on estimated targets. As mentioned above, HPM
indicators have changed over time in the different HACs reflecting subtle differences that can lead to confusion
and cannot be compared over time. These changes may reflect adaptation of activities to the context of the
response and the changes in the short-term projects with IPs. They also reflect the instructions made by RO and
UNICEF New York Headquarters (NYHQ), related to the type and set of available (or recommended) indicators that
COs must use when planning the HAC. But in some cases, they only lead to questioning: for example, in the health
sector reporting – does the indicator on “vaccination against measles” duplicate the indicator on “vaccinations
which comply with national health standards”? If so, why are both indicators being used?
In KIIs and conversations with UNICEF Colombia team members, the ET realised that it is not always clear how
HAC targets are set, as they vary significantly over the years of the response (see previous Sections on Targets
versus Achieved above). In practice, UNICEF staff referred the ET to LACRO, in some cases not understanding
themselves how targets were set. As identified by an OIAI visit report from 2020102, it would be helpful for UNICEF
Colombia to provide more detailed reporting on cases in which targets set have been exceeded as these may
indicate a hidden good practice that could be shared regionally. Additionally, there should be focus on identifying
reasons for target under-achievement as these may reveal gaps in strategic planning at CO level and some
weaknesses in the definition of targets. However, it is clear that COVID-19 was a major factor that dramatically
affected the achievement of targets in 2020 and 2021.
The ET finds that HPM indicators have clear limitations in terms of capturing the quality of outputs and outcomes
and this requires an additional effort by the M&E teams. Most of the indicators are standard measurements
recommended by NYHQ and LACRO on a year-to-year basis, or related to the CCCs. According to LACRO, these are
set annually, in a planning process that seeks consistency with previous years’ activities. Each year indicators are
set as if independent from the activities and measurements taken the previous year. The scope for a CO to modify,
add or maintain certain types of indicators is very limited. These indicators are made up often of a wide range of
different types of inputs and activities and do not help UNICEF to understand which activities are most effective
in terms of contributing to the achievement of key medium- and longer-term outcomes. This is particularly so with
such generic concepts as “empowerment of migrants” and “effective integration in national systems” which have
been suggested as the long-term goals of UNICEF’s work on migration.
It is difficult to track the results of UNICEF’s advocacy role at the national level, to understand what the strategy
for advocacy is, with whom and what have been the results. Some of this advocacy, for example on the ETP, has
been very successful. However, UNICEF’s Global Programme Framework on Children on the Move sets out six
policies seen as key to creating the conditions needed for children on the move to enjoy short-term protection
and longer-term inclusion. This area of advocacy is one that would merit improved monitoring and impact
evaluation by UNICEF.
Further, the ET finds a great deal of confusion in terms of what is actually being measured by UNICEF and the
potential for over-reporting in the HPM indicators appears significant. A few examples identified in the field
include:
- The same activities feeding into different indicators: for example, in 2020, Health and Education both
report on activities to maintain the same child friendly spaces.
- A third example is based on the services provided by the Espacios de Apoyo. In discussion with
management, it was made clear that what is reported in GIFMM reporting as the number of beneficiaries
is actually the number of services provided. One refugee or migrant might use two or three services in a
visit, and be counted as two or three beneficiaries, since there is no tracking of individual users, only the
number of services delivered.
These are just some examples of factors that can unconsciously act to inflate numbers of reported beneficiaries.
According to KIs, there are areas where additional monitoring and evaluation could provide valuable information
and guide UNICEF’s operations and strategies. Among those identified are:
● Increased emphasis on impact evaluation of programming for children on the move, across sectors.
● Education in Emergencies: Impact assessment of the LC methodology and comparative cost-benefit
analysis of different/complimentary strategies. Given that the LC methodology has existed for the past 20
years in the context of forced internal displacement, where there are relatively small groups of children
on the move, it would be an opportunity to analyse the suitability of this model as a response to such a
large-scale population movement as the VMC.
● Territorios Amigos de la Niñez/ Strategy: After many years of use and adaptation of a similar strategy for
102 https://www.unicef.org/auditandinvestigation/documents/2020-oiai-audit-report-colombia-country-office
49
local inclusion and participation of children and adolescents at the municipal level, what are the long-term
benefits and effectiveness of these strategies to support municipalities to include children and
adolescents more effectively?103 What are the bottlenecks and how have UNICEF’s investments over two
decades changed the human and financial investment of local actors to effectively address community
level CP, empowerment and related programming?
● GBV from a cross sectoral approach: A key area that has been highlighted by KIs that requires deeper
inquiry is the effectiveness of UNICEF’s response to GBV and the extent to which domestic violence and
GBV are being addressed across sectors and whether established routes for response are being followed.
KIs see that UNICEF’s own internal tracking and tools, as well as those of partners, could be better aligned
to ensure UNICEF and IPs across sectors have management information systems to strengthen capacities
and ensure identified cases are effectively and efficiently managed.
Introduction of KOBO and use of real-time monitoring tools
A positive development has been the introduction of real-time monitoring, using KOBO as a tool for distance
monitoring in a range of sectors. The ET has had the opportunity to review WASH Kobo entries which provide
detailed information about the interventions carried out over the period and could also be adapted in the future
to include a number of qualitative indicators and beneficiary feedback mechanism.
M&E
Strengths Challenges
Introduction of real-time, distance monitoring using Frequent changes in indicators. Some indicators not logically
KOBO linked to high level results
Introduction of AAP to all PCAs with IPs Quality of the intervention: need systematic tools and indicators
for monitoring the quality and impact of UNICEF interventions as
part of the VMC response104
Monitoring systems should try to reduce/eliminate duplications
or double counting of beneficiaries
UNICEF, GIFMM and national/departmental Institutional data
weaknesses. Lack of evidence and data.
EQ9: To what extent have internal (within UNICEF, between countries and sectors) and external coordination
mechanisms been effective in enhancing the quality of the overall response and advocacy on behalf of VNZ
migrant children and their families?
EQ16: How coherent were coordination mechanisms at the CO and Regional level?
Summary of key findings:
 Despite significant challenges and tensions, the GIFMM platform coordination has generated some
effective action for enhancing the quality of the overall response. A key example has been inter-agency
efforts to advocate for, support and roll-out of the ETP.
 Some sectors, such as WASH have had more effective coordination from UNICEF than others in terms of
enhancing coverage. UNICEF’s Emergency Team has been effective at documenting lessons learned from
the GIFMM coordination mechanism.
 Having two parallel coordination mechanisms going at the same time – the GIFMM for the migration
response and the OCHA Cluster system for COVID-19 – has been very challenging for all agencies to sustain.
It may soon be time to look at phasing out the former.
 The GIFMM is seen to have reduced the visibility of non-lead agencies such as UNICEF, but yet has not
provided the needed support required through its annual appeals and fundraising efforts. The result of the
103 According to UNICEF, an evaluation of the strategy is scheduled for next year as is part of our Costed Evaluation Plan of the current CPD.
104 UNICEF follows the HACT framework which includes the implementation of periodic assurance activities to determine the efficiency and effectiveness of
programmatic actions (in both development interventions and humanitarian action.) Such activities include “programmatic visits” to assess the achievement
of results in the field (including quality), as well as spot checks or even audit procedure to monitor the use and effects of resources used by partners.
Unfortunately, during the pandemic such programmatic visits were more limited.
50
GIFMM leadership of the CP AOR is a porous patchwork without meaningful coordination or a shared
information system to help identify where the gaps and which areas to prioritise.
 UNICEF Colombia’s new CDP is designed to facilitate sectors to come together around thematic, rather than
sectoral approaches, which can help cross-sectoral programmatic coordination. Internal coordination has
experienced challenges according to KIs. These have included horizontal coordination between sectors, as
well a vertical coordination between field and CO, and CO and LACRO. However, LACRO has facilitated with
Colombia more than with other countries in the region a coordinated effort with the UNICEF Venezuela
office.
 At Regional and CO level, there is a broader questioning of the coherence with humanitarian principles and
a ‘do no harm’ approach of taking a nationality-based approach to the migration response coordination.
This is not specific to Colombia but an overall reflection on the R4V appeal and coordination structure.
The GoC is the lead organisation on the VMC response with coordination led by UNHCR and IOM. The R4V platform
is made up of NGO partners, UN Agencies, and government institutions to coordinate and implement the
response. The platform in Colombia is divided by location and also by sector: with 75 member organisations, local
platforms in 10 departments105 and with seven sectors (WASH, Education, Integration, Multi-sector, Protection,
Health, Food Security and Nutrition) and two working groups on Cash-based interventions and Information
Management and Reporting. According to UNICEF Staff, the R4V platform does not to cover the cost of time
devoted to coordination incurred by agencies such as UNICEF.
While UNICEF has a dual mandate in Colombia it is much more focused on its long-term development role and
moving into and out of humanitarian modality is challenging. At field level, UNICEF teams are working in the
context of many different needs or “multiple affectations” – those of communities simultaneously affected by
armed conflict, natural disasters, Colombian returnees and Venezuelan refugees and migrants.
COVID-19 was the unexpected factor that many, especially those inside UNICEF, consider made the dual
humanitarian coordination incoherent and inefficient. Many of the same actors met once as the R4V platform and
then met again under the OCHA Cluster system on issues which, at field level, are very much mixed and
overlapping.
Coordination of external GIFMM partners – something of a patchwork
KIs from various agencies indicated that the GIFMM coordination mechanism came as a surprise for most agencies
already very familiar and comfortable with the OCHA-led humanitarian cluster system. No sooner was this GIFMM
coordination system becoming operational, than the COVID-19 pandemic hit and the cluster system was activated
to handle the public health emergency. This meant two coordination systems operating simultaneously, taking up
precious time and resources for participating agencies in endless meetings. The solution found by the GIFMM and
GIC was very practical: the “Back-to-back” strategy - meetings of the GIFMM and Cluster sectors, first the GIFMM,
then the Cluster. One informant noted that “since we are almost all the same agencies participating in both
meetings, this allowed us to save time and ensure good participation at meetings and sharing of information”.
Despite the practicality of this solution, according to KIs, at that stage, it was likely time to reconsider the role of
the GIFMM, and to merge the GIFMM migration coordination mechanism into a more comprehensive
humanitarian coordination led by OCHA.
As highlighted above, there have been a number of very evident successes in terms of the coordination between
UNICEF and the GIFMM lead agencies, UNHCR and IOM. There have been a good number of shared and successful
advocacy and communications campaigns, most noteworthy being the advocacy for and support of the roll out of
the ETP, the campaign against statelessness and shared messaging to prevent xenophobia and generate a
supportive social attitude towards migrant children and families. UNICEF Colombia’s emergency team has been
effectively recording lessons learned from GIFMM related coordination over the course of the VMC.
According to KIs, the GIFMM is seen to have reduced the visibility of non-lead agencies such as UNICEF but has
not provided the needed support required through its annual appeals and fundraising efforts. In one example
from WASH, resource mobilisation by the GIFMM in 2021 had not even reached ten per cent of the assessed need,
a figure that sharply contrasts with the effectiveness of UNICEF’s leadership and support role in the response on
behalf of all humanitarian actors and where the cost of equipment and maintenance in border regions is very high.
UNICEF is finding itself holding the responsibility for on-going costs of repair and maintenance of WASH systems,
without corresponding support from the GIFMM coordination platform. Looking to the future, UNICEF will need
to consider an exit strategy or other strategies to those utilised to date to enable other actors to take over the
maintenance of some of the key WASH infrastructure along the main migration routes. For UNICEF staff, the
105 R4V website specifies 10 local GIFMMs: Antioquia, Arauca, Bogotá and region, Cesar, Caribbean Coast, La Guajira, Nariño, Norte de Santander, Santander,
and Valle del Cauca.
51
processes for prioritisation on the use of GIFMM funding remains unclear.
There have also been tensions generated between GIFMM partners. Some have to do with different approaches
between the agencies and understandings of the nature of the crisis and approaches to be used. As highlighted
above, partners have expressed a lack of presence of UNICEF in the Centros de Apoyo and Puntos de Servicios,
where apart from providing WASH facilities, UNICEF is not seen to play a predominant role inchild protection. As
commented by many, while field teams and emergency staff have gone above and beyond to work effectively in
coordination with others, there have been many KIs, both partners and donors, who perceive that UNICEF’s senior
management could be doing more to support UNICEF’s emergency response capacity.106
Lack of resources affect UNICEF’s capacity to coordinate among GIFMM/Cluster partners
According to UNICEF KIs the demands of coordination have effectively doubled with the introduction of the
GIFMM platform on migration and the Cluster on the COVID 19 response. This has dramatically increased the time
that staff need to spend on coordination.107 As one noted: “The agency simply does not have the funding,
personnel and capacity to provide needed leadership and coordination of actors in the current context”. According
to UNICEF team members, not only does this detract from their original jobs, because the coordination role is so
time consuming, but coordination also suffers.
A further point is evidence generation and information management is suffering because this is a sub-aspect of
coordination that requires a special skillset. UNICEF Colombia has engaged consultants through a PCA with
iMMAP108 to provide support in generation of information for the education cluster, WASH, assisting the staffer
in La Guajira who helps with the leadership of the local Equipo Local de Coordinación. This support has been key
for information management, needs assessments, tools, figures, factsheets, and information products beyond the
responsibility of the M&E team. However, It is not yet sufficient. As one example CP during the course of data
collection, the ET was unable to find any consolidated lists of CP cases that had been identified by GIFMM partners
either at local or national level as a basis for understanding the prevalence of GBV, domestic violence or other CP
risks. In the GIFMM, there is a CP coordination mechanism. CP t the national roundtable it is co-chaired by IOM
and UNHCHR and UNICEF co-leads those of Norte de Santander, Arauca, and Atlántico where it has field offices.
It appears that in other localities, different agencies assume leadership on a case-by-case basis. These local
roundtables have different levels of progress. Although they are concerned with sharing information on child
protection cases, not all of them keep monthly clear statistics. Nor do they have standard reporting format or
partners reporting on the status of their cases. According to KIs, in some regions, there are partners who take
action to activate protection route. This lack of coordination in some parts of the country constitutes a major gap,
which UNICEF cannot address because it lacks presence.
Among those areas where UNICEF is present, only Arauca generates consolidated reporting from partners on
unaccompanied or separated children with cases identified by the local partners of the Mesa de la Niñez during
2021. The lack of consolidated information among GIFMM partners on UASC and CP cases in the other two
localities also constitutes a concerning information gap and shows the coordination system is not working for
children on the move. The fact that there are no statistics or information generated at these lower levels, explains
why there can be no national reporting on CP issues, other than that provided by ICBF (see above section on CP).
Therefore, UNICEF and partners have only the slightest idea of the actual number of cases and their profile. These
are the cases that finally make their way to be treated within the formal Colombian child protection system.
At national level, only IOM and UNHCR receive resources for coordination and reporting on CP. This significantly
limits UNICEF’s capacity to take on a role which in most contexts is aligned with its mandate. Currently, the
resources UNICEF receives only allow it to co-lead the local roundtables in the three aforementioned territories,
not at the national level where GIFMM leads the CP AOR.
The current situation presents many challenges: one is the lack of standardised reporting tools, in order to capture
CP information in a uniform way from all partners, and the other is related to the opportunity that could be given
to articulate and coordinate actions, combining mandates and perspectives, around the promotion of the rights
of migrant children and adolescents. Currently, each agency or organisation structures its response plan and
shares it but does not necessarily coordinate at the local level. UNICEF, for its part, is trying to reach areas where
there is no one else, to broaden the scope of GIFMM's actions, to bring added value where services are the
weakest. The result of the GIFMM leadership of the CP AOR is a porous patchwork without meaningful
coordination or a shared information system to help identify where the gaps and which areas to prioritise.
106 Lack of UNICEF senior management experience in and commitment to emergency response is also highlighted in UNICEF’s 2019 Humanitarian Review.
107 Funding for coordination depends on resources and the HAC is largely underfunded. This is obviously outside UNICEF’s control. The CO has made every
possible effort to raise funds.
108 An NGO that provides information management services to humanitarian and development organizations. See https://immap.org/
52
Improving coordination on COVID-19 CBI programming
Document review and KIs suggest that communication with all GIFMM partners engaged in HCT programmes is
lacking. According to one KI:
Particularly where IOM and UNHCR were implementing large CBIs, it is necessary to coordinate in order to avoid
duplication of efforts, to agree on eligibility criteria of the beneficiaries, to ensure that the most vulnerable
households are prioritised, reached and to send accurate and consistent messages to the community.
CBIs offers a great opportunity to enhance work on women’s empowerment and to introduce GBV mitigation
measures. According to UNICEF Colombia and IP informants the GIFMM working group on CBI should be a more
dynamic and strategic space. More horizontal coordination and collaboration in the CBI working group is needed
at the national level while also ensuring vertical coordination – in terms of ensuring access to the same information
at the national level is shared at the local level.
Internal coordination in UNICEF CO – horizontally by sector and vertically between field and CO
UNICEF Colombia’s new CDP is designed to break down UNICEF’s traditional silos and facilitate sectors to come
together around thematic, rather than sectoral approaches. This is a very positive step to remedy a situation in
which partners see the ‘silo’ approach inherent to some of UNICEF’s programmes hinder the potential for
multisectoral programming and geographic convergence. In some cases this leads to inefficiencies and reduced
quality of interventions. Much of UNICEF's effectiveness seems to lie in its long-standing experience in sectoral
interventions (e.g.: health, nutrition, education, protection and WASH), which are supported by decades of
experience, strong technical expertise, and logistical capacities. In some cases, sectoral interventions operated
with little interaction or integration with other sectors which KIs observed as a challenge. Limited integration also
occurred outwards, i.e., with local partners working with UNICEF. KIs further suggest that experiences from the
field could be better translated into needed advocacy at CO and LACRO levels on behalf of Venezuelan migrant
children and their families.
Coordination between UNICEF CO and LACRO
According to KIs, the coordination between UNICEF COs of the region, and with LACRO, on the response strategies
and modalities has been limited. Early in the emergency, CO Colombia enjoyed a privileged position in terms of
special meetings with UNICEF Venezuela, with LACRO working to create communications channels between the
Representatives from both countries. Technical support was also provided by the Emergency Section of LACRO at
the outset of the response. However, no formal coordination arrangements exist between Colombia, Venezuela
and all other COs involved in the response. Further, it is perceived that during the pandemic, technical support
from LACRO to Colombia disappeared and has yet to be reinstated, leaving a significant gap in support and
guidance to the different sectors.
Coordination
Strengths Challenges
LACRO support at the outset of the L2 R4V platform has generated a patchwork with large gaps
in coordination at field and national level
Effective leveraging of R4V to rapidly roll out the ETP
LACRO supported engagement with VNZ CO Lack of resources, dedicated staff and insufficient
investment in information management aspects of
coordination
UNICEF Colombia used its limited resources to enhance Gaps in internal coordination between sectors
coordination where it had a territorial presence
EQ10: To what extent did the activation of the UNICEF Level 2 emergency procedure in 2019 in Colombia, and
later L3 designation of COVID-19 emergency, allow for more effective scale-up of UNICEF’s support (from all
levels) and response to address the critical needs and provide increased protection and services to
Venezuelan migrant children and their families? To what extent did the L2 designation
facilitate/change/simplify procedures at CO/RO/HQ levels?
Summary of key findings:
The L2 designation at LACRO level did not significantly impact UNICEF Colombia operations. The main benefit of
the L2 designation appears to have been the ability of UNICEF to raise the profile of the VMC and mobilise
53
additional funds for the Response, as did the L3 designation for UNICEF’s COVID-19. UNICEF Colombia effectively
combined the needs of both responses to ensure efficiencies (see section on Efficiency below). However,
according to key informants, the L2 designation did not significantly change, facilitate or simplify procedures at
CO level. UNICEF Colombia emergency staff continued to face a number of administrative and contracting
challenges to mount the L2 response in a timely manner. Opening new field offices appears to have been a
decision of CO that was not directly linked to the Regional L2 Activation.
According to informants, the main value of the L2 regional emergency activation has been to attract humanitarian
funding to the response, although, as will be discussed in the Regional Synthesis Report, this despite the fact that
some countries in the region never declared themselves to be in a state of emergency. This matter will be further
explored and validated at a later stage with UNICEF LACRO and EMOPS but perceptions of both donors, partners
and UNICEF Colombia reflect the following views.
In Colombia, UNICEF KIs did not see that the L2 had led to a significant simplification of procedures. In terms of
scale up of the response, the geographic expansion through, among others, the opening of new field offices,
already started in 2018 before the L2 activation in 2019, and therefore the L2 activities did not influence this
decision.
While the L2 designation is supposed to allow for more rapid, flexible, and simplified contracting methods in order
to allow for a timely response, it appears that in Colombia, these simplified procedures have not been applied nor
did they help lighten the heavy administrative weight of the emergency response. Some specific matters that
could have been facilitated but were not include:
- Procurement and warehousing of supplies: the response has depended heavily on partners capacity to assist
UNICEF with the procurement and distribution of goods and supplies. UNICEF’s response has involved the
distribution of kits of various types – hygiene kits, school kits, nutritional kits, and PPE among others. Several
field teams commented on having to relocate offices and suffering from inadequate transportation to cover
the areas under their responsibility.
- Project Cooperation Agreements: Contracting of partners, which was intended to be rendered speedier and
more flexible under the L2 was not particularly adjusted, although additional partners were brought on
board. As highlighted above, partners have continuously highlighted UNICEF’s contracting and payments
measures did not allow for a needed cashflow to enable them to work steadily and show results throughout
the year.
- Contracting of UNICEF staff for scale up of the response: As highlighted above, a main challenge for the
emergency response has been to recruit, hire and retain staff required by the response. UNICEF Colombia
has a small but competent emergency team. All staff, but in particular emergency staff and those in the field,
have been stretched to a maximum, as they have faced both the L2 and L3 emergencies simultaneously. It
appears from staffing tables and key informants that international surge capacity was not used in the L2
response – even though it might have been very helpful to put in motion the response during the first six
months. The arrival of a senior international CP officer with experience in emergency response will likely
support the office to a great extent.
- At the level of LACRO and EMOPs, it is unclear whether there was sufficient support provided over the period
of the L2 and L3 to assist UNICEF Colombia to develop proposals, identify partners and simplify procedures
to ensure a high-quality response in a timely manner. What is clear is that the COVID-19 pandemic
dramatically reduced technical visits from LACRO and EMOPS to provide technical support to the two
emergencies when these were needed most. It is also unclear whether LACRO has followed all the emergency
procedures verifications as required (see box above): while a OIAI verification mission was carried out in
2020,109 it is not clear that any real-time monitoring of the L2 was initiated by LACRO or EMOPS.
It has been suggested by some informants, including donors, that UNICEF Colombia could have been more
supportive of the humanitarian response implied by the L2, including at LACRO and HQ levels, and that resources
were not mobilised in a timely manner to develop the types of proposals that were of interest to humanitarian
donors. And at field level, there are also questions as to whether the formulation of an L2 Emergency that is
nationality-based, and only applies to the Venezuelan refugees and migrants, was really an appropriate response
from the outset. A large number of KIs have raised concerns that here, UNICEF and other R4V partners are
contributing to xenophobic attitudes towards Venezuelan migrants by building a humanitarian response that
mainly applies to them.
According to a KI, “The VMC is just a large-scale migration that should be calling our attention to the bigger issue
109 https://www.unicef.org/auditandinvestigation/documents/2020-oiai-audit-report-co
54
of children on the move, not their nationality. The L2 as a nationality-based response may be doing more harm
than good.”
7.3 Coverage
The evaluation of the coverage of UNICEF’s response is guided by the following overarching question: To what
extent were the most vulnerable Venezuelan refugee/migrant girls and boys and their families reached with
needed protection, assistance and empowerment? This section will address the different specific evaluation
questions under this overarching question.
EQ11: What were the internal and external factors that enabled or constrained UNICEF’s ability to provide
the most vulnerable Venezuelan migrants and refugee children, their families and host communities with
protection and assistance according to their needs?
Summary of key findings:
 Factors that enabled were UNICEF’s territorial presence in the areas most highly affected by the VMC, and
the quality of partners.
 Factors that constrained include the lack of key vulnerability profiles being identified, and the lack
strategies and models designed to address these profiles given magnitude and geographic dispersion of the
VMC phenomenon, the lack of resources both human, technical, and material.
 The ET finds that the issue of coverage is the weakest aspect of the UNICEF Colombia and Regional
response: challenges of resource mobilisation did not allow UNICEF to address the scale of the VMC.
Coverage is primarily affected by the ability to identify those in need, their location, profile and vulnerabilities,
and the capacity of the agency to address these with practical measures that correspond with their rights and
protection needs. Overall, it implies that the response, and its programmes, are designed to correspond with the
scale of needs identified. These EQs are difficult to answer, since vulnerability profiles and needs of the most
vulnerable Venezuelan children have not yet been clearly identified, some three years into the response. This
represents a major gap in the response. While UNICEF can list many different vulnerabilities, there are limited
specific strategies in place to ensure the most vulnerable are reached with needed protection, assistance, and
empowerment.
In field visits, focus group discussions and key informant interviews, it has been widely acknowledged that
enabling factors are UNICEF’s field presence in key areas affected by the VMC, as well as the engagement of strong
local partners, many of which had no previous experience on migration issues. Among these, KIs are CIDEMOS
and Fundación Significarte on child protection and Fundación Renacer on addressing sexual exploitation and other
forms of GBV. These partners and their knowledge acquired on issues around migration are an important resource
that UNICEF needs to value and retain.
• UASC have been addressed through activation of institutional routes, such as for GBV survivors. No evaluation
or follow up of the adequacy of the measures adopted, typology of the victims, outcomes and numbers has
been made available. Apart from Arauca, UNICEF field offices are not compiling statistics of CP cases from
among GIFMM partners. As there are no common reporting formats that can be shared between
humanitarian actors there is no information management system for CP cases. For UASC in Arauca, the ET was
informed of 31 cases supported by UNICEF partner in 2021 and that creation of 116 places in foster families
is in the process. But the total number of UASC cases identified by GIFFM in 2021 is 786. Similar information
is not available for either Norte de Santander or La Guajira since this data is not currently being consolidated.
• Pregnant women have been effectively referred to health services supported by UNICEF. Save the Children,
UNHCR and IOM have additional agreements as do other NGOs. To be noted is the lack of paediatric care
available for migrant children, and limited reproductive health services for adolescents and women.
• While adolescents at risk of early marriages/unions have been identified as a highly vulnerable group, they do
not seem to be considered through any specific UNICEF programming at field level.110 KIs report that while
UNICEF Colombia was working to support the Global Programme to End Child Marriage111 with field
110 Colombia CO participate in the Interagency Regional Program on CMEU since 2018. Among the specific results of this process are:
i) inclusion of specific measures on CMEU in the actual National Development Plan 2018-2022.
ii) Specific interventions made in the Congress to discuss two bills to eliminate the exceptions of the civil code on CMEU.
iii) The creation of a round table with government institutions (Ministry of Health, Ministry of Education, National Department of Planning, Colombian Family
Welfare Institute, UN Women, UNFPA, Plan international) since 2018.
iv) Colombia CO undertook the first study on CMEU (2010-2019) in the country. This study will be published in 2022.
v) Contributions on CMEU have been made to the social policy document which the National Department of Planning is elaborating to protect children against
all forms of violence
111 https://www.unicef.org/documents/unfpa-unicef-global-programme-end-child-marriage-phase-i-country-profiles-2016-2019
55
information, it was never provided with any resources to participate in this platform and so has had to
abandon this task. UNICEF Colombia has concentrated its advocacy agenda and technical assistance on
positioning CMEU in the legal and public policy framework at the national level, as a basis for working with
local administrations and to develop mitigatory approaches to address this harmful practice. Although the CO
has carried out very specific work in areas such as Atlántico, the entities require a clear framework for their
action. For example, they do not know how to act in terms of protection against matrimonios y uniones
tempranas since the guideline on GBV is very weak in this issue. Civil society actors have pointed to the need
for a clear understanding of this problematic and the government responsibilities in order to duly and mainly
protect girls and adolescents from this form of violence.
• Early Childhood Development activities for under fives are not included in education activities. This age range
is only targeted occasionally through Child Friendly Spaces along the route and through mobile teams
(Chiquivan)
• Access to education remains limited both for migrants and host communities. LCs have been established to
bring learners up to a level at which they can integrate into regular classrooms, but evidence suggests that
this happening much more slowly. For those families fortunate enough to have their children in an LC, their
vulnerabilities have been taken into account through specific measures such as psychosocial support and cash
transfers in specific cases.
• PSEA is strongly integrated as an institutional issue that has been strengthened in PCAs with IPs. However,
other than the gender analysis which took place in 2021, LGTBI specific channels for identification and
attention are missing. On PSEA, there a is a specific strengthening capacity developing process with ethnic
organisations acting as implementing partners in La Guajira, Chocó, Amazonas and Cauca departments among
others. Similarly, children with disabilities are unaccounted for, not captured and weakly addressed in the
overall design of the response. WASH is an exception as UNICEF WASH facilities are mainly adapted for
children with disabilities. However in many cases access to services in transit hubs and in settlements is
impossible for these children, and parents in learning centres also commented on the lack of specialist
attention to children with autism for example.
Exploring new models that lend themselves to scalability
It possible to compare approaches taken in other VMC affected countries that are in fact scalable. In Peru, UNICEF
has supported the Ministry of Education to pilot a (now) national level platform for registration of children in
Peruvian schools. First piloted in Lima, the platform was quickly expanded to other regions of the country. This
school registration portal allows the Ministry of Education to immediately access critical information regarding
where demand for education is beyond local capacity, and where there exist resources that are not being used to
their full capacity. The system can generate critical data needed by educational authorities to map needs against
resources and to mobilise new resources where necessary.112 When the ET proposed that this might be a tool of
value in the Colombian context, informant reported this was problematic due to lack of internet access- Despite
this fact on the ground the entire roll out of the ETP registration is carried out online with support of numerous
partners on the ground, including UNICEF. The two processes could be inter-operable. In other countries, such as
Trinidad and Tobago, the pandemic was an opportunity to explore the advantages of access to online learning
platforms which can be highly effective for adolescent learners who do not have access to in-person learning.
These options do not even seem to have been considered or explored in Colombia.
Limitations on institutional capacity building as a response to large scale emergencies
While the pathway to scalability in the long-term is expanded capacity by the state to address the needs of the
most vulnerable will not happen overnight. It is for this reason that a humanitarian response is needed, to
compensate for the lack of state capacity to address critical protection needs at scale. In other words, capacity
building and complementary humanitarian actions are not mutually exclusive. It is critical to addressing the needs
of the most vulnerable that UNICEF find an appropriate balance. In Colombia, UNICEF’s approach favours
supporting capacity building of government institutions to provide health services, CP and education, but state
entities have limited capacity to absorb the high level of demand of the Venezuelan migrant outflow. Institutions
such as ICBF and key actors at departmental and municipal levels have raised the concern that they simply do not
have the staffing and resources in place to respond to the broad range of CP issues arising as part of the VMC-
This means many vulnerable cases fall through the cracks. KIs note particularly a lack of coverage of marginalised
groups not accounted for, the illegal flows including adolescent girls, victims of sexual exploitation and trafficking,
all of which go below the radar of overstretched CP systems.
112 Critical information needs include how many children in specific localities are newly registering or re-registering, which can enable the authorities to
determine where additional teaching staff and other resources are needed.
56
To compound the issue, both UNICEF and partners have identified the rapid turnover of staff as being a key
challenge. One noted that: “As soon as they are trained, they change jobs leading to a new person comes in who
requires the same training”. After decades of capacity building in Colombia it appears to be time to focus on
building the capacity of governmental institutions to ensure their own training needs are sustained internally,
rather than continuing to rely on external actors.
COVID 19 is expected to have increased illegal migration flows
COVID-19 has also played a role in impairing needed coverage. Border closures and lockdowns have limited access
to regular administrative processes. The pandemic has pushed migrants to use the illegal routes that are rife with
trafficking and exploitation, which circumvent the formal assistance mechanisms and areas where humanitarian
actors are present.
Limited and short-term funding of the humanitarian response
KIs highlight limited and short-term funding as a key factor affecting the response and the consolidation of UNICEF
teams and the engagement of partners needed at scale. Lack of experienced partners has been an additional
factor and time and resources have been invested in upgrading IPs reporting capacity and adherence to
humanitarian standards, including around gender issues, PSEA, and AAP. Lack of sufficient resources, particularly
for UNICEF’s coordination role, has impacted effectiveness of coordination platforms and reduced UNICEF
capacity for leverage in some key institutional and humanitarian working groups.
According to UNICEF Colombia, a major issue that has limited coverage has been the lack of funding of its appeals.
Frequent comparisons are made with the Syrian refugee crisis. Funding for the refugee operation in Turkey has
been many times greater than for the VMC on a per capita basis, allowing for both better coverage and more
comprehensive response.113The VMC, or more broadly migration of children on the move in the Americas, has
become one of the world’s forgotten crises.
EQ12: What factors have affected donors’ perceptions and willingness to fund UNICEF’s programmes and
appeals in line with assessed needs/targets?
Summary of key findings:
Donors’ perceptions have been affected by multiple factors both internal to and external to UNICEF. The main
factors affecting donor perceptions and willingness to fund UNICEF’s appeal and projects include:
 the ability to come up with innovative humanitarian initiatives and projects that address the needs of the
most vulnerable
 the ability to involve more donors: the US, sees itself as giving a disproportionate share of the humanitarian
financing for the VMC
 competition from other actors in which UNICEF needs to demonstrate its value for money as a UN agency,
because there are many other reputable response agencies proposing to achieve comparable outcomes for
less money.
Donors consider that UNICEF in some cases lacks specific data needed to adequately target its programming
towards those most vulnerable migrants and children on the move, and to address the protection risks
particularly facing adolescent girls who fall victim to trafficking and networks of sexual exploitation.
The ET relied heavily on feedback from donor representatives interviewed as part of the evaluation inception and
data collection phases. Donors suggested that in addition to interview data, the ET should request copies of Donor
Visit Reports to have a comprehensive and systematic view of donor perceptions based on their own field visits
and analysis. However, UNICEF CO and RO both informed the ET that they do not have or could not find copies of
these reports.
The ET had the opportunity to interview a range of donors to UNICEF Colombia, including ECHO, BPPRM and Global
Affairs Canada. All share similar perspectives on the role that UNICEF is currently playing in the response, the
rationale for supporting UNICEF and their expectations of UNCEF as a UN agency. They highlighted the following
points:
● For donors, UNICEF’s value-added consists in its ability to mobilise a wide range of actors, not least
government partners, around key CP issues to enable a rapid and effective humanitarian response at scale.
● UNICEF has a high degree of credibility and global expertise. UNICEF is not an NGO, and it is more costly than
donating directly to international or national NGOs. Donors consider that this added cost is worth it where
113 This, according to UNICEF, would suggest that the VMC has been somewhat lower on the international agenda than was the Syria Refugee situation – for
obvious reasons that these refugees are effectively being absorbed by LACRO countries, rather than being at the doorstep of Europe or North America.
57
UNICEF is able to generate evidence from the field and international experience, and influence government
and other actors to adopt actions and policies aligned with humanitarian standards and best practices.
● For smaller donors with less personnel and capacity, it is often easier to pass larger sums through UNICEF,
rather than contracting directly with smaller partners, even though smaller partners are increasingly
competitive in many fields, as well as being more cost effective. In Latin America there are a growing number
of competent NGO partners who have a national or international reach. A localisation agenda suggests that
donors should be supporting these local and national partners, just as UNICEF is doing. In this sense, the
funding context is more competitive than elsewhere.
Based on these expectations and realities, informants suggest that their assessment of UNICEF Colombia’s
performance is mixed.
UNICEF’s technical support and partnerships on child protection issues: UNICEF is seen to have been able to
identify strong IPs with a good reading of the context and broad CP expertise. These partners have allowed UNICEF
to solve complicated situations. Generally, CP donors spoke well of UNICEF Colombia’s Emergency Team and
specific interventions and have in some cases requested UNICEF’s support in other places on UASCs and CP but
where UNICEF does not have a permanent presence, such as in the Darien with other migrant populations. WASH
is also considered to be an added value of UNICEF among humanitarian donors.
Capacity to mobilise a broader range of donors: Some important donors want to see UNICEF being more proactive
and seeking funding further afield. The USA in particular is providing some 80 per cent of the total funding for the
VMC humanitarian response, which it considers is imbalanced. According to the interviewed donor
representatives, UNICEF has a role to play in attracting a more diverse group of donors. This is where the CO,
regional offices and HQ all need to work in coordination to ensure that UNICEF is reaching out to diverse donors-
from the public and private sectors. UNICEF maintains a significant corps of fundraising staff at various levels, and
this could be more effectively mobilised for the VMC.
Lack of comprehensive needs assessments linked to programming and reporting: Donors, like other informants,
find themselves somewhat bewildered by the fact that three years into the VMC, much of the information
regarding the needs and specific vulnerabilities of refugee and migrant children remain anecdotal. They highlight
that UNICEF’s targets and strategy need to be based on evidence of the actual numbers of children at risk and their
needs. However, specific figures vary wildly from one partner to another, and many times cannot be pinned down.
This lack of solid needs assessments produced in a timely manner frustrates donors considerably. According to one
donor representative:
UNICEF tells us: there are high numbers of children out-of-school, there is a lot of human trafficking, there is a
lot of GBV and early marriage, but they never tell you concretely how they know this, what are the figures,
what percentage of Venezuelan children are or are not in school, and where exactly the problem or bottleneck
lies and how to fix it. I do not know why it is so difficult to find ways to generate and manage information - to
have registry systems to register the percentage of children in or out-of-school or to have more solid data to
be able to make this type of analysis and then to push for the resources that are needed. The Norwegian
Refugee Council has done this baseline survey on school reopening, which is very good, but it comes very late
in the operation and could be extended to more areas and have an impact that would then allow us to see
what the needs are and meet them as a first step.
This type of observation shows that donors lacking confidence in the lack of tangible data as a basis for HAC appeals
and overall humanitarian programming.
Need for innovation and scalable, timely humanitarian solutions: Linked to the above, while a major challenge
for UNICEF has been lack of funding for its existing programmes there is a willingness by donors to provide funding
for initiatives that can be brought to scale. Donor representatives assess that some programmes of UNICEF are
very costly and can only be delivered on a small scale, whereas a humanitarian crisis of the scale of the VMC
requires initiatives that can address the needs of the many, including the most vulnerable among Venezuelan
refugees and migrants.
Supporting GoC openness to accepting assistance: Lessons can be learned from a more detailed comparison
between the VMC and the Syrian refugee flight. Some informants have noted that a significant difference was that
Turkey has been willing to receive funding on a significant scale to assist it to meet both immediate humanitarian
and longer-term social integration objectives, which led to the creation of the EU Facility for Refugees in Turkey.114
114 Although often characterised in the media as a large sum of money given by the EU to Turkey, the EU Facility for Refugees in Turkey was established to
fund projects for the benefit of refugees in Turkey. General budget support or sector budget support were not proposed or used by the Facility, neither were
these modalities requested by the Republic of Turkey. Rather the Facility was used to fund a number of humanitarian and development projects that were
agreed to between the Turkish government and various EU contribution mechanisms.
58
This could be a model for the GoC and donors to explore. However, a major obstacle has been the GoC’s
ambivalence about receiving assistance that clearly it so badly needs. As has been observed by many informants
there are many sectors in which Colombia has struggled to fulfil the needs of its own citizens, let alone absorb the
needs of an additional 1.7 million Venezuelan migrants and Colombian returnees. Here informants consider that
UNICEF should continue to play a more active role in helping the GoC to identify key structural reforms that will
allow it to considerably strengthen its ability to serve both Venezuelan migrants and ultimately better serve its
own citizens.
Coverage
Strengths Challenges
Outreach activities for health, WASH and C4D Definition of adequate targets
UNICEF’s role in institutional strengthening Limited Institutional capacity to absorb Venezuelan
migrants under emergency and COVID-19 conditions
Development of UNICEF’s COVID-19 CBI response Short term funding
Failure to address major bottlenecks such as data on
availability on school spaces and CP
UNICEF’s COVID-19 CBI response (very small scale)
7.4 Coherence and Coordination
The evaluation of the coherence and coordination of UNICEF’s response is guided by the following overarching
question: What are the main factors that have led to internal and external coherence and coordination of UNICEF’s
response or lack thereof? This section will address the different specific evaluation questions under this
overarching question.
EQ13: What factors led to or detracted from UNICEF’s ability to balance its response to local needs and
national priorities?
Summary of key findings:
UNICEF response was originally linked to the 2018 GoC request for assistance to address the VMC, so was very
much tied to national level priorities. Prior to the VMC, UNICEF was in a long-term development modality, and
was in close cooperation with GoC ministries on jointly agreed upon workplans. The response has continued to
be closely tied to the priorities of various national ministries and institutions, such as the MEN and ICBF, and
their requests for assistance and technical support. The wider extension of UNICEF’s presence through the
opening of field offices has led to UNICEF’s ability to better balance national priorities with local needs. Going
forward, it will be important for UNICEF to reflect back to national institutions the gaps and barriers created by
efforts to implement national policies at the local level, and to generate creative solutions to overcoming these
barriers.
The initial response of UNICEF was to support the needs expressed by the national government in 2018.
Subsequently UNICEF linked its actions to the R4V- GIFMM platforms, also articulated based on national priorities
and agreements. Based on KIIs and field visits, it appears that on balance the response is heavily tailored to
alignment with national priorities regarding migration as a factor of national development. This means that the
GoC is much more interested in those Venezuelan migrants with the intention to remain and settle permanently
in Colombian than those Venezuelan migrants who are transiting to other countries, returning to Venezuela or
engaged in pendular movements in and around border areas. Following this approach and interest of the national
government, UNICEF has generated internal coherence and coordination through the design of its new CPD, which
aligns actions on migration along thematic, rather than sectoral lines, closely linked to agreements and specific
government requests at the national level.
A key factor that has led to UNICEF’s ability to balance its response to local needs and national priorities has been
the process of establishment of field offices in areas most affected by the VMC (see section on Appropriateness
above). This has allowed UNICEF Colombia to have direct engagement with local actors from civil society and
municipalities and departmental authorities, and also to be more aware of the gaps and bottlenecks that block
national level police and which inhibit inclusion of Venezuelan migrant children and their families at the local level.
59
UNICEF Colombia has not yet found the needed balance and coherence between local needs and national
priorities, where local needs are so massive and resources – of the state, civil society and other response actors –
are so limited. UNICEF will be working most strategically when it develops a clear advocacy plan that draws on
well documented local realities and ensures that these are effectively shared with national authorities. The
national government cannot act without required evidence and in some cases, may require strong and united
UNICEF/R4V advocacy to impel it to do so.
EQ14: What is UNICEF’s added value in the Venezuela Outflow response?
Summary of key findings:
UNICEF’s value added in the L2 response and more generally, for children on the move, is its mandate to defend
and advocate for child rights, regardless of nationality and migration status. Donors and other actors look to
UNICEF to set and uphold humanitarian standards for children on the move and their families in the context of
the VMC, while also providing technical advice to government and other agencies on issues that particularly
affect children, across sectors. UNICEF’s multi-sectoral mandate is an advantage, but also leads to its resources
being spread very thin on the ground.
Of the sectors that stand out for partners and beneficiaries is UNICEF’s contribution to WASH, which has strongly
come to be associated with UNICEF’s contribution to both the R4V presence and its own programmatic
interventions.
UNICEF’s value added has also manifested in strengthening the capacity of its implementing partners in the area
of migration, which is a new issue which many civil society organisations needed support to address.
When key informants in the field were asked about UNICEF’s added value in the VMC Response, the response was
clear and emphatic: WASH! UNICEF partners repeatedly highlighted WASH as UNICEF’s most valuable
contributions – through its high level of technical expertise in the area and the competence of its partner
organisations. The COVID-19 pandemic has highlighted the importance of WASH as a key pre-requisite for any and
all humanitarian and development interventions. Handwashing stations, for example, have taken on an
unprecedented value which can be recognised by all. UNICEF staff repeatedly noted that UNICEF Colombia utilises
WASH sector activities as the spearhead to enter and get to know new communities and as a basis for other sector
programming initiatives. WASH is also seen as an uncontroversial contribution within the humanitarian response
which both local and national governments welcome. It does not challenge government capacities, resources, and
procedures, but brings a contribution which municipal budgets are hard pressed to cover. UNICEF’s leadership in
this sector allows for a seamless transition from the needs of the humanitarian crisis to those of longer-term
development.
Across other sectors, the value added of UNICEF’s contribution is less visible to partners and donors. The view of
its cluster leadership within the GIFMM-Platform – in other areas such as education and CP is more variable.
UNHCR and IOM lead the CP working group in GIFMM at the national level. UNICEF leads the OCHA-led cluster CP
AOR which was created in 2020 and tackles other emergencies than migration.
UNICEF staff and partners tend to see that its value added derives from its mandate (children’s rights), its work
across sectors which should, in theory allow it to take a comprehensive and holistic approach, and also the
specificity of its areas of coordination leadership: education, CP and WASH. UNICEF’s multi-sectoral mandate is an
advantage, but also leads to its resources being spread very thin on the ground. Furthermore, a number of
partners and donors signalled that UNICEF’s added value as a UN agency could be strengthened in some instances,
in terms of spearheading sector leadership, advocacy and innovative, evidence-based, scalable models that
enhance the overall response and orient other partners in a meaningful way.
Where better resourced and more technical partners such as IOM, UNHCR, UNFPA and PAHO (vaccines) are also
providing some overlapping services and coverage directly to migrant children and families, it is important for
UNICEF to consider where the cost incurred by rolling out its own programming might be better used to
complement/combine programmes developed and rolled out by other partners. On the other hand, UNICEF’s
investment in supporting the National Civil Registry to establish birth registration units in hospitals receiving a
high number of births of migrant children is particularly well aligned with UNICEF’s mandate. Overall, the efforts
to prevent statelessness among refugees and migrant children appears particularly impactful, both in the short-
term humanitarian response and in longer-term development planning for a child rights-based approach by the
GoC.
In the education sector the added value of UNICEF consists in the implementation and promotion of the Círculos
60
de Aprendizaje model to address the needs of children displaced by the internal armed conflict, in order to
facilitate enrolment of children to the public schools. While this model in itself is valid, it does not require UNICEF
to implement it. UNICEF could be setting its sights higher, aspiring for measures that would transform the situation
and overcome current bottlenecks by providing both evidence needed for sound decision making as well as
resourcing of the education sector. This would support both the VMC response, and also help the MEN and SDEs
to rationalise the allocation of resources to ensure coverage of children in the educational sector.
Colombia’s new CPD offers a key opportunity for UNICEF to boost its value added by building synergies between
its work at the level of the PDET Strategy – to develop models for the integration of migrants in local level
municipal development plans and processes – while ensuring that migrants experience at field level is transformed
into advocacy positions for improvements in resourcing and policy at national level.
EQ15: To what extent were meaningful partnerships and/or coordination mechanisms established with other
key actors (e.g., government at national and local levels, civil society, NGOs, academia, private sector, other
UN agencies etc.), to assist, include and empower the most vulnerable Venezuelan children and their families?
Summary of key findings:
UNICEF Colombia has played a key role in engaging local and national actor on the topic of children on the move
and has built capacities to address the rights of migrant children among a wide range of partners. Of UNICEF’s
VMC IPs, 25 are Colombian organisations and 11 are community-based. The ET considers this a positive
contribution to strengthening national capacity to address future emergencies and migration situations by
building capacity of civil society organisations, on migration, emergency and humanitarian response.
In terms of meaningful partnerships, UNICEF is generally seen to have added value through identification of and
capacity development of good implementing partners. In the case of Colombia, this includes strong partnerships
with local, national and regional NGOs and government authorities.
The emergency response to the VMC called for an increased field presence in peripheral and hard-to-reach border
areas where GoC presence has been historically limited. It has also necessitated strong linkages with development
workstreams. To achieve this, UNICEF Colombia has sought to work with a wider array of partners with a solid
track record who also help ensure relevance of interventions, smoothing transition to longer-term development
work.
PCAs were tailored by including key aspects relevant for UNICEF as gender, AAP, PSEA and C4D. In terms of what
makes partnership with UNICEF meaningful, partners appreciated that UNICEF brings a strong technical capacity
for them to learn and strengthen their own practices. But partners also highlighted that there could be areas for
improvement. For example, in the transition from a development context to emergency/humanitarian work, they
would have liked to receive more support from UNICEF – to receive training for example on UNICEF’s humanitarian
standards and the CCC, which were never fully described to them; to have more opportunities to share their
lessons learned and to learn from each other. While UNICEF maintains that IPs are far more than sub-contractors
and are full partners, it appears that there could also be more sharing and listening to IP voices when developing
response strategies.
UNICEF has also developed capacity building initiatives on administrative and financial processes, to strengthen
local teams and networks, and also to strengthen partners in their ability to meet UNICEF procurement standards,
particularly in terms of the internal measures to prevent and address cases of sexual exploitation and abuse.
UNICEF depends heavily on unrestricted private sector fundraising (PSFR) for implementation of its CPD as well as
for advocating child rights among the private sector and it maintains a significant fundraising staff to carry this
out. UNICEF developed business-friendly materials and strengthened partnerships with major and medium-sized
companies, including Banco de Bogotá, Banco de Occidente, CLARO, NEXA and Kimberly Clark, as well as business
platforms. In the future, it is expected that these partnerships may enhance the migration component of UNICEF
Colombia’s new CPD.
UNICEF has also relied on the experience and capacity of other international NGOs, such as NRC in Education and
for the CBI, World Vision. For CP, UNICEF relied mainly the GoC rutas to address UASC and GBV, with very limited
case management by ICBF. It signed agreements with public hospitals and health service providers to ensure access
of migrants (mainly pregnant women and children under five) to health services in some locations.
UNICEF has collaborated effectively on key campaigns and advocacy with IOM and UNHCR. UNICEF Colombia is
the UN Agency leader at country level on CMEU strategy along with UNFPA, UN Women and together with the
participation of GoC institutions and Plan International has enabled a strong advantage point on CMEU.
Coherence
61
Strengths Challenges
High quality partnerships with local, regional and national Limited training of partners and staff on
civil society and private sector organisations humanitarian modalities and standards/migration
(CCCs and GPF for COM)
WASH as a spearhead and bedrock for humanitarian and New and less experienced field staff occupying
development responses multiple coordination positions115
Focus on areas where GIFMM partners are less present Dysfunctional, inefficient and incoherent
(i.e., Tibu in the Northeast) coordination mechanisms
Leadership in key sectors
7.5 Efficiency
Key informants and UNICEF partners consider that the response overall has been slow to match the scale of the
emergency. This does not only apply to UNICEF. In an ideal world, institutional intelligence should have allowed all
UN agencies, particularly those with a presence in Venezuela, to predict and prepare for the imminent massive
exodus. Why did UNICEF Venezuela not sound the alarm earlier, so that preparedness measures could be taken by
UNICEF LACRO, COs and other UN partners?
EQ17: Were UNICEF strategies and programmatic interventions designed taking into account the activities,
capacities and efficiencies of other UN agencies, local governments, central governments, civil society
organisations, NGOs, private sector?
EQ18: When did coordination with national Governments, UN agencies and other major respondents avoid
overlaps and bridge gaps? If any, what are the reasons for the gaps and what is needed to close them?
Summary of key findings:
UNICEF’s programmatic interventions were designed based on its own mandate, strategic partnerships,
including those with UN, local government, central government, local government, civil society, and NGOs.
There have only been a few cases of duplication detected that should be easily corrected in the future. However,
in a humanitarian situation like the VMC, it appears that gaps are unavoidable until UNICEF and other partners
can develop more strategic, scalable approaches and attract needed donor support.
Strategies and programmatic interventions:
A number of key strategies and programmatic interventions have been effective and efficient because they have
drawn on the resources and mandates of a range of UN, NGO and government actors. Among those worthy of
note:
● The joint advocacy carried out between UNICEF, UNHCR and IOM for the establishment of the ETP in early
2020 and the roll out of the large-scale registration process through jornadas de inscripción, engaging many
partners to ensure that as many Venezuelan migrant and refugee families as possible could be officially
registered. Key gaps in the process have been the fact that families have not always been registered together,
leaving some parents and children in separate files, and different timeframes. However, efforts are currently
being made to correct these problems. A key synergy that should be sustained is working together to provide
human and financial resources to maximise the speed and efficiency of the registration process, in particular
reducing the current lag of more than six months between the pre-registration and second phases of the ETP
registration process.
● Other highly complementary experiences have included the collaboration of UNICEF with IOM and UNHCR
on the campaign to address statelessness, as well as a mass media campaign to address xenophobic
perceptions which were led by UNICEF’s communications teams in collaboration with the two other R4V lead
agencies.
● UNICEF’s PDET strategy has clearly sought to build on the specific role of municipal authorities and their
obligation to include all children and adolescents and generate specific projects and programmes to address
their needs. This has been expanded and will be increased under the CPD to ensure that the rights and needs
of migrant children and adolescents are also addressed with municipal development plans in key migration
affected areas identified by the GoC.
115 At the outset, the Emergencies section received the support of experienced personnel from the Regional Office who supported the training of UNV team
members, as well as a Standby Partnership Programme (SBP) staffer from the Global Cluster.
62
● A highly efficient and effective initiative has been to support the Registraduría General de la Nación in the
creation of birth registration units in hospitals in the border areas where many Venezuelan mothers are
giving birth, ensuring easy access to birth registration documents. It is important to note that of the 36 civil
registry units created by the time of the evaluation, only six had requested transitional support for staffing.
UNICEF has not covered any staff time. The cost of new positions has generally been absorbed by the
hospitals themselves. This is a positive contribution to long-term sustainability.
● Another cost-effective initiative has been to support civil society organisations to set new legal precedents
for treatment of children through for example, supporting the legal case of a boy who needed special support
to go to school. This strategy could be extended to declare Colombia in a state of unconstitutionality due to
the number of children that are unable to find a place in school.
● UNICEF has seen one of its main roles as building the capacity of State actors in relation to CP, WASH, and
other services areas. This strategy has at times reached limits due to the limited capacity of government
institutions to absorb both the technical support on offer from R4V partners as well as the capacity to take
action on behalf of Venezuelan migrant children and their families.
Potential areas of duplication
In the course of the evaluation KIs and the ET have identified a few areas where duplications exist. These could
generally be addressed by putting in place appropriate information management systems:
 Health care coverage provided through various UN and other agencies
The ET learned that health coverage has often been provided by various agencies to somewhat overlapping
populations. Some larger agencies with bigger budgets, such as IOM and UNHCR, have been able to negotiate
better rates or more comprehensive packages for health services than UNICEF. Coverage provided by these
different health programmes has allowed the same households to register for more than one package. It is the
understanding of the ET that UNICEF is addressing this potential overlap by withdrawing from providing primary
health coverage in its programming in the new HAC. The ET identified some challenges in the health sector where
OPS and IOM can eventually overlap with UNICEF sponsored services.
Some inconsistencies in coordination of nutrition case management for Venezuelan migrants and different
solutions in different locations led to inefficiencies of the intervention, such as supply and accessibility of
PumplyNuts. Overall, coordination mechanisms need to be strengthened to improve inter-agency arrangements
to ensure less duplication of the same type of services.
 Rationalising field presence around the country
Inherent in the context of multiple needs over a widely dispersed geographic area and multitude of partners, the
VMS, like responses to earlier crises across the globe, has brought out the risk of too great a concentration of
partners in particular locations and not enough in others. During the ET visit to Colombia, UNICEF teams were in
the process of exploring a move from Cucuta where there are many NGO and other actors present, to Tibu where
the needs of migrants are great but there are far fewer NGOs and other actors. Such openness of UNICEF to adjust
its strategy to go to more inaccessible places (with the risk of less visibility) is commendable.
 Rationalising fundraising appeals
A further area for rationalisation and seeking efficiencies is the process of fundraising and the production of the
R4V Regional and RMRPs as well as UNICEF’s own HACs. It is understood that there may be some overlap between
the HAC and the RMRP, where the RMRP funds raised go in part to fund the HAC. These areas of overlap need to
be clarified, while the RMRP process needs to be made more efficient. Key informants suggest that it does not
make sense to have a ballooning RMRP, as more and more humanitarian actors join the response, while the donors
are still the same with more humanitarian needs, and more crises in the world which require their funding.
It is suggested by some KIs that three years into the VMC response, there should be a transition to a multi-year
RMRP that helps move from humanitarian to more social and economic integration actions. Annual RMRPs are
considered highly inefficient, especially as they take place alongside HRP with less and less humanitarian and more
integration actions. UNICEF it seems has now accepted the idea of extending the period for the HAC appeals to
two years This should significantly reduce the workload of staff and provide a longer-term planning horizon.
Key gaps identified by UNICEF teams and partners
 Gaps in coordination and information gathering/management
There seem to be two significant gaps. One is in the area of information gathering/management, the other in
coordination. The two go hand in hand. Effective coordination should be put in place the mechanisms and
reporting formats that are needed to generate information on a vulnerability or gap. This information in turn
should allow additional actors, funds and programmatic response to be generated to meet the need. However,
63
both functions are done spasmodically, by sector and by geographic area. UNICEF’s field presence, while it has
expanded, remains limited overall since the scale of the VMC is at a national level. This can generate gaps in terms
of UNICEF’s key areas where, in the cluster system, UNICEF would normally play a coordinating role. This appears
to be the case in CP and education – where UNICEF is trying to coordinate in areas where it has a field presence,
but GIFMM has the national responsibility for CP AOR Coordination. This gap is also generated by the fact that
there appear to be limited resources to carry out all the coordination that the scale of the VMC would require.
This would require advocacy at LACRO and HQ levels to see how UNICEF’s coordination role could be extended
and associated costs covered which relate to its particular areas of expertise such as a WASH, Education, and the
Child Protection Area of Responsibility (AoR).
 Gaps generated by the absence of models and mechanisms
There are also gaps created by the lack of solutions or models. This has been explored above, particularly in
education where UNICEF as a key actor needs to play a more ambitious and transformational role to identify how
the VMC can serve as an opportunity for Colombia to overcome historic bottlenecks that have disadvantaged
generations of Colombian children.
Efficiency
Strengths Challenges
Effective partnerships with UNHCR and IOM on key CP Duplication of efforts and programming in some areas
campaigns to ensure rights of migrant children and – health, nutrition and CBI
their families
Institutional support to local and national Gaps in information and coordination
government institutions
Willingness to change locations to avoid Gaps in UNICEF leadership in some of its key sectors
overcrowding/duplication of actors of expertise in some key locations along the migration
routes.
Need to plan a transition from an annual RMRP to a
multi-year plan, more focused on social and economic
integration, with UNICEF developing its own medium-
term strategy
7.6 Connectedness
The evaluation of the connectedness of UNICEF’s response is guided by the following overarching question: To
what extent is UNICEF Colombia’s response to the Venezuelan Outflow linked to other key institutional planning
and policy processes? This section addresses how the needs of the Venezuela migrant and refugee populations
are effectively being addressed by linking the two specific evaluation questions formulated under this overarching
question. The two EQs are answered together because they are related.
EQ19: How is the new country program of UNICEF Colombia adjusted to the new context and needs of the
Venezuela migrant and refugee populations effectively being addressed by linking the emergency response
to longer-term development goals in each country? What are the difficulties, including opportunity costs, if
any, encountered internally and externally (i.e., UNICEF internal structure and processes, donor
requirements)?
EQ20: To what extent has UNICEF adopted a whole-of-migration cycle approach which provides longer-term
solutions for migrants, refugees and returnees including preparedness for new influxes, support to access
social services in host countries as well as when returning and reintegrating in their home countries (the
nexus)?
Summary of key findings: UNICEF Colombia’s strength is building on long-term partnerships with the GoC,
promoting models and favourable government policies to work towards longer-term integration and capacity
building. This is clearly articulated in the new CPD which identifies migration as one of its three components and
adapts pre-existing strategies to include migration as an additional protection risk facing children and
adolescents in Colombia. This is valid and well connected to UNICEF’s longer-term work to build capacity of
Colombian institutions, ensuring inclusion and integration of migrant children and adolescents into national
systems, social policies and protective mechanisms.
However, as migration is a dynamic phenomenon and UNICEF has not fully invested in its humanitarian response
capability, it is not clear that lessons learned from the VMC, including the importance of paying attention to the
64
conditions of those returning to Venezuela, will lead to UNICEF Colombia being better prepared for future
influxes and movements of returnees.
Understanding of the humanitarian-development nexus within the VMC
The ET feels that UNICEF seems to struggle with capacity and understanding of the framework of a humanitarian
response. For example, some staff did not appear to be able to articulate how a humanitarian modality would be
different from a normal development context, what would be the limits to building institutional capacity in an
emergency, and where direct interventions of humanitarian actors might be required to ensure that affected
populations can enjoy their rights today, rather than awaiting a distant future.
While many UNICEF staff and partners believe that continuing to utilise development modalities in an emergency
context is the same as doing nexus type programming, the ET suggests that UNICEF needs to reassess this
assumption. The nexus refers to a transition from a humanitarian modality towards a full development modality.
But if UNICEF teams remain in development mode, despite an emergency, this should not be considered a nexus
approach, for it is neither coherent nor connected. An emergency, humanitarian context requires rapid
deployment that may well exceed the capacity of state institutions, and which requires a response which meets
needs and rights at scale. This is the reason for the presence of additional international actors and donor
resources. In at least two areas of education and CP, a full humanitarian modality and coordination mechanisms
to ensure rights today have yet to materialise. The lack of reference to and training on the CCCs, the Global
Framework for Children on the Move and other key policies and standards for partners and staff limit the
coherence in the operation at CO level. UNICEF teams are small and their framework for articulating a response
is mainly development oriented.
UNICEF Colombia’s new CPD integrates migration as a key programme component and aligns well with the GoC’s
approach, as a factor of development and long-term integration. The migration component of the new CPD arises
from the GoC's desire to move beyond humanitarian action to respond to the social emergency generated by the
mixed migratory flow from Venezuela, with longer-term development proposals aimed at promoting and
facilitating the integration of the migrant population (in this case both Colombian returnees and Venezuelans) into
the social and economic dynamics of the host communities.
This migration component in the CDP responds to the GoC's priorities included in CONPES Document 3950 of
Estrategia para la atención de la migración desde Venezuela (Strategy for the attention of migration from
Venezuela)116 which sets out the basic parameters that define the type of attention that the Venezuelan migrant
population and the Colombian returnee population should have in terms of health, education, family welfare,
protection, nutritional security. enjoyment of favourable environments, coexistence and citizen security in the
receiving municipalities. It contains an income generation strategy for the migrant population and host
communities that proposes alternatives for economic stabilisation and social integration. This is why the GoC
requests the support of the United Nations to work together for this purpose within the new Country Programme.
UNICEF proposes to reintroduce many of the same approaches it has been implementing over several decades:
flexible learning models, health system monitoring and strengthening and strengthening capacities in priority
municipalities to incorporate children and adolescent participation through the Territorios Amigos de la Niñez
strategy. However, this is limited to specific municipalities targeted by the GoC for special attention, mainly
adjoining the Venezuelan border. While the ET questions the objectives of the education component, the other
two strategic elements appear well adapted to the needs of those migrants who are more or less permanently
settled within the urban and peri-urban communities in the border areas prioritised by the GoC.
UNICEF Colombia’s strengths appear to play to the longer-term development strategy. Among other things, the
ET was told that a further spatial extension of UNICEF presence would be to Tibu, due the fact that there are few
social actors there and UNICEF can have a significant and longer-term influence. In this sense, UNICEF Colombia is
showing itself to be an agile player interested in longer-term strategies in those areas that most require its
support.
What UNICEF’s new CPD strategy does not fully take into account is what has become known as the whole of
migration approach, the influx of migrants on the move to other regions within the country, mainly urban areas
that are not currently being prioritised by government, as well as the return dynamics to Venezuela. These are
significant components, and the porous nature of the border also offers a scenario of regular pendular
movements. UNICEF has until now mainly focused on the influx and integration components. The returning flux
116 https://www.migrationportal.org/resource/conpes-strategy-attention-migration-venezuela/
65
to Venezuela is very relevant and no information is available of any coordination with UNICEF Venezuela CO on
what are the conditions for reception of Venezuelan returnees. This point should remind UNICEF of its declared
six policy asks: the one that is never mentioned, but has significance in this context is the first, which relates to
the need to understand and address the conditions that force children and families to move from Venezuela in
the first place, and to which some families find themselves returning. There is a need to strengthen advocacy and
strategies to address the original cause of the VMC and the likelihood that vulnerable families may be returning
to these conditions.
Indigenous communities, particularly binational communities have very specific needs. These needs could be
better articulated and addressed in the new CDP to help preserve and support the cultural diversity of the country.
Connectedness
Strengths Challenges
Consolidated Migration Component of new CPD Short term nature of contracts and funding117
aligned with government priorities
Adaptable, standard modalities that can address Need to review objectives of the Education
settled, migrant integration component of new CPD
Willingness of UNICEF to establish new field presence Lack of specific programming for binational
in underserved areas (i.e., Tibu) indigenous communities impacted by migration flows
Lack of consideration of return migration of
Venezuelans as a result of COVID-19 and economic
downturn
Need to strengthen understanding and practice of
the humanitarian-development nexus.
7.7 Cross-cutting: gender, equity, conflict sensitivity and accountability
The evaluation examines some cross-cutting dimensions of UNICEF’s response and is guided by the following
question: To what extent has UNICEF’s response to the Venezuelan outflow taken a gender, equity, conflict
sensitive and accountability approach at all levels? Cross cutting issues have been treated throughout the report
in different EQs. To summarise main aspects identified:
 Of the five country case studies in our sample, UNICEF Colombia’s approach is the most conflict sensitive, as
the country have been living and dealing with armed conflict for the past 50 years. Conflict sensitivity,
understanding of how the dynamics of population movements can spark local tensions and ignite conflict is
strongly reflected in UNICEF Colombia’s analysis, strategies and approaches which permeate all aspects of its
programming.
 On AAP, the evaluation found initial steps and a learning attitude by UNICEF and IPs to find solutions for
affected population participation and to find adequate accountability mechanisms. Challenges remain and are
notoriously problematic in areas were irregular migrants gather or in informal settlements, where lack of
beneficiary engagement, insecurity, poor information, and absence of standards affect AAP. In transit centres
and shelters the situation can provide an adequate context for AAP if clear information is provided,
participation promoted and adequate standards ensured. However, AAP requires more direct engagement
from UNICEF to overcome power dynamics between IPs and the beneficiaries who rely on their services. AAP
is not seen to be present at the beginning of the project/programme cycle, where its consultations could
inform UNICEF programming. According to KIs the concept of direct consultations of UNCEF teams with
beneficiaries is not part of its organisational culture, although its WASH experience shows that this can be
meaningfully accomplished.
 On gender analysis it is noted that UNICEF undertook a gender analysis in 2021 and this is generally contained
within funding proposals but the ET observes that its translation into programming and monitoring can be
strengthened (although CO stakeholders have indicated that the analysis formed the basis for advocacy
actions with key government and civil society actors to recognize, characterize and address the needs of LGBT
117 This is not the case for ORR funding.
66
adolescents and youth affected by migration).118 has not been carried over in terms of programming and
monitoring. Migration is a phenomenon that may have different and specific risks, opportunities and drivers
for girls and boys. It is important to understand these to arrive at gender appropriate programming that does
not minimise the risks and issues facing children and adolescent girls and boys. The VMC is characterised by a
hyper-sexualisation of the Venezuelan adolescent and women. Many interviews and focus groups with
beneficiaries show that women and adolescent girls feel particularly vulnerable to being perceived as sexually
‘available’. This creates a high potential risk to Venezuelan migrant girls and women that has not been
adequately acknowledged or integrated into the protection work of UNICEF and other partners, nor
challenged through C4D and other communications processes.
 PSEA are core aspects of the response from a contracting point of view, and UNICEF has been active in raising
the profile of those issues, ensuring visibility in all assessments and information tools, providing training, (PSEA
surge) and monitoring means for those aspects.
 Through the Canada-funded project held by LACRO, and with the support of UNICEF colleagues in Colombia,
Ecuador and Peru, UNICEF has developed a research paper on the different situations faced by
unaccompanied or separated adolescent girls and LGBTIQ+ adolescents on the move who had no choice but
to leave Venezuela and on how this affects them differentially. In addition, protocols and guidelines for the
identification and protection of unaccompanied or separated adolescent girls and LGBTI adolescents on the
move were analysed from a gender perspective. From this analysis UNICEF developed Adolescent girls and
LGBTIQ+ adolescents unaccompanied or separated : an invisible migration?119
 On GBV, adolescent marriages, early pregnancies and UASC: The involvement of local authorities and social
services in case management is not yet an adequate strategy. The ET notes the lack of specific monitoring to
follow up of the cases identified by GIFMM partners, UNICEF and ICBF.
 The evaluation has identified weaknesses in the overall response where it comes to children with disabilities,
not only on the part of UNICEF. Shelters and transit spaces have little adaptation for persons with disabilities,
although UNICEF WASH facilities do in most cases take this into account. An additional challenge for UNICEF
and partners is to define a clearer differentiation of disabilities.
 The engagement of adolescents in both migration and COVID-19 response has been already mentioned as an
example of good practice in C4D work.
8. Good practices and lessons learned
8.1. Good practices
Although there are doubtless more, some good practices identified include:
National roll-out of the EPT and multi-service jornadas de inscripción: UNICEF has worked closely with UNHCR
and IOM on the advocacy and technical assistance which put in place the EPT. This has marked a major advance in
ensuring the rights of Venezuelan migrants and asylum-seeking children on the move and their families in the
longer-term. UNICEF has played a valuable role in supporting Jornadas de Inscripción for the EPT which included
multi-sectoral services and programming, including medical and dental care, vaccination, and a number of other
services not provided by other R4V partners. UNICEF should continue to support the roll out of the EPT through
the jornadas de inscripción and other strategies to ensure that the maximum number of families and children are
identified, registered, and enabled to benefit from access to government programmes, protection, and services.
UNICEF can support this registration by advocating to ensure that processes include all family members, so that
children are taken into account as their parents are registered, and thus that no child is left behind.
WASH as an entry point for entering into communities impacted by migration: taking a community-based
approach and allowing UNICEF to gain insight into other aspects including education, CP, health and other
community dynamics. UNICEF can build on this strategy to allow for a deeper engagement on AAP, one that
involves UNICEF staff and partners together to implement participatory and consultative processes to ensure
feedback that is not tainted by power dynamics between frontline service providers and affected populations.
UNICEF supporting a localisation agenda by selecting and building capacity of local, regional, and national NGOs
on emergency, humanitarian responses to migration.
118 The gender analysis had the purpose of establishing - from primary and secondary information - the different protection risks faced by LGBT adolescents
and youth affected by migration, given the limited information available.
119 Adolescent girls and LGBTIQ+ adolescents unaccompanied or separated | UNICEF
67
Capacity to prevent PSEA has been strengthened among UNICEF partners: UNICEF has supported all its partners
through PCAs to build their capacity to prevent and address issues of sexual exploitation and abuse. CO Colombia
has also supported PSEA interagency coordination, development of SOPs and strengthening of services.
Working with indigenous organisations in indigenous languages: UNICEF Colombia has learned through its
partnerships with indigenous organisations about the importance of creating documentation in local indigenous
languages as a basis for learning and developing a clear inter-cultural understanding of UNICEF’s policies and
procedures, their rationale and how to adapt them to the culture of indigenous communities.
COVID-19 humanitarian cash transfer benefited families at a critical moment when help was needed most: A
positive adaptation to the COVID-19 pandemic was UNICEF Colombia’s HCT, recognising that refugee/migrant
families were particularly vulnerable and did not have access to alternative government support programmes. This
was a positive response, although one that could potentially have been better coordinated with similar
investments made by other GIFMM partners to avoid overlapping support, to push back on a policy requiring that
30 per cent of beneficiaries should be Colombian since alternative programmes were available, and used to target
the most vulnerable, which may not have been the LC households.
8.2. Lessons learned
A key learning from the evaluation has been that the transition from a highly centralised operation to one with a
significant field presence is not one without challenges. Areas for improvement are:
● ensuring that the field presence developed by UNICEF is adequately consulted and engaged in the generation
of new proposals, identification of partners and development of an advocacy agenda that enriches and feeds
into UNICEF’s advocacy role at the national level;
● that field teams and IPs who are new to UNICEF and humanitarian work are provided with needed training
and support. In particular, that they are training on UNICEF’s humanitarian standards, in particular the CCCs,
and examples of how these standards might be applied in their context. This is seen to be something very
much lacking, leading to the belief among field staff that humanitarian standards do not apply, due to the
fact that the GoC and state institutions are taking the lead on the response;
● that field staff and IPs are provided with needed support and backstopping from senior management. This
evaluation echoes the recent findings of the 2019 Humanitarian Review in suggesting that senior
management in UNICEF Colombia would benefit from also receiving training, support and experience on
humanitarian response modalities. UNICEF at global level should give clearer guidance regarding the extent
to which humanitarian standards are understood to apply in this context, or whether there is something
special and different about the Latin American context that requires a distinct approach on humanitarian
standards.
UNICEF and GIFMM partners in general are learning that they need to invest adequately in information
management systems that will help to pinpoint the most vulnerable groups and develop strategies to address
these vulnerabilities. While many issue areas have been identified and communicated to donors and the public at
large, donors are looking to UNICEF for more targeted, specific, and responsive programmes that address the
urgent and structural issues that allow tens of thousands of children to fall through the current cracks in
programme coverage.
9. Conclusions
We propose here a number of conclusions, grounded in the findings reported above. We will follow the evaluation
criteria to facilitate understanding of the rationale and the supporting evidence behind our recommendations.
Appropriateness
UNICEF Colombia has participated in a complex response to the VMC, one which has unfolded in a context of
diverse and multiple humanitarian needs and issues, not the least of which has been the effects of the COVID-19
pandemic. During this period, UNICEF Colombia has appropriately adapted to the increasing VMC influx by
extending its presence, among other by adding field offices, without which it could not have delivered a
humanitarian response to the extent that it did. UNICEF’s emergency, sectoral and field teams must be given
credit for their enormous efforts under very difficult circumstances – handling two emergencies simultaneously.
Most of the field teams are comprised of young professionals hired on short-term UNV contracts, provided with
limited resources in terms of office space, vehicles, and equipment. They were on a steep learning curve and have
performed admirably under the circumstances. The same can be said for UNICEF’s implementing partners who
have carried the operation using their knowledge of the field and technical skills.
UNICEF Colombia has been the strongest among the five Cos evaluated regarding preparedness of a migration-
type emergency. In 2018, UNICEF Colombia had identified migration as key risk factor and had met 18 out of 25
68
Minimum Preparedness Standards. In 2021, migration was highlighted again in 2021 EPP.
The evaluation notes limited consultation and participation of affected communities in project design and
implementation phases.
UNICEF staff and partners at CO level have noted the lack of an overarching Regional Strategy and Framework for
the VMC response and similar responses to Children on the Move. A regional strategy was developed and drafted
in 2018 and, to LACRO’s credit, work was reinitiated in 2021 after having been delayed by several years.
On gender analysis and use of a gender equality lens: The ET has concluded that UNICEF Colombia is lacking in staff
resources to address the breadth and scope of the VMC from a gender perspective. The VMC raises specific
challenges for adolescent girls and boys, women and men, and current programming is not sufficiently set up to
take gender seriously as a variable impacting the risks nor to effectively mitigate barriers associated with gender
identities, although some actions have been taken.120 While staff are doing their best, they are stretched to the
maximum.
Effectiveness
The ET commends UNICEF’s relatively rapid mobilisation of technical capacity in the field, to accompany partners
and understand first-hand the way the VMC has impacted host communities. UNICEF has been effective in building
local capacity of government and civil society partners to take action on migration, which is a new phenomenon
in a country used to seeing itself as generating, rather than receiving, migrants. The COVID-19 public health
emergency significantly affected UNICEF’s and its IPs’ ability to deliver on results in the short term. Across sectors,
performance on humanitarian targets prior to the pandemic was generally strong, compared to a sudden drop in
capacity with the onset of the pandemic. This was due to the added workload and significant adjustments in
programme delivery modalities in order to continue to reach beneficiaries during and despite public health
restrictions. UNICEF Colombia was gradually able to adapt. This was possible thanks to the strength of its WASH
sector community-based interventions. Additionally, UNICEF was able to simultaneously respond both to the VMC
influx and the pandemic by building synergies between these two responses – specifically in the areas of WASH,
healthcare, vaccination and CP. UNICEF took courageous steps to keep CP spaces open even during the pandemic,
when many partners were shutting down these vital spaces.
On Child Protection: UNICEF Colombia has contributed significantly at the national level to put in place the pre-
requisites for Venezuelan refugee and migrant children to enjoy their rights – in particular through the campaign
to combat statelessness, measures to ensure birth registration, positive messaging around respect for migrant
rights to challenge xenophobic attitudes, and the roll out of the ETP for Venezuelan refugees and migrants.
Following joint advocacy between UNICEF, UNHCR and IOM with the GoC the EPT must be recognised as a game
changer in terms of the response. UNICEF’s support to the EPT in terms of facilitating registration of children and
whole families should be sustained. However, efforts at the international (regional) level of the Quito Process to
ensure a regional CP protocol appear to have stalled and efforts at the local level to operationalise effective CP
monitoring and case management require strengthening.
On Education: UNICEF has not achieved the sector result formulated in its HAC 2019 or 2020 and with current
measures in place will not achieve the sector result of full integration into the national education system.
Education is waiting. Many children continue to lack practical access to the national education system, and to the
main intervention, LCs. This intervention, while having many positive aspects, is not, on its own and with current
resourcing, sufficient to provide an effective response given the scale of the VMC. It is focused uniquely on children
whose families are settling in Colombia and does not respond to the learning needs of children on the move in
transit nor of adolescents above the age of 14.
On Social Protection: UNICEF first rolled out a HCT in the second half of 2020 in response to the extreme
vulnerability of migrant families to the confinement and public health measures to control the spread of the
pandemic. This was reportedly seen by beneficiaries and UNICEF as a very positive experience, but one that was
too limited in scale in relation to the needs. The ET finds this to have been an important and timely response, but
one that did not necessarily target those who were the most vulnerable, as those with their children in the LCs
are generally considered to be less vulnerable than those newly arrived in the country. Future work on HCTs in
Colombia can build effectiveness and efficiencies by working more closely and in coordination with other GIFMM
partners also rolling out HCTs. The PDET approach is also promising in terms of its potential for bringing about
long-term integration of migrant children and adolescents in priority communities. It would be helpful to carry out
an impact evaluation of this programming. In 2022, UNICEF began to offer technical support in designing
independent living modalities for older children and inclusion in social protection programmes.
120 For example, gender analysis about the situation of LGBT migrant children and adolescents.
69
On WASH: Like other sectors, it appears that the WASH sector results were significantly impacted by the COVID-
19 pandemic, among other factors. Nonetheless, WASH has been the most visible face of UNICEF during the VMC
response, and also as it overlapped with the COVID-19 L3 Emergency response.
On health and nutrition: A common strategy to deliver health and nutrition services as one package appears to be
both effective and efficient. The mobile clinic concept has enhanced outreach to vulnerable groups from both
migrant and host communities. These services could also include CP and GBV prevention and response. The
GIFMM- R4V platform has ensured the availability of primary health services to refugees/migrants at key border
and transit points. These health services provided in transit and at border points are not covered by UNICEF
Colombia. UNICEF’s programming is mainly directed to refugees and migrants in rural and urban settlements.
Special concerns regarding adolescents on the move: On case management systems, UNICEF understands its role
as being to uphold government SOPs, even where these might not be fully aligned with the best interests of the
child on the move. This is particularly the case for adolescents on the move, who may see their own interest very
differently than does the host country, leading to a pattern of avoidance of CP and other authorities. UASCs,
adolescents with partners and children, for example those used to living on their own or seeking work or other
types of opportunities, must be given special consideration.
There is also a tendency among staff, which has evolved within the organisational culture of the UNICEF Colombia
operation, that humanitarian standards like the CCCs, are intended for other contexts than Colombia as a middle-
income, Latin American country. That such contexts are somehow different and governed by different rules than
countries in Africa, Asia or other parts of the world is a mindset which needs to be challenged.
At the very least, this suggests the need in Colombia and other countries in the region for more training on how
to apply the CCCs and further clarification about the CCCs being a mandatory policy across the globes.
Coverage
UNICEF was swift to expand its zone of operations to better respond to the influx of Venezuelan migrants and
refugees. A key challenge facing the operation – both at the level of the GIFMM and UNICEF Colombia – has been
the lack of investment in or analysis of data and evidence as basis for targeting the most vulnerable through
programming and coordination. The scale and wide geographic dispersion of the migration phenomenon appears
to have overwhelmed the capacities and resources of humanitarian actors and the GoC. Mass migration is a specific
phenomenon whose characteristics need to be taken into account to improve future responses: it is dynamic, not
localised like floods, earthquakes o rother natural hazards. It ebbs and flows according to specific social, economic,
and political factors (human generated) rather than those of that natural world. In this sense, it should be
something that UNICEF and other actors can better model and plan for. The push and pull factors can be monitored
and analysed and likely consequences for human population movements can be modelled. Early warning systems,
at local, national, and continental/regional levels, are needed to improved preparedness.
Coherence and coordination
UNICEF has provided leadership and coordination in its core areas of competency, particularly in CP, WASH and
education. However, the evaluation findings have documented various levels of incoherence and lack of
coordination that should be addressed by UNICEF at CO, Regional and Global level. As highlighted above, the
design of an L2 activation and humanitarian response built around one national population movement - the VMC
– has led to its own inconsistencies. While this is not specific to CO Colombia, it has created an entire coordination
mechanism that is uniquely dedicated to one population group, potentially ignoring the needs of other children
on the move. It may, indirectly, also have led to an increase in xenophobic attitudes and resentment where
Venezuelans are singled out as a group perceived to be getting some type of preferential treatment by national
and international actors
Efficiency
For the most part, UNICEF’s interventions have been found to be relatively efficient and designed to avoid
duplication. In particular, the combined efforts and partnerships with UNHCR and IOM on key CP campaigns to
end statelessness and to ensure rights of migrant children and their families (EPT) have been effective and efficient.
The ET has noted only a few areas of duplication of efforts and programming in some areas – health, nutrition and
CBI and these are currently being corrected.
Institutional support to local and national government institutions through systems strengthening approaches and
Territorios Amigos de la Niñez are seen as efficient, but often not on a scale that enable adequate coverage given
the scale of needs in both migrant and host communities. UNICEF has also shown agility - to change locations to
avoid contributing to overcrowding of response actors in areas where too many NGOs and UN agencies are already
present.
70
The ET has identified areas where gaps in information and coordination should be addressed. In particular more
harmonisation of interventions and information sharing between CP actors to increase coordination and coverage
is required. UNICEF Colombia has also identified the inefficiencies associated with annual planning processes in
what is clearly a protracted migration context.
The ET also considered the question of timeliness of the L2 regional activation in relation to needs. From the
reconstructed timeline, the ET concludes that the L2 should normally have been activated in 2018, when it was
evident in Colombia and other countries that governments were signalling the need for assistance and the UNICEF
at CO level were entering emergency modalities without the necessary support from Regional and HQ levels.
Connectedness
The VMC has clearly put migration front and centre of the national agenda. At the outset of the emergency, as
many KIs have noted, Colombia did not see itself as a destination for refugee/migration movements, but rather
as a point of departure for those fleeing violence and armed conflict. UNICEF’s Colombia response to VMC has
been anchored in its longer-term development process in its CPD 2021-2024. This allows humanitarian response
to be effectively transitioned into longer-term development planning. UNICEF Colombia has, in an apt and timely
manner, seized the opportunity to integrate this shift in paradigm into its new CPD. One of three programme
components is on Migration as a Factor of Development, seeking ways to integrate all UNICEF Sectors under a set
of thematic and programmatic outcomes. This is a bold and positive move for UNICEF. It is one which will require
much closer internal coordination between sector activities and plans in order to ensure that this thematic
approach to the CPD benefits from potential synergies and cross-sector learning that can make the programme
most effective and efficient.
10. Recommendations
The recommendations have been debated by the Colombia CO staff in a workshop carried out on September 15,
2022, and adapted in order to align them to an eventual management response plan. The result of the workshop
is included below:
Recommendation (as Action points Whom Timeframe
retained by the CO)
R1  Strengthen - with the technical approach of AAP - SBC Officer 12 months
Develop complementary UNICEF coordination and territorial teams through (focal point
tools and processes for technical training and transfers of the national in AAP)
AAP in projects, in protocol. This strengthening will allow UNICEF to
addition to the improve the information it collects directly, both
mechanisms currently for programmatic improvements and for the
implemented by IP. establishment of early warnings, through first
respondent teams.
 Ensure the systematization of the information SBC Officer 6 months
collected by UNICEF coordination and territorial (focal point
teams through the development and in AAP)
implementation of a CO common tool. Territorial
teams should be trained to use this tool.
 Pilot direct dialogues - from the national and M&E Officer 12 months
territorial team - with participating communities,
through at least two (2) joint missions from the
areas of M&E, Gender and Social and Behavioral
Change.
R2  Advocacy with the Colombian government to Education 18 months
UNICEF Colombia must ensure that resources are allocated for the specialist
provide technical implementation of actions aimed at children and
assistance and advocacy adolescents in the Migration CONPES.
to the Colombian State so  Technical assistance to the Ministry of National Education 24 months
that it allocates - Education for the interoperability of national specialist
effectively and efficiently information systems that make it possible to
- the financial resources identify deficiencies in educational quotas at
to guarantee children territorial level.
71
Recommendation (as Action points Whom Timeframe
retained by the CO)
and adolescents access of  Technical assistance to the Ministry of Education in Education 24 months
education the definition of instruments for the active search specialist
and management of quotas at the territorial level,
which considers the ethnic, rural and gender gaps
in access to education for girls, boys and
adolescents.
 At the level of Secretaries of Education, start the Education 18 months
processes of active search and management of specialist
quotas with an inclusive approach of ethnic,
gender, disability, and rural conditions.
 In coordination with the Education in Emergencies Education 12 months
Cluster and the local education working groups, specialist
implement supply and demand analysis processes
for educational places at the community level, in
at least two territorial sub-offices.
R3  Technical assistance to the National Government ADAP 12 months
Promote the rights and and local authorities in the design and Officer
empowerment of implementation of tools to promote adolescent
adolescent migrants and participation skills and favor their empowerment
host communities, in all in different environments, including schools and
programmatic community settings.
interventions of UNICEF’s  Strengthen protection modalities of children and CP Officer 12 months
Cooperation Program in adolescents of the ICBF, based on the (migration)
Colombia, with a gender identification and exchange of experiences in the
perspective and other promotion of their progressive autonomy.
differential factors
 Design and implement a tool to mainstream the Gender 12 months
gender approach in emergency interventions and Officer
UNICEF Cooperation Program, with special
emphasis on LGBTIQ+ adolescents and the
protection of girls and adolescents against early
unions (with IP and their staff).
R4  Improvement and implementation of processes M&E Officer 6 months
Optimize the processes and tools for:
of information  The function of analysis of the situation of
management, situation children and adolescents and their integration
analysis and needs in the strategic planning and monitoring of
assessment, as a basis for humanitarian action.
both the strategic  Assessment of the needs of children and
planning of the CO, and
adolescents with a differential and territorial
for evidence-based
approach for strategic planning
advocacy with
 Generation of (updated) evidence regarding the Emergency 12 months
government and
violations and bottlenecks that affect the rights of coordinator
humanitarian actors.
children and adolescents, with an intersectoral
approach.
 Advocacy in humanitarian coordination spaces (led Emergency 18 months
or co-led by UNICEF) to improve the connection coordinator
between the available evidence around the needs
of the population, and the planning of
humanitarian action.
72
Recommendation (as Action points Whom Timeframe
retained by the CO)
 Guarantee that activities and budgets oriented Emergency 6 months
towards information management, assessment of coordinator
needs and situation analysis are incorporated in
HAC planning processes.
R5  Include actions and expected results in UNICEF's Social 6 months
Update UNICEF's advocacy strategy to improve the articulation Inclusion
advocacy strategy – and between humanitarian and development Specialist
its monitoring scheme – institutional architectures; as well as integrating it
based on the Evaluation's in the National Development Plan, Disaster Risk
recommendations, Management with a focus on children.
taking into account the  Provide technical assistance to local governments Social 12 months
CCC frameworks; to ensure the inclusion of migrant children in local Inclusion
Children on the Move, as policies, plans, programs and actions. Specialist
well as recent evidence
 Define and implement a knowledge management M&E Officer 12 months
on the multiple impacts
agenda around effective interventions for the
on childhood and
inclusion of migrant children.
adolescence.
73