Formative Evaluation of UNICEF Three Star Approach for WASH in Schools in the Pacific 1
Final Report
FORMATIVE EVALUATION OF UNICEF
THREE STAR APPROACH FOR WASH
IN SCHOOLS IN THE PACIFIC
FINAL REPORT
PACIFIC MULTI COUNTRY OFFICE
December 2021
2 Formative Evaluation of UNICEF Three Star Approach for WASH in Schools in the Pacific
Final Report
Formative Evaluation of UNICEF Three Star Approach for WASH in Schools in the Pacific
© United Nations Children’s Fund, New York, 2021
United Nations Children’s Fund
Three United Nations Plaza
New York, New York 10017
December 2021
The purpose of publishing evaluation reports produced by the UNICEF Pacific Multi Country Office is to fulfil
a corporate commitment to transparency through the publication of all completed evaluations. The reports
are designed to stimulate a free exchange of ideas among those interested in the topic and to assure those
supporting the work of UNICEF that it rigorously examines its strategies, results and overall effectiveness.
The contents of the report do not necessarily reflect the policies or views of UNICEF. The views expressed
in this report are those of the evaluators. The text has not been edited to official publication standards and
UNICEF accepts no responsibility for error. The designations in this publication do not imply an opinion on the
legal status of any country or territory, or of its authorities, or the delimitation of frontiers.
The copyright for this report is held by the United Nations Children’s Fund. Permission is required to reprint/
reproduce/photocopy or in any other way cite or quote from this report in written form. UNICEF has a formal
permission policy that requires a written request to be submitted. For non-commercial uses, the permission
will normally be granted free of charge. Please write to the Pacific Multi Country Office at the address below
to initiate a permission request.
For further information, please contact:
Pacific Multi Country Office
United Nations Children’s Fund
3rd Floor, FDB Building
360 Victoria Parade
Suva, Fiji
suva@unicef.org
Cover photo: © UNICEFPacific/2021/Stephen
Formative Evaluation of UNICEF Three Star Approach for WASH in Schools in the Pacific 3
Final Report
CONTENTS
LIST OF TABLES 4
LIST OF FIGURES 4
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 5
ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS 6
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 7
1. INTRODUCTION 10
1.1 Context 10
1.1.1 Global and Regional Context 11
1.1.2 WASH Bottlenecks in Evaluation Countries 11
1.1.3 Country Contexts 12
1.2 Object of the Evaluation 16
1.3 Implementation in the Pacific 17
2. PURPOSE, OBJECTIVE AND SCOPE OF EVALUATION 21
2.1 Purpose of the Evaluation 21
2.2 Objective of the Evaluation 21
2.3 Scope of the Evaluation 22
3. METHODOLOGY 23
3.1 Evaluation Approach 23
3.2 Sampling Criteria 25
3.3 Data Analysis 27
3.4 Ethical Considerations and Safeguards 27
3.5 Limitations and Mitigation Strategies of the Evaluation 28
3.6 Quality Assurance 28
4. FINDINGS 29
4.1 Relevance 29
4.2 Coherence 41
4.3 Efficiency 43
4.4 Effectiveness 47
4.5 Sustainability 50
5. CONCLUSIONS 54
6. RECOMMENDATIONS 56
REFERENCES 60
4 Formative Evaluation of UNICEF Three Star Approach for WASH in Schools in the Pacific
Final Report
Annex I: Terms of Reference 63
Annex II: Theories of Change 70
Annex III: Draft Integrated Programme Logic 73
Annex IV: Evaluation Matrix 74
Annex V: Original and Revised Evaluation Questions 86
Annex VI: Data Collection Tools (including consent scripts) 101
Annex VII: Maps of Implementation Areas 119
Annex VIII: Scripts for Institutional Clearance/Authorization 122
Annex IX: Ethics Review Feedback 127
Annex X: Documents Consulted 138
Annex XI: List of Interviewees 142
Annex XII: Extended Stakeholder List 143
List of Tables
Table 1: Country Context - Fiji 13
Table 2: Country Context - Kiribati 14
Table 3: Country Context - Solomon Islands 14
Table 4: Country Context - Federated States of Micronesia 15
Table 5: Country Context - Vanuatu 15
Table 6: Overview of Kiribati Three Star Approach for WASH in Schools 17
Table 7: Overview of the Solomon Islands Three Star Approach for WASH in Schools 18
Table 8: Overview of the Vanuatu Three Star Approach for WASH in Schools 18
Table 9: Overview of the Fiji Three Star Approach for WASH in Schools 19
Table 10: Overview of the FSM Three Star Approach for WASH in Schools 20
Table 11: Evaluation Objectives 21
Table 12: Overview of Evaluation Questions 24
Table 13: OECD DAC Definitions and Working Definitions 24
Table 14: Sampling Criteria 25
Table 15: Number of key informant interviews (KIIs) and school visits carried out 26
Table 16: Best Practice and Challenges within the Three Star Approach Theories of Change 34
Table 17: Design of Three Star Approach and Relevance to Dimensions of WASH 36
List of Figures
Figure 1: Oceania WASH in School Data 11
Figure 2: Service Levels for WASH in Schools in Evaluation Countries 13
Figure 3: Overview of the Three Star Approach for WASH in Schools 16
Figure 4: Periods of Implementation of the Three Star Approach 17
Figure 5: Data Collection, Analysis and Triangulation Process 27
Figure 6: Sustainable Development Goals 6 and 4 30
Figure 7: Alignment of UNICEF Pacific Programme with UNICEF Strategic Plan 32
Figure 8: Illustration of the ‘logic’ of the logical framework 33
Figure 9: Inclusive Access to WASH 40
Figure 10: Recommendations from formative evaluation 56
Formative Evaluation of UNICEF Three Star Approach for WASH in Schools in the Pacific 5
Final Report
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The evaluation team would like to sincerely thank Islands), Emily Rand and Jake Ward – WASH
all of the contributors to this synthesis evaluation Specialist (Vanuatu), Waqairapoa Tikoisuva – UNICEF
report for sharing information and documentation WASH lead for Kiribati, George Quifada - Sector
by email, completing evaluation questionnaires or Coordination TA, UNICEF and Brucetta Toatu - WASH
providing insights through key informant interview in Schools TA, UNICEF (Kiribati and Fiji); UNICEF New
and for taking their time and resources to check York/HQ (Irene Imongin and Silvia Gaya) and UNICEF
references to their work in the first drafts of the East Asia and Pacific Regional Office (EAPRO) with
reports and providing comments and suggestions. contributions from Evariste Kouassi-Komlan, Brooke
Additionally, the team would like to express their Yamakoshi and HanChul Kim.
gratitude to the many UNICEF staff, members of
government, non-government organisations and Special note of appreciation is extended to Education
other stakeholders of the Solomon Islands, Fiji, colleagues Iosefo Volau – Education Specialist and
Federated States of Micronesia, Vanuatu, and Kiribati Anna Smeby - Chief of Education for the Pacific
for their generous contributions of time. Contributors Multi-country education programme (Fiji), and to
came from the following organizations and partners Ivan Scott - Evaluation Specialist, and Koorosh Raffii
are acknowledged: - Evaluation Adviser at the UNICEF EAPRO. A special
vote of thanks is also to the WASH team in Suva, Ro
Governments: i.e. government officials working at Iva Namela, Milika Nabulivula and James Robertson
the Ministry of Education and or Health, i.e. Paul for their support throughout the evaluation.
Amao – National WASH Coordinator, Ministry of
Education and Franco Rodie – Permanent Secretary, The evaluation team would like to express thanks to
Ministry of Health (Solomon Islands), Christine-Anne UNICEF Pacific for their help and support throughout
Garoleo – Provincial SIO Coordinator, Ministry of the engagement of this assignment. In particular, the
Education and Training Penama Province (Vanuatu), evaluation team would like to thank Chander Badloe
Reetina Katokita - Director, Policy, Planning and (Chief - Water, Sanitation & Hygiene, UNICEF Pacific
Development Unit, Ministry of Education and Arboro Multi-Country Office) and Ali Safarnejad (Multi-
Henry - Senior Health Promotion Officer, Ministry of Country Evaluation Specialist, UNICEF Pacific Multi-
Health and Medical Services (Kiribati), Deanne Aizawa Country Office) for their oversight and guidance
– Chief, Planning and Development Division, Dept throughout the evaluation process.
of Education MJ Martin – Mental Health Specialist,
Department of Health (FSM) and Serupepeli Udre – This evaluation report was prepared by the IOD
Ministry of Education and Relenshni Karan - Ministry Parc evaluation team, which included Jerry Adams –
of Education, Heritage and Arts and Mr Suliasi Principal Associate and Evaluation Lead, Kate Alliott
Batikawai - Environmental Health officer (Fiji). – Senior Consultant and Stuart Kinsella – Consultant.
Many thanks go to Talanoa Consulting, without
National / International NGOs – Fiji Teachers whom fieldwork in a COVID-19 landscape would
Association and CBM Nossall (Fiji) , Save the Children, have been extremely difficult.
Live and Learn, Engineers Without Border, Mamma’s
Laef, Live and Learn Vanuatu, Wan Smolbag The evaluation team thanks the parents, teachers
(Vanuatu), World Vision International, Live and Learn and school leadership involved in conducting
Environmental Education (Solomon Islands), NZ the fieldwork and providing their insights on the
Institute for Environmental Science and Research Three Star Approach. The evaluation team would
(ESR), Live and Learn Environmental Education, like to thank the students and young people who
Kiribati Women’s Federation (AMAK) (Kiribati) participated in the fieldwork, lending their voices
and expressing their views of how to improve water,
UNICEF National Committees / Donor government – sanitation and hygiene for all children and young
Department for Foreign Affairs and Trade (DFAT), people across the Pacific region. Particular thanks
Government of Australia, UNICEF National is given to colleagues who gave up their valuable
Committees of Australia and New Zealand and time and expertise to undertake a comprehensive
German Cooperation for International Cooperation review the first drafts of the country reports and the
(GIZ) (FSM) overall synthesis report whom also went the extra
mile to share additional documents or information
UNICEF – which included UNICEF Country Offices: and answer questions as part of the review process,
Jeffery Ing – WASH Specialist, Quennie Amor - over and above what was expected.
WASH Consultant, Helen Piana (WinS Consultant)
and Cromwell Baraza – Chief of Field Office UNICEF It is hoped that the outputs of this evaluation
(FSM), Mamita Bora Thakkar – WASH Specialist, contributes to the country, regional and global
previously Solomon Islands, Zelalem Taffesse – Chief knowledge base around WASH in Schools and it is
of Field Office, UNICEF Solomon Islands, Abigail hoped they will provide additional motivation for the
Tevera – WASH Specialist, Frederick Saeni – WASH continued learning and progress on WASH in Schools
Officer and Tai Ring Te – WASH Specialist (Solomon across the Pacific region.
6 Formative Evaluation of UNICEF Three Star Approach for WASH in Schools in the Pacific
Final Report
ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS
AUD Australian Dollar
CLTS Community-led total sanitation
DFAT Australian Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade
DFID United Kingdom Department for International Development
EAPRO East Asia Pacific Regional Office
EMIS Education management information system
EMT Evaluation management team
ESR Environmental Science and Research Limited
FEMIS Fiji Education Management Information System
FGDs Focus group discussions
FSM Federated States of Micronesia
GDP Gross domestic product
GIZ German Corporation for International Development
ICT Information, communication and technology
INGO International non-government organization
KIIs Key informant interviews
KIRIWATSAN Kiribati Water and Sanitation in Outer Islands
KWAS Kiribati WASH from the Start
KWIS Kiribati WASH in Schools
LLEE Live and Learn Environmental Education
MCPD Multi-country programme document
MFAT New Zealand Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade
MHM Menstrual Hygiene Management
NGO Non-government organization
NZD New Zealand Dollar
O&M Operations & maintenance
OECD DAC Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development Assistance Committee
SDGs Sustainable Development Goals
SIBLE Solomon Islands Better Learning Environment
SIEMIS Solomon Islands Education Management Information System
TC Tropical Cyclone
ToR Terms of Reference
UN United Nations
UNDP United Nations Development Programme
UNICEF United Nations Children’s Fund
Van-WASH in Schools Vanuatu Water, Sanitation and Hygiene in Schools
VEMIS Vanuatu Education Management Information System
WASH Water, sanitation and hygiene
WASHBAT Water, sanitation and hygiene bottleneck analysis tool
WHO World Health Organisation
WinS Water, Sanitation and Hygiene in schools
Formative Evaluation of UNICEF Three Star Approach for WASH in Schools in the Pacific 7
Final Report
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
Water, sanitation, and hygiene (WASH) are critical Star Approach has been implemented in the five
dimensions of the health and safety of people in target countries. These lessons are intended to
the Pacific, made even more so by the impact of inform UNICEF Pacific’s WASH agenda, as well as
the COVID-19 pandemic and climate change. 43% the UNICEF Pacific Multi-Country Programme.
of the Pacific population lacks access to basic water
services (World Health Organisation and UNICEF,
2021b) and pressing threats such as increasing SCOPE
numbers of natural disasters are exacerbating
pre-existing vulnerabilities (McLeod & Bruton- This evaluation is concentrated on the Three Star
Adams, 2019). Access to WASH services is far from Approach across its countries of implementation
equitable, with women, people with disabilities in the region, which are currently Fiji, Solomon
and rural communities suffering worse outcomes, Islands, Vanuatu, Kiribati, and Federated States
particularly when these categories intersect of Micronesia (FSM). Fiji was the first country to
(WaterAid, 2016). Schools across the region face a implement the Three Star Approach for WASH in
lack of suitable WASH infrastructure and awareness, Schools in 2014. Kiribati was the second country
resulting in continuing practice of open defecation, of implementation in the Pacific in 2015. This was
spread of disease and student absenteeism during followed by the Solomon Islands in 2016, then larger
menstruation, amongst other public health risks. Fiji and Vanuatu implementation in 2017. Advocacy
work and baseline surveys began in FSM in 2018.
This evaluation focuses on the years between 2015
THE THREE STAR APPROACH
– 2018, however research stretched from 2011 to the
present day (2021).
The Three Star Approach was designed to be a
“simple, scalable and sustainable” method to
address WASH issues in schools, with a particular METHODOLOGY
focus on hygiene and behaviour change. Schools
are rated from a scale of zero to three stars based This evaluation was centred on the principles of
on the WASH infrastructure and behaviours utility and realism, ensuring that the products
exhibited by students (UNICEF & GIZ, 2013). It is are of use to UNICEF, national governments and
an incremental approach, centred on strengthening WASH partners. The evaluation matrix is built around
the capacity of schools to identify their own needs relevance, coherence, efficiency, effectiveness and
and empower children to become agents of change sustainability. The evaluation methods included
in their communities through their improved WASH extensive secondary document review from
knowledge. It looks to address the bottlenecks global to local resources; primary data collection
that block the effectiveness and expansion of through key informant interviews with UNICEF,
current WASH in Schools programmes. Additionally, government, non-government organisations and
the Three Star Approach works to encourage other stakeholders in all five countries; and fieldwork
governments to create an enabling environment in schools and communities of implementation,
through the commitment of policy, legislation and with interviews and transect walks with students,
financing for effective WASH in schools. parents, teachers and school leadership in four
countries (FSM was excluded by UNICEF due to
status of implementation).
PURPOSE
The evaluation underwent some modifications
The purpose of this evaluation is to generate due to the onset and ongoing nature of the
evidence to inform replicability and scalability COVID-19 pandemic, however this in no way
of the Three Star Approach for WASH in Schools. compromised the integrity or quality of the
It is designed to foster learning and improvement evaluation. As a result of travel restrictions, the
of the approach, and identify priority focus areas evaluation was initially delayed, and a revised
for government partners, donors and UNICEF. The inception report and methodology proposed in
intended audience is UNICEF Pacific, education November 2020. In the revision, the team partnered
and health ministries in host governments (along with Pacific-based Talanoa Consulting. Talanoa
with other relevant ministries), WASH programme and evaluation team recruited and trained highly
implementing partners and donors. Based on the experienced data collectors to conduct the fieldwork
evaluation’s formative purpose, the objectives in their local communities. The data collectors went
were centred on assessing progress to date and on to contribute to the analysis and development of
identifying lessons from the way in which the Three the findings.
8 Formative Evaluation of UNICEF Three Star Approach for WASH in Schools in the Pacific
Final Report
KEY FINDINGS Systemic weaknesses due to limited capacities
and supply and resource chains seriously impact
RELEVANCE the programme and both weaken and damage
the areas of strength in approach and buy-in from
The objectives of the Three Star Approach for
government, schools and communities. Addressing
WASH in Schools are aligned with and respond
these weaknesses starts with the theoretical
to most of the changing policies and priorities
underpinning of the programme at regional
at a global level, specifically in relation to the
and country levels. There is a clear challenge of
Sustainable Development Goals and UNICEF’s Global
budgeting for operations and maintenance (O&M),
WASH Strategy. A critical weakness is the lack of
with a need to embed financing of school facilities
detail on resilience. Strong government buy-in to the
and infrastructure into the cost of improvements for
approach, as evidenced in evaluation countries, is
schools. Systemic and structural challenges need
testament to the importance and relevance of taking
to be considered in programme planning with due
a demand-driven approach. Whilst the rights-based
attention paid to threats and challenges to efficiency.
element is present and progress is being made, a
strong inclusion focus regarding disability is not clear.
EFFECTIVENESS
There is clear evidence that pilot schools have
The primary challenge with programme relevance
experienced improvements in their star ratings,
is to ensure that alignment is sufficiently
reflecting an improvement in WASH behaviours,
detailed. The prime indicators of this lack of detail
and this has also been seen within gender-related
are seen in the regional- and country-level Theories
WASH outcomes. Additionally, there has been
of Change and their accompanying programme plans
significant policy reform and improvements in the
and results frameworks. A gap exists within these
enabling environment that bolster WASH in schools.
documents between the intermediate outcomes
The lack of WASH infrastructure at both school and
and the assumptions, risks and mitigating strategies.
community level however is a major constraint to
Additionally, they lack localised nuance which limits
further improvement.
their capacity to act as a foundation for plans that
promote and support effective, inclusive and
There has been little progress responding to
sustainable change.
the unique needs of children with disability,
COHERENCE due to many stakeholders holding a simplistic view
of disability - guidance notes on the Three Star
There are important examples of governments
Approach reflect this (e.g., exclusively referring to
institutionalising WASH in schools in line with
people in wheelchairs). Monitoring and reporting
the Three Star Approach which is a significant
across the Three Star Approach are not adequate,
achievement. Generally, this is tied into strong
which hinders data-informed decision making and
buy-in from different ministries. This includes some
building intra-regional learning on what works in the
governments requesting roll-out nationwide, a key
Pacific context.
opportunity to improve WASH for thousands of
children. Communities and schools broadly do not
SUSTAINABILITY
have name recognition of the Three Star Approach,
The Three Star Approach for WASH in Schools
and whilst they are eager to improve WASH
in the Pacific contains sustainable elements,
standards, they do not have the financial capacity to
however a more targeted strategy is required
do so.
in order to ensure that gains do not revert
back, particularly considering the pace of roll-
Development partners and other actors in the
out. Components that do reflect sustainability
WASH sector have a general understanding of
are the development of ‘change makers’ in host
the Three Star Approach and mostly work in line
governments, progress within advocacy for improved
with it. Strategic, capacity-informed partnerships
menstrual hygiene management (MHM) and the
have not been witnessed, with international non-
simplicity inherent in the design itself. One concern
government organisations and other stakeholders
for sustainability is around the lack of detailed
in the region used more as implementing bodies.
strategy for wider roll-out, particularly in Vanuatu
Questions around ‘why’, ‘who’, and ‘how’ seem to
and Kiribati, as vast amounts of finances, technical
be rarely considered when working with partners.
capacity and human resources will be needed to
EFFICIENCY make the implementation a success.
Whilst resources for the WASH in Schools
Challenges are caused primarily by supply-side
programme have been adequate for the initial
constraints, as communities, students and schools
phase of the programme, there are serious
are seen as largely incapable of self-advocating
challenges to the quantity, level, quality and
effectively to improve WASH infrastructure. There
timeliness of resourcing, implementation, and
are some good examples of U Report, UNICEF’s
management of activities to ensure that gains can
social messaging and data collection tool, being
be sustained and built on.
Formative Evaluation of UNICEF Three Star Approach for WASH in Schools in the Pacific 9
Final Report
used to mobilise community ‘voice’, and this could Centre the importance of disability as a key
be strengthened further along with other community priority and continue progress being made on
reporting mechanisms. Vulnerable children, parents gender-related WASH.
and their communities with limited resources often Develop training for Three Star Approach stakeholders
prioritise other needs. Whilst the approach is robust on the diversity of disability and accommodations
and well-situated, further thinking is required to build and adjustments that can (and should) be made to
sustainability to ensure its ongoing impact. further support inclusion. Continue advocacy efforts
for improvements to gender-related standards and
MHM education and infrastructure. Consider further
RECOMMENDATIONS
research into options for the provision of MHM
supplies, including school budgetary requirements
Construct practical and robust Theories of Change and culturally appropriate sustainable alternatives.
in which assumptions, context and partnerships
are well-grounded. Share good practice on O&M and consider
This evaluation recommends that new Theories mandatory requirements for them to be
of Change should be developed that reflect best embedded in school management.
practice and are based on WASH Bottleneck Continue to amalgamate contextualised examples
Analyses conducted at both regional and country of strong O&M in practice and support the
levels. Specific focus should be paid to programme development of alternative approaches to O&M
risks and assumptions that are then tested in an during the design phase, including consideration for
iterative manner and updated as necessary. more expensive facilities that may have lower O&M
costs in the longer term. Continue to advocate to
Develop sufficiently detailed and relevant government partners for either i) the provision of
programme indicators and ensure timely budgetary support for O&M or ii) if not possible then
monitoring and reporting against them. provide increased trainings for school management
These should be derived from and explicitly linked to committees on how to budget for O&M.
the Theories of Change. Increasing the requirements
for formal internal monitoring and reporting in a Build local ownership and sustainability through
consistent manner across the Pacific will improve maximising the voice of rights holders.
data-informed programming and build a greater Build recognition and usage of UNICEF’s social
evidence body on the Three Star Approach for messaging and data collection tool U-Report and
implementing Pacific Island countries and other develop analogue ways of collecting and responding
stakeholders. to feedback from children and young people. Utilise
teachers, parent teacher associations and other
Build research base and develop a UNICEF- school community-based groups to push initiatives
specific approach to the ‘scale up’ process of the and collect and respond to their feedback on the
Three Star Approach. implementation of the Three Star Approach.
This recommendation is critical for all programming
but is particularly pertinent for Vanuatu and Kiribati
(as they aim for national roll-out). This evaluation
recommends that UNICEF robust outcome
harvesting approaches to build an understanding of
what works in scale up the Three Star Approach in the
Pacific and where possible advocate for larger pilots
and more rigorous testing for further refinement of
tools and strategies.
10 Formative Evaluation of UNICEF Three Star Approach for WASH in Schools in the Pacific
Final Report
1. INTRODUCTION
This is the final evaluation report for the rarer across the Pacific (McLeod & Bruton-Adams,
formative, theory-based evaluation of the Three 2019), and the spread of disease such as the
Star Approach for Water, Sanitation and Hygiene COVID-19 has demonstrated the vital importance
(WASH) in Schools in the Pacific region. The of robust hygiene practices (Centers for Disease
Three Star Approach was launched in 2013 with Control and Prevention, 2020). The impact on the
the publication of a Field Guide to its application health and education of children costs Pacific
(UNICEF & GIZ, 2013). The approach aims to address Island countries dearly in foregone Gross Domestic
bottlenecks that obstruct the effectiveness and Product (GDP) and restricts their ability to achieve
expansion of WASH in Schools programmes in the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) (World
particular countries, so that all schools can meet the Health Organisation, 2015). A range of challenges
applicable national WASH standards. In the Pacific, are present in Pacific Island countries in relation to
UNICEF, with its implementing partners, has rolled improving WASH in schools, including geography,
out the approach in Fiji, Solomon Islands, Vanuatu, restricted government capacity and insufficient
Kiribati and Federated States of Micronesia (FSM). It infrastructure as is further explored in Section 1.1.2
is designed to be “simple, scalable and sustainable” (Love et al., 2020).
and can be tailored for implementation in different
contexts to advance the effectiveness of hygiene UNICEF supports governments in accordance
behaviour change programmes (UNICEF & GIZ, with its mandate to advocate for the protection
2013). of children’s rights. To strengthen WASH for
children, schools are a logical entry point. WASH in
This final evaluation report sets out the evaluation Schools is directly linked into the SDGs, specifically
context, purpose, scope, methodology, findings, Targets 4.a, 6.1 and 6.2. Children spend a significant
conclusions and recommendations. portion of their day at school, where WASH services
can impact student health, learning and dignity.
Therefore, UNICEF’s support has a strong focus
1.1 Context on strengthening WASH in schools. The Three
Star Approach for WASH in Schools has been
developed to address context-specific challenges
1.1.1 Global and Regional Context
and bottlenecks to strengthening WASH in schools,
and also empower children to be agents of change
Five years into the Sustainable Development
in their homes and communities. The report further
Goals (SDGs) and the world is not on track
details the framework of the approach Section 1.2.
to achieve WASH-related targets 6.1 (drinking
water) and 6.2 (sanitation and hygiene) (WHO,
The COVID-19 pandemic has severely impacted
2021). This situation is reflected in the Pacific, as the
the Pacific, as with the rest of the world. On the
current rate of progress will be too slow to achieve
11th of March 2020, the World Health Organisation
the targets by 2030 (World Health Organisation and
(WHO) declared a global pandemic due to the SARS-
UNICEF, 2021c). 43% of the Pacific population lack
CoV-2 respiratory illness (COVID-19). At the time
access to basic water services and large disparities
of writing, 4.5 million people have died globally as
exist within the region (World Health Organisation
a result. Throughout 2020, thanks to its relative
and UNICEF, 2021b). For example, 90% of Tonga’s
geographic isolation, the Pacific Islands remained
population has access to basic or safe water
relatively unscathed through a series of strict national
services in comparison to only 45% of Papua New
lockdowns and major travel restrictions (Pryke,
Guinea’s population (World Health Organisation and
2021). This has come at significant economic cost
UNICEF, 2021a). Inequalities within countries are
to Pacific Island countries, with tourism and exports
also present, with significant distinctions between
suffering greatly.
remote, rural and urban areas and across ethnic and
social-economic divides (World Health Organisation
The COVID-19 context in the Pacific is changing
and UNICEF, 2021c). Women, people with disabilities
rapidly at the time of this report (August 2021).
and indigenous groups are all more likely to face
Towards the end of 2020, Vanuatu declared its first
barriers to adequate WASH, presenting significant
case which resulted in the main island going into
intersectional equity issues (WaterAid, 2016).
lockdown (The Pacific Community, 2021). In March
2021, Papua New Guinea reported a significant
Pressing threats such as natural disasters
surge in cases. In May 2021, a growing cluster of
and increasing impacts of climate change are
cases on the island of Viti Levu, Fiji (where capital
exacerbating pre-existing vulnerabilities in
Suva is located) pushed the Fijian Government
the region. Freshwater resources are becoming
to declare a lockdown (Movono, 2021). Solomon
Formative Evaluation of UNICEF Three Star Approach for WASH in Schools in the Pacific 11
Final Report
Drink Water
•
No service
•
Insufficient data
•
Limited
•
Basic
Sanitation •
No service
•
Insufficient data
•
Limited
•
Basic
Hygiene
•
No service
•
Insufficient data
•
Limited
•
Basic
Drinking Water
)%(
egarevoC
Islands, Kiribati and FSM have been impacted by As evidenced in Figure 1, basic / sufficient WASH
regional lockdowns through the loss of tourism in Schools is far from widespread, with 43.84%
and export trade but are yet to report a death of students in Oceania1 having no access to
from COVID-19 (The Pacific Community, 2021). hygiene at school. Access to basic levels of drinking
Economists predict the pandemic-related economic water and sanitation at school are relatively equal,
recession will last several years and will invariably with 48.34% and 47.07% respectively. Hygiene in
place a squeeze on bilateral and multilateral aid to schools is comparatively behind, with 16.97% of
the region (Brown, 2021). Public health specialists the population having basic access at school. Some
predict that herd immunity through vaccination could bottlenecks / challenges to universal WASH in schools
take several years to cover the diverse and dispersed are listed below, however the list is not exhaustive.
Pacific population (Natalegawa & Bismonte, 2021).
As the vaccination roll-out continues in the Pacific, Lack of access to drinking water at schools is
it remains critical to bolster hygiene practices to common in the Pacific region. 43.48% of schools
prevent the spread COVID-19 (Centers for Disease report no water service (as seen in Figure 1) (UNICEF
Control and Prevention, 2020). & WHO, 2021). Access to improved drinking water
is higher at the household-level (57.35%), however
1.1.2 WASH Bottlenecks in Evaluation the irregularity / inequity of access impacts children’s
Countries health due to increased likelihood of drinking
contaminated water, which is linked to illness
Efforts to improve WASH in the Pacific face a and death (UNICEF Pacific, 2017c). Children at
range of challenges, including the geography schools without improved water sources are more
of the region. The region is made up of multiple likely to get their water from surface water, rivers,
groups of islands and/or atolls spread across vast lakes, unprotected dug wells and ponds. This is a
stretches of ocean. Typically, the population is significant issue, as evidenced by diarrheal diseases
concentrated on one or more “core” islands, which being the sixth most common cause of death in
usually contain the national capital and are the most Solomon Islands (Asian Development Bank, 2019).
urbanized areas, with the highest concentration of Water scarcity at school has been identified by World
employment and educational opportunities (Levine, Vision as a key cause for student absenteeism (due
n.d.). This creates distinct difference between urban to illness) as well as student dropout rates (World
and rural populations with children growing up in Vision, 2021).
highly contrasted environments. Land area tends to
be very limited and space for school infrastructure is Weather events and the increasing impacts of
often limited. Many Pacific Island territories exceed climate change is negatively impacting WASH
1,000,000 square kilometres, bringing considerable outcomes, including in schools. Maintaining
transport hurdles. The widely dispersed nature of progress in WASH in schools is negatively impacted
many Pacific Island countries makes the delivery through extreme weather events resulting in
of core government services challenging, including damaged and destroyed facilities (toilets and
WASH.
Figure 1: Oceania WASH in School Data (UNICEF & WHO, 2021)
School data - SDG regions - Oceania - 2019 - Service Levels
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
Sanitation Hygiene
1 SDG regions = Oceania is the Pacific without Australia and New Zealand, which are reported on separately.
12 Formative Evaluation of UNICEF Three Star Approach for WASH in Schools in the Pacific
Final Report
rainwater catchment facilities). Communities have connections and the need for boats, make logistics
limited resources to repair damage, which has difficult for critical water infrastructure across the
significant impacts in countries like Solomon Islands region, as transporting items such as water tanks
where the majority of schools are community-built needed for schools can be extremely challenging.
and maintained. The effects of climate disasters on Access to markets and supply chains in the Pacific
fragile freshwater resources are especially critical. region is costly due to the geographic disparity of
Kiribati’s capital Tarawa has limited freshwater the countries and this impacts schools’ access and
resources and combining with increased climate affordability of WASH infrastructure and maintenance
variability has resulted in increased threat of water (Anderson et al., 2019).
scarcity, putting pressure on schools’ ability to
provide water for both drinking and handwashing Regional economic and governmental factors
(World Bank, 2019). Most of Vanuatu’s islands have are linked with lack of universal safe WASH in
little permanent freshwater, and lower-lying islands schools. The Pacific region has small economies,
are dependent on groundwater, harvested rainwater as evidenced by low GDPs throughout the region
or freshwater lenses, all likely to be disrupted by (Worldometer, 2020). This negatively impacts on
changing rain patterns (Future Directions, 2019). available finances to improve WASH infrastructure
and embed operations & maintenance practices.
Access to adequate sanitation is limited due Adequate WASH in schools relies heavily on
to insufficient infrastructure. Open defecation government funding, policies and guidance. Funding
is still reported to be practiced amongst 44.79% allocations for WASH from central governments
of households in Solomon Islands (UNICEF & across the region have largely been inadequate (Asian
WHO, 2021). A recent outbreak of cholera in 2020 Development Bank, 2020). The Pacific region has a
on Pohnpei Island in FSM affected approximately frequent lack of (i) sector policies and regulations for
3,500 people and was the result of poor wastewater schools to provide WASH infrastructure and (ii) clearly
management (Pacific Water, 2020). Significant defined roles and responsibilities of government
disparities exist between rural and urban populations agencies to address WASH, including WASH in
(Anderson et al., 2019). Handwashing stations with schools (WASH Reference Group, 2020).
soap for regular handwashing are available in only
26% of schools in Solomon Islands (UNICEF & WHO, Knowledge and information around WASH acts
2021). WHO has linked poor sanitation in schools as a limiting factor on quality WASH in schools.
with reduced well-being, social and economic WASH practices and menstruation have been
development and lost educational opportunities for included in many Pacific Island school curriculums, yet
students (WHO, 2019). teachers report feeling ill-equipped or uncomfortable
around teaching these topics (Anderson et al., 2019).
Girls face significant challenges to manage Widespread knowledge around the importance of
menstruation effectively with dignity at school, handwashing and sanitation relating to the spread
which contributes to absenteeism. A study diseases is an ongoing gap across Pacific Island
conducted by the Burnet Institute identified pervasive populations (MacDonald et al., 2017). Capacity
taboo surrounding menstruation across the Pacific, constraints across all levels of governance have
including ongoing beliefs of it being ‘dirty’ which been identified by the WASH Reference Group as
creates ongoing stigma resulting in poor hygienic a critical challenge to overcome to improve WASH
management and feelings of humiliation from girls in the Pacific (WASH Reference Group, 2020) and
(Mohamed et al., 2017). Schools in the region can this is further exacerbated by high staff turnover
be inadequate to meet menstruating girls’ needs, (Secretariat of the Pacific Regional Environment
including lack of toilets, safe disposal options, soap Programme, 2021).
and water (Mohamed et al., 2017). In Fiji, girls report
a lack of understanding of menstruation, and report
that menstruation reduces their participation in class 1.1.3 Country Contexts
and attendance at school (Francois et al., 2017). This
absenteeism, amongst other negative impacts of The Three Star Approach has been implemented by
stigma around menstruation, poses a threat to girls’ UNICEF in Fiji, Kiribati, Solomon Islands, Vanuatu
educational attainment (Benshaul-Tolonen et al., and the FSM. These are the five focus countries
2020). for this evaluation. The most up-to-date information
regarding the country WASH contexts are included
Supply, transport and topography are key in Tables 1, 2, 3, 4 and 5 (World Health Organisation
elements to improving WASH in schools in the and UNICEF, 2021c) and their Human Development
Pacific. Countries such as Fiji and Kiribati are made Indexes (United Nations Development Programme,
up of a large number of small islands and navigating 2020). WASH in Schools data from each target
the logistic and financial constraints to delivering country is included in Figure 2.
improved WASH infrastructure cannot be ignored.
Modes of transport, including inadequate road
Formative Evaluation of UNICEF Three Star Approach for WASH in Schools in the Pacific 13
Final Report
Figure 2: Service Levels for WASH in Schools in Evaluation Countries
(UNICEF & WHO, 2021)
School data - 2019 - Service Levels
Drink Water
•
No service
•
Insufficient data
•
Limited
•
Basic
Sanitation •
No service
•
Insufficient data
•
Limited
•
Basic
Hygiene
•
No service
•
Insufficient data
•
Limited
•
Basic
Fiji Kiribati Solomon Vanuatu
Islands
Drinking Water
)%(
egarevoC
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
Fiji Kiribati Solomon Vanuatu Fiji Kiribati Solomon Vanuatu
Islands Islands
Sanitation Hygiene
Table 1: Country Context - Fiji
Country Fiji
Human Development
0.743 – 93 out of 189 countries
Index
Surface drinking water: 2%
Most recent
Unimproved drinking water: 3%
household WASH
Basic drinking water: 94%
data
At least Basic sanitation: 99%
Fiji is one of the richest Pacific Island countries, although the economy
is currently experiencing a sharp decline as a result of the COVID-19
restrictions limiting the tourism sector (Australian Department of Foreign
Brief context Affairs and Trade, 2021a). Natural disasters often affect or reverse WASH
gains made. Significant tropical cyclones such as Cyclone Winston in 2016
and Cyclone Harold in 2020 reflected the vulnerabilities of Fiji’s physical
infrastructure and need to prepare for a changing climate.
The Fijian government has a robust approach to WASH, with targets for
100% access to safe drinking water by 2030 included in the National
Development Plan (UNICEF, 2018a). A new Clean Environment Policy was
Policy Context released in February 2019. Fiji has also established National Drinking Water
Quality Standards with the assistance of UNICEF and WHO. Fiji also has a
WASH in Schools Policy and a National Water and Sanitation Policy, both of
which provide a framework to ensure water and sanitation for all.
14 Formative Evaluation of UNICEF Three Star Approach for WASH in Schools in the Pacific
Final Report
Table 2: Country Context - Kiribati
Country Kiribati
Human Development
0.630 – 134 out of 189 countries
Index
Surface drinking water: 2% Basic sanitation: 19%
Basic household Unimproved drinking water: 3% Safe managed sanitation: 26%
WASH statistics Basic drinking water: 94% Limited sanitation: 16%
At least Basic sanitation: 99% Basic hygiene: 56%
Half of the total population of almost 120,000 people live in the main
urban area of the main island of South Tarawa. Spread over a vast area of
ocean, many of the islands and atolls that make up Kiribati are extremely
remote and difficult to access (Australian Department of Foreign Affairs
Brief context and Trade, 2021b). Increasing migration from the outer islands to the main
island is resulting in high population densities, overcrowding and strained
infrastructure, particularly in Betio (Australian Department of Foreign Affairs
and Trade, 2021b). This is placing major demands on existing freshwater
sources and sanitation.
The Government of Kiribati developed a National Sanitation Policy in 2010,
coordinated by the Ministry of Public Works and Utilities. The Kiribati
Development Plan 2020-2023 has identified WASH as critical for the
Policy Context
country’s development. Kiribati adopted a WASH in Schools Policy in 2015
and has School Improvement Plan Standards and National Infrastructure
Standards for Primary Schools (2011).
Table 3: Country Context - Solomon Islands
Country Solomon Islands
Human Development
0.567 – 151 out of 189 countries
Index
Basic household Limited service water: 6% Limited service sanitation: 6%
WASH statistics At least basic water: 67% At least basic sanitation: 35%
Solomon Islands is one of the poorest countries in the Pacific with a small
and geographically diverse population (Australian Department of Foreign
Affairs and Trade, 2021c). The country experienced severe economic
contraction between 1998 and 2003 due to ethnic conflict (Australian
Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade, 2021c). Populations in rural and
Brief context remote areas have significantly different WASH experiences in comparison
to the growing informal settlements around capital Honiara, but overall,
44% of the population practice open defecation (World Health Organisation
and UNICEF, 2021a). With agriculture, forestry and fisheries providing
livelihoods for the majority of the population, the impact of climate change
is a major concern (UNDP Climate Change Adaptation, n.d.).
WASH targets in line with the SDGs have been established by the
Solomon Islands Government’s National Development Strategy 2016-35.
There are several relevant policy documents, including the Rural WASH
Policy (2015), Rural WASH Strategic Plan (2015-2020) and the Solomon
Policy Context Water Development Plan (2013-2015). The Ministry of Health and Medical
Services leads coordination for rural water development (Water Aid, 2016).
The Ministry of Education and Human Resources Development has also
produced a policy for Water Supply, Sanitation and Hygiene for Education
Facilities in the Solomon Islands (2018).
Formative Evaluation of UNICEF Three Star Approach for WASH in Schools in the Pacific 15
Final Report
Table 4: Country Context - Federated States of Micronesia
Country Federated States of Micronesia
Human Development
0.620 – 136 out of 189 countries
Index
Basic household At least basic drinking water: 88%
WASH statistics At least basic basic sanitation: 88%
FSM is a decentralised country, with main government functions vested at
the level of its four states (Chuuk, Kosrae, Pohnpei and Yap). The economy
is almost entirely dependent on government services and external grants,
with a highly limited private sector (Australian Department of Foreign
Affairs and Trade, 2019). Poverty is concentrated in the states of Pohnpei
Brief context and Chuuk (World Bank, 2015) and the small islands in all states are fully
reliant on rainwater and shallow wells due to the low elevation (Pacific
Water, 2007). These are highly vulnerable to pollution and contamination
which, together with inadequate wastewater control, result in frequent
cholera outbreaks. Rising sea levels are anticipated to increase challenges
for healthy and sustainable WASH practices.
WASH-related policies for urban sanitation, urban drinking water, hygiene
Policy Context promotion in schools and WASH in Schools have been approved but are yet
to be implemented.
Table 5: Country Context - Vanuatu
Country Vanuatu
Human Development
0.609 – 140 out of 189 countries
Index
Basic drinking water: 91%
Basic household Basic sanitation: 53%
WASH statistics Limited sanitation: 15%
Unimproved sanitation: 31%
With a predominately rural population of almost 300,000 spread across
several islands, Vanuatu has challenges in delivering equitable WASH
infrastructure and capacity training across the country (Worldmeters,
2019). Gender inequality is still a hurdle to be addressed as 72% of women
in Vanuatu have experienced some form of physical sexual violence in
their lives (Pacific Women, 2017). The Government of Vanuatu has been
Brief context
proactively monitoring the impact of climate change on the country,
particularly after Cyclone Pam destroyed 92 % of crops in 2015 (Permanent
Mission of the Republic of Vanuatu to the UN, 2019). Cyclone Harold also
caused enormous devastation to local communities in Vanuatu (particularly
in Ambae) in April 2020. Increasing salination and costal erosion continue to
pose major threats to Vanuatu’s overall health, economy, and development.
Water Resources Administration in Vanuatu is governed by the Water
Supply Amendment Act 2016, the Water Resources Management
Amendment Act 2016 and the Public Health Amendment Act 2018. Led by
the Ministry of Lands and Natural Resources, the current Vanuatu National
Water Strategy (2018-2030) follows on the previous ten-year strategy
Policy Context
(2008 – 2018). Water sanitation and supply constitutes a key part of the
Vanuatu Infrastructure Strategic Investment Plan (2015-2024). The National
Sustainable Development Plan (2016-2030) is built on a pillar of protecting
the environment to ensure Vanuatu’s adaptive capacity to climate change
and natural disasters (Green Growth Knowledge Platform, 2016).
16 Formative Evaluation of UNICEF Three Star Approach for WASH in Schools in the Pacific
Final Report
1.2 Object of the Evaluation schools to take simple, inexpensive steps to ensure
that all students wash their hands with soap, have
access to drinking water, and are provided with
The Three Star Approach for WASH in Schools
clean, gender-segregated toilets at school.
is an intervention model aimed at supporting
the institutionalisation of WASH in schools and
The Three Star Approach is designed to be easily
the community more broadly. It aims to address
scalable. It is an incremental approach aiming first
bottlenecks that obstruct the effectiveness and
at achieving minimum standards, and then moving
expansion of WASH in Schools programmes so
from one to three stars by expanding hygiene-
that all schools can meet national WASH standards
promotion activities and improving infrastructure,
applicable in a particular country. Bottlenecks to
ultimately achieving the national standards for WASH
WASH in Schools improvement often relate to the
in Schools. The Three Star classification (illustrated
responsibilities of governments, as duty bearers to
in Figure 3) incentivises and encourages schools to
develop and implement effective policy, legislation
improve WASH facilities and practices. As schools
and financing, and adequate human and physical
move along the continuum from none to three stars,
resources for effective and sustainable WASH in
the WASH curriculum, WASH facilities and sanitation
Schools, amongst others.
and hygiene practices improve.
The Three Star Approach for WASH in Schools
Stars are designed to be calculated by inputting
is demand-driven and rights-based. It aims to
basic WASH information. Schools input data around
strengthen the capacity of schools to identify their
the numbers of students (gender-disaggregated), of
own needs; to effectively introduce, manage and
toilets, of taps etc. and the chosen data management
sustain appropriate WASH facilities and practices;
system calculates what ‘star’ the school is at. In
and to enhance stakeholder involvement to
the participating countries, Three Star Approach
strengthen and sustain their initiatives. It supports
stakeholders also visit schools to verify information.
and empowers rights-holders, in this case all children
This input and verification process is carried out in
in participating countries, to realise their right to
different ways across participating countries. An
adequate WASH in schools, and more widely in their
extended stakeholder list involved in the Three Star
homes and communities. Based on the principles of
Approach is included in Annex XII.
simplicity, scalability and sustainability, it encourages
Figure 3: Overview of the Three Star Approach for WASH in Schools
(UNICEF & GIZ, 2013)
One Star School Two Star School Three Star School
Daily routines to promote Incremental improvements Meeting national standards
healthy habits • Hygiene education and • School facilities and systems
• Daily supervised group hand facilities to promote hand upgraded to meet national
washing with soap, normally washing with soap after standards
before the school meal toilet use
• Daily supervised cleaning of • Improved sanitation facilities,
toilets, and provision of soap plus facilities and education
and water (at least one for menstrual hygiene
functional toilet for girls and management
one for boys); no open • Low-cost point-ofuse water
defecation treatment introduced in
• Daily supervised use of schools
drinking-water bottles by all
children
‘No Star School’
The existing situation for many schools
• Limited or no hygiene promotion
• May or may not have WASH infrastructure
Formative Evaluation of UNICEF Three Star Approach for WASH in Schools in the Pacific 17
Final Report
1.3 Implementation in the Pacific
The Three Star Approach for WASH in Schools This was followed by Solomon Islands in 2016, then
has been progressively rolled out to five Pacific a larger Fiji and Vanuatu implementation in 2017, as
countries. Fiji was the first country to implement outlined in Figure 4. Advocacy work and baseline
the Three Star Approach for WASH in Schools in surveys began in FSM in 2018. As evidenced by
2014 (UNICEF Pacific, 2015). Kiribati was the second Tables 6, 7, 8, 9 and 10, roll-out, focus, timeframe,
country of implementation in the Pacific in 2015. scope and funding vary across the countries.
Figure 4: Periods of Implementation of the Three Star Approach
2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022
KIRIBATI
SOLOMON ISLANDS
VANUATU
PILOT FIJI FIJI
FSM
Table 6: Overview of Kiribati Three Star Approach for WASH in Schools
Kiribati – Three Star Approach
Mainly demand – Training on WASH Technical Toolkit and management provided
Focus to school committees by Regional NGO Live and Learn Environmental Education
(LLEE), with support from UNICEF.
Timeframe 2015 – 2018
36 Schools (26 primary, 7 junior secondary and 3 senior secondary)
4,800 students (40% of the outer island student population) and 219 teachers
The Three Star Approach is embedded within the Kiribati WASH from the Start
(KWAS) initiative. The KWAS initiative builds on the previous Kiribati WASH in Schools
Scope
(KWIS) programme which ran from 2015-2019. The Three Star Approach was initially
piloted in four schools in 2015 but has since been extended to 32 schools on four
outer islands. There are now plans to roll out the Three Star Approach to all schools
in Kiribati (through the KWAS initiative) by 2023.
Four of the outer islands of the Gilbert group (North Tarawa, Abaiang, Maiana,
Location
Marakei)
MFAT: NZD 1,480,350 of which NZD1,184,070 is being provided by the New Zealand
Partnership for Development Fund
Funding
UNICEF: NZD 296,070 in matched funding and $360,000 in kind (Human Resources)
ESR: NZD 26,000 in kind (Human Resources)
Regional NGO LLEE: production of WASH Education Toolkit
Partnerships KIRIWATSAN project: assistance in building relationships with school committees,
village water committees and women’s groups.
18 Formative Evaluation of UNICEF Three Star Approach for WASH in Schools in the Pacific
Final Report
Table 7: Overview of the Solomon Islands Three Star Approach for WASH
in Schools
Solomon Islands – Three Star Approach
Focus System strengthening and supply – Aim to get all schools to ‘Two Stars’
Timeframe October 2016 – October 2021
42 schools affected by the April 2014 flash floods, approximately 6,500 students
Scope
and 280 teachers. 7 schools are faith-based.
Location 5 wards in north and East Guadalcanal
Funding MFAT: NZD 3.8 million over 5 years
Environmental Science and Research Limited: technical and scientific support.
Partnerships Engaged in delivering the project outputs are World Vision Solomon Islands, Live &
Learn Environmental Education and Ministry of Education and Human Resources
Table 8: Overview of the Vanuatu Three Star Approach for WASH in Schools
Vanuatu WASH in Schools
Comprehensive. Aiming to get all schools in Penama province to ‘Two Stars’, whilst
building capacity of government and partners to effectively and sustainably scale up
Focus WASH in Schools nation-wide. UNICEF will also advocate for Ministry of Education
and Training policies to be relevant to WASH in Schools issues; develop education
resources; develop WASH in Schools training for school managers, principals etc.
Timeframe July 2017 – June 2022
67 primary and 14 secondary schools
Scope
8,300 students and 404 teachers
Location Penama province (Pentecoste, Ambae, and Maewo islands)
MFAT: NZD 3,719,346
Funding
UNICEF: matched funding
The project is implemented through the Ministry of Education and Training, in
collaboration with the Ministry of Health and Department of Water Resources. ESR
Partnerships will adapt the Department of Water Resources template to be relevant to schools
and support development of technical standards and guidelines around WASH,
particularly in climate, gender and disaster resilience.
Formative Evaluation of UNICEF Three Star Approach for WASH in Schools in the Pacific 19
Final Report
Table 9: Overview of the Fiji Three Star Approach for WASH in Schools
Fiji – Reach for the Stars
Mainly enabling environment – WASH in Schools policy development, advocacy for
WASH in Schools budget allocation, WASH in Schools monitoring systems (inclusion
Focus
of WASH in Schools data in Fiji Education Management Information System) and
training of Head Teachers, teachers, Parent Teacher Association, District officials.
Small pilot in 2014
Timeframe
January 2017 – December 2019: ‘Reach for the Stars’ implemented
Direct: 100 primary schools (from 6 of the 9 education districts in Fiji) and 7 early
childhood education centres, approximately 10,000 children.
Scope Indirect rights holders: 112,468 children in 453 Primary schools.
353 primary schools indirectly benefitting from the country wide Three Star mapping
activity with guidance tools.
Location Suva, Nousori, Ra, Ba/Tavua, Nadroga/Navosa, and Lautoka/Yasawa/Nadi
MFAT: NZD 1,732,000 (through UNICEF New Zealand National committee) for
Funding whole time period.
DFAT: AUD 1.3 million to support school infrastructure development.
CBM Nossal: completed a case study on WASH in School programme for children
with disability.
UNC: completed a menstrual hygiene management study, with Project Heaven as
Partnerships a partner.
LLEE.
Fiji Teachers’ Association: implement activities around education ad training on the
Three Star Approach and enter WASH data into FEMIS.
20 Formative Evaluation of UNICEF Three Star Approach for WASH in Schools in the Pacific
Final Report
Table 10: Overview of the FSM Three Star Approach for WASH in Schools
Federated States of Micronesia – Three Star Approach
Baseline survey completed June 2018 between Chuuk State Department of
Focus
Education and UNICEF
Three Star Approach introduced in the state of Chuuk in October 2017.
Timeframe A baseline study of 24 schools in all 5 regions of Chuuk was conducted in 2018. This
represents 30% of schools in Chuuk State.
Since 2018, UNICEF has assisted the Government of FSM via a single technical
adviser based in Chuuk State. The adviser has had a sole focus on building the enabling
environment for WASH in Schools and building relationships and strengthening
collaboration between the Department of Education, Department of Health, the
Environmental Protection Agency and NGO’s and other stakeholders working in
the sector. The technical support provided follows a baseline assessment of 24
Scope schools in Chuuk State completed in 2018, the most comprehensive assessment
of WASH in Schools in FSM ever undertaken. Five schools from Chuuk State are
currently participating in a pilot of the Three Star Approach (i.e, Three Star Approach
at the school level). In 2020, UNICEF’s technical adviser worked closely with the
Department of Education on the response to the COVID-19 emergency and helped
to draft the Standard Operating Procedures for WASH in Schools in support of the
re-opening of schools in FSM in mid-2020.
Location All 5 regions of Chuuk State
Funding UNICEF regular budget
German Corporation for International Cooperation (GIZ)
Government of FSM
FSM Department of Education
Partnerships
Chuuk Environmental Protection Agency
Chuuk Public Utility Cooperation
Federated States of Micronesia College
Maps of implementation areas are included in Annex IV.
Formative Evaluation of UNICEF Three Star Approach for WASH in Schools in the Pacific 21
Final Report
2. PURPOSE, OBJECTIVE AND SCOPE
OF EVALUATION
2.1 Purpose of the The findings and recommendations of this
evaluation are intended to be used to adjust
Evaluation
WASH in Schools strategies and implementation
modalities when necessary. Additionally, they identify
what changes are required for future replication and/
The main purpose of this formative evaluation is
or scaling, as well as strengthen the implementation
to generate evidence to inform the replicability
of the Three Star Approach in Pacific countries.
and scalability of the Three Star Approach for
WASH in Schools in Fiji, Kiribati, Solomon Islands,
The timing of the evaluation centred on activities
Vanuatu and FSM. The purposes of the evaluation
between 2011 and 2018, but post-2018 actions
are (i) to foster learning and improvement of the
have also been considered. The UNICEF country
Three Star Approach for WASH in Schools, (ii) identify
programme cycle is pertinent to this evaluation as
priority focus areas for government partners and
the activities span multiple cycles. The majority of
donors and (iii) increase accountability by assessing
activities considered were in the previous UNICEF
the effectiveness of the Three Star Approach for
country programme cycle of 2013 – 2017, and the
WASH in Schools in building sustainable and resilient
evaluation took place during the current programme
schools and communities and in changing children’s
cycle of 2018 – 2022. This evaluation contains
behaviour as agents of change.
findings and recommendations that will be relevant
for the next programme cycle of 2023 – 2027.
An extended list of WASH in Schools stakeholders
are contained in Annex XII and the primary
audience includes:
• UNICEF Pacific who will use the information 2.2 Objective of the
to contribute to the mid-term review of the
Evaluation
Multi-Country Programme Document;
• Education and health ministries along with other
relevant ministries or government departments The objectives of the evaluation, as outlined in
at national and provincial/island level; the Terms of Reference (Annex I), were refined to
• Universities and research institutes in the region reflect the evaluation’s formative purpose and to
and abroad; emphasise the focus on the Three Star Approach for
• WASH programme implementing partners and WASH in Schools as the evaluation subject. Table
other development partners working in WASH 11 differentiates the original and revised evaluation
in Schools to learn and increase accountability objectives.
by improving WASH in Schools implementation;
and
• Donors to inform their investments.
Table 11: Evaluation Objectives
Original Objectives as per
Revised Objectives
the Terms of Reference
Over-arching evaluation objective
To establish the extent to which the WASH in To assess results to date, and to identify lessons
Schools Three Star Approach achieved its desired from the way in which the Three Star Approach for
results as it is implemented in Fiji, Kiribati, Solomon WASH in Schools is being implemented in FSM,
Islands and Vanuatu and inform the way forward to Fiji, Kiribati, Solomon Islands and Vanuatu that
advancing the WASH agenda under Goal 4 (“Every can inform the way forward for the WASH agenda
child lives in a safe and clean environment”) of under Goal 4 of UNICEF’s 2018-2021 Strategic Plan:
UNICEF’s 2018-2021 Strategic Plan the Global “every child lives in a safe and clear environment”,
WASH Strategy and UNICEF Pacific Multi-Country as well as the Global WASH Strategy and UNICEF
Programme Document (MCPD). Pacific MCPD.
Table continued on page 22
22 Formative Evaluation of UNICEF Three Star Approach for WASH in Schools in the Pacific
Final Report
Table continued from page 21
Specific evaluation objectives
Assess relevance, effectiveness, efficiency Assess the relevance, coherence, effectiveness,
of the WASH in Schools Three-Star Approach, efficiency and sustainability of the Three
1
and whether it is contributing to sustainable Star Approach for WASH in Schools towards
and resilient (a) schools and (b) communities institutionalising WASH in Schools
Validate Programme Logics for the country-specific
Validation of the WASH in Schools Three-Star and integrated Three Star Approach for WASH
2
Theory of Change in Schools, including its contribution to WASH
outcomes in the MCPD
Identify the pre-conditions and requirements for
Identification of the pre-conditions from pilot
replicating and scaling up pilots of the Three Star
3 to scale up and replication, to other countries
Approach for WASH in Schools in Pacific Island
in the Pacific region
Countries
Determine the extent to which students’ WASH
Determine the extent to which children’s
knowledge and behaviour contribute to WASH
learned WASH behaviours in schools
4 behaviour change at home (with families) and in
contribute to behaviour change at homes
communities, and the conditions and requirements
(among their parents)
to optimise this
2.3 Scope of the Evaluation focused on the key result areas targeted in each
country (see section 1.3). Investigating coherence
between the Three Star Approach for WASH in
The evaluation focused on activities carried out
Schools and other interventions to institutionalise
between 2015 and 2018, whilst also recognising
WASH in Schools is also important to understand
that the foundational work carried out in the
how different stakeholders work together, or could
development of the approach commenced in 2013
work together, to achieve this.
in Fiji. The evaluation was guided by the evaluation
criteria and their associated evaluation questions
The unique opportunities and challenges in different
that were agreed during the original inception phase
evaluation countries provide opportunities to draw
and updated prior to the implementation of phases
lessons and good practice from the way in which
2 and 3 commenced (see section 3.1 and Annex V).
the Three Star Approach for WASH in Schools is
To maintain the utility focus of the evaluation, the
being implemented, as well as conditions and
evaluation team took into consideration activities
opportunities for replication and scale-up, in a wider
after 2018, including the impact of COVID-19 starting
range of contexts. In accordance with the Terms
in 2020.
of Reference (Annex I), the evaluation involved in-
country data collection in four countries (excluding
Not all key result areas of the Three Star Approach
FSM). Data collection began in Fiji to serve as a pilot
for WASH in Schools were targeted in all countries.
for the evaluation methodology and tools, further
Guided by country implementing plans for the Three
explored in Section 3.
Star Approach for WASH in Schools, as well as the
integrated Program Logic (Annex III), the evaluation
Formative Evaluation of UNICEF Three Star Approach for WASH in Schools in the Pacific 23
Final Report
3. METHODOLOGY
3.1 Evaluation Approach data collection methodology did not compromise
the integrity / quality of the evaluation, a prime
consideration in the adaptation of the methodology,
The evaluation is centered on the principles of
along with feasibility.
utility and realism, ensuring that the products
are of use to UNICEF, national governments and
The methods employed in this evaluation include:
WASH partners. The evaluation also builds on the
I. review of secondary documents and data
principles outlined in the United Nations Evaluation
relevant to the design and implementation
Group Norms and Standards for Evaluation (2016) and
of the Three Star Approach for WASH in
UNICEF’s Revised Evaluation Policy (2018b). Based
Schools in FSM, Fiji, Kiribati, Solomon Islands
on an extensive review of the Theories of Change
and Vanuatu, including quantitative data from
for the Three Star Approach (contained in Annex II),
reporting. A list of documents consulted can
the evaluation team devised a theory-based mixed
be found in Annex X.
methods approach to capture learnings in line with
II. primary data collection through online
the evaluation questions (overview in Table 12,
interviews with UNICEF WASH staff in the
detailed in Annex IV). Primary and secondary data
Multi-country Office and participating
were used to inform the findings contained within
countries, including implementing partners,
this report. COVID-19 and its subsequent lockdowns
teachers, community leaders, development
across the Pacific region prompted a revision of the
partners and government stakeholders. A full
data collection approach, and the evaluation team
list of interviewees can be found in Annex XI.
and the UNICEF Evaluation Management Team
III. school visits with teachers, parents and
(EMT) has ensured that the information gathering
students in participating schools by Talanoa
remained robust and relevant.
Consulting data collectors. This included
community transect walks, focus group
The evaluation aimed to learn how, and under
discussions (FGDs) with students and
which conditions, the Three Star Approach for
community members, key informant
WASH in Schools positively influences WASH
interviews (KIIs) with teachers and WASH
behaviour among girls and boys (and men and
coordinators and direct observation of WASH
women). Since the evaluation did not involve the
practices. Samples of these methods are
manipulation of an independent variable or random
included in Annex VI.
assignment of participations to study conditions,
it was based on a non-experimental design. The
The evaluation matrix (Annex IV) illustrates
evaluation was implemented in three phases:
which data collection methods were used to
inception; investigation and validation; and reporting.
address each of the evaluation questions and
During each phase, different methods were used to
an overview is included in Table 12. Working
collect, analyse and interpret data in accordance with
definitions as relevant to the Three Star Approach
the participatory, utilisation-focused approach.
are included in Table 13. A specific non-probability,
multistage sampling approach was used to select
The evaluation adapted significantly and
the islands, provinces, schools and communities
effectively to the COVID-19 context through
visited further detailed in Table 14. Further detail on
partnering with Talanoa Consulting. As a Pacific-
the methodological approach of this evaluation is
based multi-disciplinary consulting company, Talanoa
contained in the Inception Report (IOD Parc, 2020).
provided an ‘on the ground’ perspective in each data
collection country. Highly experienced data collectors
The evaluation used the integrated Program
were recruited in Fiji, Solomon Islands, Kiribati
Logic in Annex III, as well as the Pacific Multi
and Vanuatu from education, aid and community
Country Programme WASH and country-specific
service backgrounds. Gender and age were taken
WASH in Schools Theories of Change (Annex
into consideration to ensure students and teachers
II) as a starting point. The preliminary, integrated
felt comfortable discussing WASH concerns. They
Programme Logic in Annex III incorporates both the
carried out the fieldwork and contributed extensively
theory of action and theory of change for the Three
to the development of findings, providing additional
Star Approach for WASH in Schools. The activities and
information around socio-cultural perceptions of
outputs represent the theory of action, around which
WASH. They contributed to the ‘ground truthing’
UNICEF’s implementing capacity, and associated
recommendations, maintaining the utility-focused
enablers and limitations were investigated. The
dimension of the evaluation. Utilising data collectors
evaluation team then devised the overarching
from the implementing communities and able to
evaluation questions contained in Table 12 and used
speak in community languages added additional
the OECD DAC working definitions defined in Table
relevance to the methodology. These changes in
13.
24 Formative Evaluation of UNICEF Three Star Approach for WASH in Schools in the Pacific
Final Report
Table 12: Overview of Evaluation Questions
OECD DAC
# Evaluation Question
Criteria
Do the objectives and design of the Three Star Approach for WASH in Schools
address and respond to changing global, country and schools’ WASH needs,
1 Relevance
policies and priorities, as well as those of girls and boys (and men and women),
including those at risk of being left behind?
Is the Three Star Approach for WASH in Schools compatible with other WASH
in Schools interventions (government, schools and other actors, including
2 Coherence
those supported by other development partners) in the participating countries,
education sector, schools and communities?
Is the Three Star Approach for WASH in Schools implemented in an economic
3 Efficiency
and timely manner?
Is the Three Star Approach for WASH in Schools contributing to the enabling
environment, demand, supply and quality for WASH in Schools in each country,
4 Effectiveness
for the benefit of girls and boys (and women and men) of different ages and
abilities, including those at risk of being left behind?
Do governments, schools, students and communities have the requisite
5 Sustainability
capacity to sustain and scale up the Three Star Approach for WASH in Schools?
Table 13: OECD DAC Definitions and Working Definitions
Standard OECD DAC Working Definitions for
Criteria
Definitions (2019) this Evaluation
The extent to which the The extent to which the objectives and design
intervention objectives and of the Three Star Approach for WASH in Schools
design respond to participants’, address and respond to changing global, country
Relevance global, country, and partner/ and schools’ WASH needs, policies and priorities,
institution needs, policies, and as well as those of girls and boys (and men and
priorities, and continue to do so women), including those at risk of being left
if circumstances change.2 behind.
Compatibility of the Three Star Approach for
WASH in Schools with other WASH in Schools
Compatibility of the intervention
interventions (government, schools and other
Coherence with other interventions in a
actors, including other development partners) in
country, sector or institution.
the participating countries, provinces, districts,
schools and communities.
The extent to which the Three Star Approach for
The extent to which the WASH in Schools contributes to institutionalising
intervention delivers, or is WASH in Schools in an economic and timely
Efficiency
likely to deliver, results in an manner for the benefit of girls and boys (and men
economic3 and timely way. and women), including those at risk of being left
behind.
Table continued on page 25
2 “Respond to” means that the objectives, design and adaptation of the intervention are sensitive to the economic, environmental, equity, social,
political economy, and capacity conditions in which it takes place.
3 “Economic” is the conversion of inputs (funds, expertise, natural resources, time, etc.) into outputs, outcomes and impacts in the most
cost-effective way possible, as compared to feasible alternatives in the context. “Timely” delivery is delivery within the intended timeframe,
or a timeframe reasonably adjusted to the demands of the evolving context. This may include assessing operational efficiency (how well the
intervention was managed).
Formative Evaluation of UNICEF Three Star Approach for WASH in Schools in the Pacific 25
Final Report
Table continued from page 24
The extent to which the Three Star Approach for
The extent to which the
WASH in Schools contributes to strengthening the
intervention achieved, or
enabling environment, demand, supply and quality
is expected to achieve, its
Effectiveness for WASH in Schools in Pacific Island Countries, for
objectives, and its results,
the benefit of girls and boys (and men and women)
including any differential results
of different ages and abilities, including those at
across groups.
risk of being left behind.
The extent to which governments, schools,
The extent to which the net students and communities demonstrate the
Sustainability benefits of the intervention financial, behavioural and institutional capacities to
continue or are likely to continue. sustain the net benefits of the Three Star Approach
for WASH in Schools over time.
As implementation of the Three Star Approach 3.2 Sampling Criteria
for WASH in Schools in FSM started in 2018 it was
opportune to evaluate the relevance, efficiency,
In Fiji, Kiribati, Solomon Islands and Vanuatu,
effectiveness and sustainability of the Three Star
non-probability, multistage sampling was
Approach for WASH in Schools programme with
used to select the islands, divisions / provinces /
a view to strengthening implementation, and to get
districts, schools and communities to be visited.
an indication of conditions and requirements for
The main selection considerations were purpose
replication and scale-up. In this sense, FSM could
and convenience. The selection, which took place in
benefit from the experience and lessons in the other
consultation with UNICEF WASH focal points in each
four countries. While no in-country data collection
country, was based on criteria that are summarised
was undertaken in FSM, documents were reviewed
in Table 14. The selection ensured that balanced
and remote interviews were conducted with the
representation of sites according to criteria was
UNICEF WASH focal point, implementing partners,
achieved and allowed for flexibility to account for
government partners, development partners and
logistical and accessibility challenges.
community service organisations.
Table 14: Sampling Criteria
Fiji Kiribati Solomon Islands Vanuatu
Islands / Viti Levu (main Gilbert Island Group Guadalcanal Penama province
Provinces island) (main island)
Province / Six of nine education Two of the four Four of the five wards Two of the three
Official districts in Viti islands in the where the Three- islands (Pentecost,
Subdivision Levu, three each in Gilbert Island Group Star Approach is Ambae, and
Western Division where the Three- implemented (two Maewo) of Penama
and in Central Star Approach each in north and east province, based
Division, based on is implemented, Guadalcanal), based on greatest
greatest learning based on greatest on greatest learning learning potential
potential for the learning potential potential for the for the evaluation
evaluation purpose, for the evaluation evaluation purpose, purpose, number
population size, purpose, population population size, socio- of participating
socio-economic size, socio-economic economic status, schools, language
status, distance status, number of distance from capital (French, English),
from the capital participating schools, (Honiara), number of population size,
(Suva), number WASH infrastructure participating schools, level of urbanization,
of participating and service delivery, population size, socio-economic
schools, WASH vulnerability due WASH infrastructure status, WASH
infrastructure and to disasters/ and service delivery, infrastructure and
service delivery, as emergencies and vulnerability due service delivery, as
well as vulnerability climate change, as to disasters/ well as vulnerability
due to disasters/ well as accessibility emergencies and due to disasters/
emergencies and climate change, as emergencies and
climate change well as accessibility climate change, as
well as accessibility
Table continued on page 26
26 Formative Evaluation of UNICEF Three Star Approach for WASH in Schools in the Pacific
Final Report
Table continued from page 25
Schools Three of the 6 Three participating Three participating Three participating
education districts, schools on each of schools in each of the schools on each
and 3 schools the selected islands, selected wards, based of the selected
in each of these based on greatest on greatest learning islands, based on
districts, will be learning potential potential for the greatest learning
selected, based on for the evaluation evaluation purpose, potential for the
greatest learning purpose, size of size of school and Star evaluation purpose,
potential for the school and Star Rating (none, 1, 2 and size of school and
purpose of the Rating (none, 1, 2 3-star), Star Rating (none,
evaluation, size and 3-star) 1, 2 and 3-star)
of school; socio-
economic status
of catchment
community, Star
Rating (none,
1, 2 and 3-star),
population profile of
schools (proportion
iTaukei to Indo-
Fijian)
Communities If a selected school serves more than one community/village, at least two communities/
villages will be selected, based on greatest learning potential for the evaluation purpose,
WASH infrastructure and service delivery, community awareness and mobilisation around
WASH
The school selection was arranged with UNICEF unable to be reached due to concerns around safety
country offices, Talanoa Consulting and the and ongoing tropical cyclones. This school was
evaluation team. The sample arrangement was substituted for a school that remained within the
able to be filled bar one school in Kiribati which was sampling parameters.
Table 15: Number of key informant interviews (KIIs) and school visits carried out
Country KIIs Planned Schools Schools Visited
Fiji 6 15 15
Solomon Islands 7 12 12
Vanuatu 4 6 6
Kiribati 6 6 54
FSM 7 n/a n/a
TOTAL 30 39 38
4 One school in Kiribati was removed due to unsafe weather and transport at the time of fieldwork.
Formative Evaluation of UNICEF Three Star Approach for WASH in Schools in the Pacific 27
Final Report
3.3 Data Analysis at an integrated, programmatic level. This went
on to form the basis of the evaluative judgements
against the criteria. The analysis of the information
Information and evidence from document
was conducted jointly by the core evaluation team
reviews, KIIs, FDGs, transect walks and direct
who collected data remotely, as well as with the in-
observation for each country was captured
country data collectors.
separately in an analysis framework devised from
the evaluation questions. The evaluation draws
The evaluation team reflected the emerging
primarily on secondary data (mainly qualitative,
findings, lessons and recommendations through
some quantitative) and qualitative primary data. The
two workshops with the UNICEF evaluation
information was then compiled with information
team and UNICEF evaluation countries to serve as
from different stakeholders and gathered through
additional triangulation points. This also enabled the
different methods as a means of triangulation and
evaluation team to further refine and enrich emerging
consolidation to evaluation questions, as evidenced by
findings and recommendations prior to the drafting
Figure 5. Country-specific answers to the evaluation
of this evaluation report. The data collection, analysis
questions were generated from the analysis of issues
and triangulation process are further elaborated on
and themes. These responses were then analysed
in Figure 5.
as a synthesized whole to identify common issues
and themes that informed answers to the questions
Figure 5: Data Collection, Analysis and Triangulation Process
Data Collection and Validation Data Analysis and Triangulation
School transect
walks Integrated content analysis of
Integrated content analysis of
FGDs data and info from different
data and info from different
KIIs sources according to EQs sources according to
EQs across countries
Community Data Traingulation Point #4
Data Triangulation Point #5
transect walks Data captured and
systematised according
Workshop with in-country
to Evaluation Questions
data collectors and core team
(EQs)
on lessons and issues
related to implementation of
Three Star Approach Understanding of issues
Data Trinagulation Point #3 Understanding of issues and and lesson across countries
lessons at a country level and replicable practice
In-country validation and in all contexts
refinement of emerging
findings and lessons
Data Triangulation #1
Content analysis of data and
information according to each Evaluation team reflects key findings and
evaluaton question per country lesson to UNICEF in two workshops
Data Triangulation Point #2 with relevant stakeholders
Data captured and Data Triangulation Point #6
systematised according
to EQs
Document
reviews
KIIs with IPs, Evaluation team further refine key findings and
governments, lessons in light of feedback and present in report
Data Triangulation Point #7
CSOs, donors
3.4 Ethical Considerations
acting fair and credible towards research subjects,
providing an accurate and transparent description of
and Safeguards
the potential risks or discomforts and the anticipated
benefits derived from the evaluation. Evaluators also
Members of the evaluation team were bound accounted for conflict of interest arising from the
by ethical research principles of impartiality, concern for individual rights and potential harm to
independence, credibility, conflicts of interest research objects and the benefits of knowledge and
and accountability. Evaluators remained as learnings generated.
impartial and objective as possible and allowed
participants to express their own views and opinions The evaluation team undertook all necessary
without interruptions. Evaluators were responsible ethical clearance steps required for research with
for safeguarding the credibility of the evaluation by participants under the age of 18, based on the
28 Formative Evaluation of UNICEF Three Star Approach for WASH in Schools in the Pacific
Final Report
International Charter for Ethical Research Involving best practice such as the Sphere Standards (2021)
Children (Ethical Research Involving Children, 2015) and significant inclusion-focused research, but more
and UNICEF’s Procedure on Ethical Standards in investigation is required to address specific disability-
Research, Evaluation, Data Collection and Analysis related barriers to Three Star Approach for WASH in
(2021b). The team obtained permission in writing Schools.
from the Ministries of Education (institutional
clearance/ authorization forms are contained in Substantial evidence base across rural, remote,
Annex VIII). Additionally, the evaluation team urban populations: As outlined in the context
provided a detailed overview and received approval section of this report, the Pacific’s population is highly
from an independent Ethics Review Board during dispersed and significant differences exist between
the inception period (September 2020) (found in urban, rural, remote and very remote communities.
Annex XI). Talanoa Consulting data collectors were Servicing remote and very remote communities
also cleared through a strict vetting system and were often have exponential cost implications as transport
required to agree to an ethical code of conduct. The and access are often extremely expensive and time
evaluation was based on the principle of informed consuming. Whilst this evaluation examine schools
respect and child-friendly approaches. Detailed across urban and rural populations, the sampling
scripts to ensure participants’ understanding of their was limited to the geographic structure of the pilots
rights are detailed in Annex VI. being implemented in the countries which were
not remote schools due to reasons of practicality.
Gender equality and social inclusion were Diversity and inclusion across this report will refer
recognised as critical dimensions to this to the differences between rural and urban schools,
evaluation. Data collection methods were designed as well as other dimensions such as disability and
to capture different voices, including separating gender. The evaluation does not however examine
FGDs based on gender, and having data collectors the specific challenges related to remote populations,
of the same gender work with groups. This was which is an area for future exploration.
particularly important when looking at topics such as
menstrual hygiene management. Diverse methods
of engagement were employed to bring in people 3.6 Quality Assurance
with disabilities however as explored in Section 3.5,
this is often challenging in the Pacific context.
All necessary checks were in place to ensure the
evaluation and its deliverables were useful and of
appropriate quality. The UNICEF EMT is responsible
3.5 Limitations and
for quality assurance with oversight from UNICEF
Mitigation Strategies of the East Asia Pacific Regional Office (EAPRO) Evaluation
Section. The team comprised of the Multi-country
Evaluation Evaluation Specialist and the Chief of WASH
Programme. Two workshops were held with the
UNICEF EMT and other UNICEF stakeholders
Access to countries, schools and communities
to assess the validity of emerging findings and
impacted by COVID-19: this was addressed by
recommendations. The deliverables were reviewed
using local consultants to conduct the fieldwork and
by the Evaluation Reference Group comprising of
including further data validation points to ensure
UNICEF Pacific Research and Evaluation, Study and
validity of the findings. Additionally, a wide range of
Ethics Committee and relevant UNICEF EAPRO staff
online tools were used to maintain communication
members.
(e.g. Teams, Zoom, Whats App).
Difficulties elevating voices of children with
disabilities and out-of-school youth: significant
equity gaps exist across the Pacific region with
access to education, particularly in remote areas
(Monash University, 2016). Children with disabilities
are also significantly more likely to be out of school.
The extent of this issue is not well monitored
however the Pacific Indicators for Disability Inclusive
Education Guidelines estimates that 90% of children
with disabilities in the Pacific are out of school
(Monash University, 2016). The primary focal point for
the fieldwork for this evaluation was centered around
schools, and so it is likely that a significant number of
disabled children in the sampled communities were
not engaged. To address this, the evaluation used
Formative Evaluation of UNICEF Three Star Approach for WASH in Schools in the Pacific 29
Final Report
4. FINDINGS
4.1 Relevance
4.1.1. To what extent are the objectives and design
of the Three Star Approach for WASH in Schools
Overall Evaluation Question 1: Do the objectives aligned with changing global priorities, including
and design of the Three Star Approach for WASH in those related to gender equality, inclusion, the
Schools address and respond to changing global, environment and climate change (including
country and schools’ WASH needs, policies and preparing schools to identify, assess, manage and
priorities, as well as those of girls and boys (and absorb risks and shocks from natural disasters
men and women), including those at risk of being and pandemics)?
left behind?
Recognising that the intervention model of the
Three Star Approach was developed prior to
Summary of Evaluation Question 1 – the SDGs, its application in the selected Pacific
Relevance: countries is aligned to its priorities, particularly
SDG 6 (WASH). It also aligned to other closely linked
The objectives of the Three Star Approach SDGs 3 (Health) and 4 (Education) through helping
for WASH in Schools are aligned with and schools meet essential criteria for a healthy learning
respond to most of the changing policies environment for children. The Three Star Approach
and priorities at a global level, specifically is also aligned with SDG 10 (Equality). This is clearly
in relation to the SDGs and UNICEF’s Global articulated in the demand driven and rights-based
WASH Strategy. A critical weakness is the lack approach that aims support and empower rights-
of detail on resilience. Strong government buy- holders to realise their right to adequate WASH
in to the approach, as evidenced in evaluation in schools, and more widely in their homes and
countries, is testament to the importance and communities through addressing WASH bottlenecks.
relevance of taking a demand-driven approach. In particular, the Three Star Approach for WASH in
Whilst the rights-based element is present Schools is aligned with the statement from World
and progress is being made, a clear disability Leaders on the ‘Decade of Action’ to achieve the
inclusion focus is not strongly evident. SDG targets, particularly with regards to catalysing
‘local’ and ‘people’ action. (Sustainable Development
The primary challenge with programme Goals Hub, n.d.)
relevance is to ensure that alignment is
sufficiently detailed. The prime indicators For the application of the Three Star Approach
of this lack of detail are seen in the regional- in the Pacific region, there are important and
and country-level Theories of Change and clearly evident links to Goal 17 (partnership) which
their accompanying programme plans and emphasise support to developing countries, including
results frameworks. A gap exists within small island developing states. This is in particular
these documents between the intermediate regard to significantly increasing the availability
outcomes and the assumptions, risks and of high quality and reliable data (with appropriate
mitigating strategies. Additionally, it lacks levels of disaggregation) which is embedded in the
localised nuance which limits its capacity to Three Star Approach (United Nations Department of
act as a foundation for plans that promote and Economic and Social Affairs, n.d.).
support effective, inclusive and sustainable
change. The Three Star Approach also links in with broader
global research and action on climate change. In
2013, UNICEF EAPRO released a report highlighting
the gap between the Pacific and the East Asia
region in comparison to the world in the provision of
basic water and sanitation (UNICEF EAPRO, 2013).
The report underscores the need for Pacific Island
nations and leaders to prioritize efforts to improve
water resources and their sustainable management
(Pacific RISA, 2015). There is a linkage to SDG 13
Climate Change through 13.2 on integration of
climate change measures into policy and planning
and to some extent 13.3 building knowledge and
capacity on climate shocks such as tropical cyclones.
A major gap has been the lack of a strong and explicit
30 Formative Evaluation of UNICEF Three Star Approach for WASH in Schools in the Pacific
Final Report
Figure 6: Sustainable Development Goals 6 and 4 (United Nations Department
of Economic and Social Affairs, 2021)
GOALS GOALS
SDG 6: Ensure availability and sustainable SDG 4: Ensure inclusive and equitable quality
management of water and sanitation for all education and promote lifelong learning
opportunities for all
TARGETS
TARGETS
6.1 By 2030, achieve universal and equitable access
4. a Build and upgrade eduction facilities that are
to safe and affordable drinking water for all
child, disability and gender sensitive and provide
6.2 By 2030, achieve access to adequate and
safe, non violent, inclusive and effective learning
equitable sanitation and hygiene for all and end
environments for all
open defecation, paying special attention to the
needs of women and girls and those in INDICATORS
vulnerable situations
4.a 1 Proportion of schools with access to:
INDICATORS (a) electricity;
(b) the internet for pedagogical purposes;
(c) computers for pedagogical purposes;
See 4.a.1 for WASH in Schools indicators
(d) adapted infrastructure and materials for students with
disabilities;
(e) basic drinking water;
(f) single-sex basic sanitation facilities; and
6CLEAN WATER (g) basic handwashing facilities 4QUALITY
AND SANITATION EDUCATION
(as per the WASH indicator definitions)
linkage to SDG13.1 Resilience Building as this is one of disability-related infrastructure is largely left the
of the most critical challenges facing the Pacific Three Star rated schools, often identified as the
Island countries (Pacific RISA, 2015). hardest and most expensive one to reach. This
means that with its incremental approach, 1 Star
The focus of the Three Star Approach on children, and 2 Star schools often have made no progress in
particularly girls and those who are excluded or disability inclusion. This undermines the approach’s
marginalised (people with disabilities) resonates relevance to disabled children and young people.
with the clear SDG emphasis on ‘Leave No
One Behind’. Specifically, the focus on those most The Three Star Approach highlights the
disadvantaged and excluded, articulated in the importance of children being actively engaged.
statement: ‘we will endeavour to reach the farthest Through school WASH clubs, students are
behind first’ (United Nations, 2015). The Three Star encouraged to have a ‘voice’. Students’ involvement
Approach for WASH in Schools strongly emphasises is recognised as being very important both in
the fundamental importance of having gender supporting activities in schools as well as forming
segregated toilets (1 Star) and strong emphasis on links between the school and the community
menstrual hygiene management (MHM) education (UNICEF & GIZ, 2013). The Theories of Change
and infrastructure, particularly in 2 Star ratings. from both regional and country-specific contexts
directly point to the role that children play as change
The application of the Three Star Approach for agents. The message is one that has been strongly
WASH in Schools highlights the importance articulated by UNICEF for many years. The following
and challenges of inclusion of people with statements from UNICEF make this point clearly:
disabilities. Ensuring access and inclusion for all is
unsurprisingly more challenging to implement when “UNICEF recognizes the potential of children
faced with major limitations (primarily on budgets) as agents of handwashing behaviour change by
but also with regard to attitudes on disability where coupling water and sanitation improvements
there is limited understanding of differing needs. in schools with hygiene education. The use of
For example, there is evidence within Three Star environmental health clubs, drama groups and
Approach guiding documentation of addressing student focus groups creates the conditions for
issues of access only through provision of ramps children themselves to be agents of change in their
without considering the needs of young people schools, families and communities. UNICEF’s
with other disabilities such as blindness. The design experience in promoting handwashing with soap
Formative Evaluation of UNICEF Three Star Approach for WASH in Schools in the Pacific 31
Final Report
in schools as part of a larger water, sanitation 2018 national elections. Whilst this has made
and hygiene effort shows how important it is to implementation challenging, the relevance of the
involve children themselves as active participants Three Star Approach has remained consistent.
with real project responsibilities rather than as
passive targets of health messages.” (Global FSM: WASH (including WASH in Schools) appears to
Handwashing Day, n.d.). be a growing priority for FSM Government at both
state and national level in FSM. This is evidenced
Other examples include the 2010 WASH in Schools by the FSM Association of Chief School Officers
Call for Action (UNICEF, 2010). passing a resolution that WASH in Schools must be
an indicator for school accreditation in early 2021.
The clear focus of the Three Star Approach for Despite this, there are no overarching WASH policies
WASH in Schools through ‘simple and inexpensive at state or national level (including for WASH in
steps’ to improving WASH in Schools is highly Schools), and requirements and standards for WASH
relevant to schools, communities and decision in Schools are often inconsistent between government
makers in government and support agencies. agencies and/or are not adequately defined.
This is strengthened by changing the way ‘WASH
in Schools programming is perceived by Schools, Kiribati: The Three Star Approach for WASH in
communities and decision makers in government Schools is strongly supported by the Government of
and support agencies’ (UNICEF & GIZ, 2013) thus Kiribati and there is evidence of ownership amongst
contradicting a misconception that investment in key ministries including the Ministry of Education,
WASH in Schools is expensive (infrastructure) and Ministry of Health and Medical Services and the
difficult (behaviour change). The focus on simple Ministry of Infrastructure and Sustainable Energy.
and inexpensive steps is highly relevant to the This includes participation and strong engagement
context where there are limited resources within in the recently established National Committee for
communities as well as governments of the five WASH in Schools, which is chaired by a Director of
participating countries (UNICEF & GIZ, 2013). the Ministry of Education. The Three Star Approach
is aligned with key current and previous national
4.1.2. To what extent are the objectives and policies including the Kiribati 20 Year Vision 2016-
design of the Three Star Approach for WASH in 2036, National Sanitation Policy and the National
Schools aligned with Governments’ (changing) Water Resources Implementation plan. The National
policies/plans, needs and goals in Fiji, Kiribati, Sanitation Policy was recently updated to ensure the
Solomon Islands, Vanuatu and FSM? Three Star Approach is mainstreamed across the
country.
There is strong evidence across all five countries
of strong support by governments for the Vanuatu: The Government of Vanuatu is strongly
Three Star Approach for WASH in Schools with supportive of the Three Star Approach for WASH
evidence of ownership across key ministries in Schools and has indicated it wants the approach
and departments. Additionally, appreciation of the (currently piloted in Penama) to be rolled out
Three Star Approach as relevant to their contexts and nationwide. Strengthening WASH, and particularly
situation was demonstrated. The following evidence WASH in Schools, has been a key national government
from each country illustrates this. Key challenges priority for many years and has become even more
to progress relate to coherence of policies and important since both the onset of the COVID-19
standards and the impact of changes in personnel pandemic and Tropical Cyclone Harold (April 2020).
across key departments and ministries. The importance placed by the Government of
Vanuatu on improving WASH in Schools is evidenced
Fiji: The Three Star Approach for WASH in Schools by the recent creation of a new National WASH in
is strongly linked with the work of the Government Schools Coordinator position within the Ministry of
of Fiji. It aligns with the government’s commitment Education and Training.
to providing quality WASH, reflected in the National
Development Plan 2017, targeting 100% access Solomon Islands: The Three Star approach aligns
to safe drinking water by 2030 and 70% improved with the existing policies of the Solomon Islands
sanitation systems by 2021. Additionally, the Three including the Rural National Water Policy (2012),
Star Approach flows on from the policies previously National Water Policy (draft available) and the
released by the Ministry of Education, Heritage and National Water and Sanitation Implementation Plan
Arts. These include the Education in Emergencies from 2017 to 2033. There have been significant
policy (2012), Minimum Standards on WASH in changes in personnel across particularly the Ministry
Schools Infrastructure (2012) and WASH in Schools of Education and Human Development, recently
in Emergencies – Standards (2016). More recently, appointing its third minister since the April 2019
implementation has faced several disruptions due to elections however throughout this, the Three Star
changes in personnel across Ministry of Education, Approach has remained relevant.
Heritage and Arts, as well as a reshuffle after the
32 Formative Evaluation of UNICEF Three Star Approach for WASH in Schools in the Pacific
Final Report
The COVID-19 pandemic has provided additional security of water sources and the development of
impetus to improve WASH in Schools particularly Water Safety Plans (UNICEF, 2016). The approach of
in terms of hygiene, particularly handwashing. In helping schools to meet essential criteria for a healthy
Kiribati there is a strong push from the Government and protective environment for children and improve
of Kiribati to roll out the Three Star Approach to all the effectiveness of hygiene behaviour change
schools in Kiribati (i.e., beyond the four outer islands programmes through a set of inexpensive, simple
where the approach has been piloted) by 2023 as part and sustainable steps clearly reflects UNICEF’s
of the KWAS initiative as part of the WASH in Schools Global Strategy for WASH (2016). The focus on the
replication policy (New Zealand Ministry of Foreign building of an enabling environment and supporting
Affairs and Trade Aid Programme, 2018). In Solomon improved accountability, transparency, monitoring
Islands, the WASH indicators included in Solomon and people’s participation for WASH in Schools is
Islands Education Management Information System evidence of UNICEF focusing on areas where it
(SIEMIS) were used to assess COVID-19 related ‘needs to do better’ (from the Preface of UNICEF’s
hygiene risk across the nine provinces of the country Global Strategy). This is also clearly articulated in the
which enabled the National Disaster Operational 2018-2022 Pacific Islands MCPD (UNICEF Pacific,
Council to develop rapid assessments of where key 2017c).
outbreaks could occur. At the time of writing, Fiji
was enduring a significant outbreak and a lockdown The Three Star Approach for WASH in Schools is
was imposed on the main island of Viti Levu. A full linked to UNICEF’s Strategic Plan 2018-2021. As
investigation into the implications of lockdown on with the Global WASH Strategy, the UNICEF Pacific
WASH in schools is out-of-scope of this evaluation. application of the Three Star Approach for WASH in
Schools is consistent with the Goals of the 2018-
4.1.3. To what extent is the Three Star Approach 2021 Strategic Plan. This can be seen from the
for WASH in Schools aligned to UNICEF’s Strategic diagram in Figure 7. There is alignment with Goal
Plan Goals for WASH? Area 2 (Every Child Learns), Goal Area 3 (Every
Child is protected from Violence and Exploitation)
The Three Star Approach for WASH in Schools is and Goal Area 4 (Every Child Lives in a Safe and
consistent with the priorities of UNICEF’s 2016- Clean Environment). There is however less clarity on
2030 Global WASH Strategy that highlights the how the Three Star Approach for WASH in Schools
importance and challenge of universal coverage. Its can support the strengthening of ‘coherence and
clear stress on the needs of women, girls and those complementarity between humanitarian action and
in vulnerable situations and the necessity to address development programming’ (Cross-cutting Priority 1)
wastewater management both link to long-term (UNICEF, 2018c).
Lead
Outcome
Contributing
Figure 7: Alignment of UNICEF Pacific Programme with UNICEF Strategic Plan
(UNICEF, 2017)
ALIGNMENT OF UNICEF PACIFIC PROGRAMME 2018-2022
WITH (draft) UNICEF STRATEGIC PLAN 2018-2021
EVERY CHILD EVERY EVERY CHILD EQUITY: EVERY CHILD
SURVIVES CHILD LEARNS IS PROTECTED EVERY CHILD LIVES IN A SAFE
AND THRIVES FROM VIOLENCE HAS A FAIR &
& EXPLOITATION CHANCE IN LIFE CLEAN
ENVIRONMENT
Child Child Health
Child Health Education &
Protection & Nutrition WASH
& Nutrition Learning
WASH
Child Health
WASH & Nutrition Education &
Learning Education &
Learning
WASH
Child
Child Protection
Protection
Policy, Evidence & Social Protection
Formative Evaluation of UNICEF Three Star Approach for WASH in Schools in the Pacific 33
Final Report
Whilst UNICEF’s Field Guide to the Three Star is critically important. The relevance of the WASH in
Approach is not explicit on disaster risk reduction Schools Three Star Approach and linkage between
and climate change, global and regional thinking the SDGs, UNICEF’s Global WASH Strategy, UNICEF
on disaster risk reduction and the impact of Strategic Plan 2018-2021, UNICEF Pacific WASH
climate change has been highlighted in key Strategy and UNICEF Country Programme WASH
documents on WASH in Schools for a number Strategies were reviewed alongside their relevant
of years. This focus is seen in the current MCPD Theories of Change. Whilst the relevance of the Three
(UNICEF Pacific, 2017c) which aims to implement a Star Approach for WASH in Schools to the SDGs and
drinking water safety and security planning approach UNICEF’s Global Strategy is very clear, an emerging
to make communities resilient to climate change and gap (‘missing middle’) is increasingly visible.
natural hazards (UNICEF (Internal), n.d.). The UNICEF
Pacific WASH Strategy aims to prioritise increased There is an emerging gap between how the
resilience in ordinary times and emergencies intermediate programme results influence
(UNICEF Pacific, 2017c). This message is further change at other levels, including longer-term
developed in the UNICEF Pacific WASH Resilient outcomes and impact. This is particularly apparent
Guidelines Handbook which state: in reviewing the Theories of Change (multi-country as
well as for each specific country) together with their
“Pacific Island countries must incorporate disaster accompanying logframes and results frameworks for
and climate risk, and new forms of financing into the WASH in Schools programmes (annexes II and III
WASH programmes and service delivery and contain the current Theories of Change). The UNICEF
integrate WASH into disaster risk reduction and Pacific Multi Country Programme Theory of Change
climate change adaptation programmes in line has a box on risks (unstable political environments,
with the Framework for Resilient Development changed government priorities, economic constraints,
adopted by Pacific Island countries governments.” natural disasters hindering progress, increases in
(UNICEF Pacific, 2018). costs and diversion of resources) (UNICEF, 2017).
These significant risks are not addressed either in
An all-encompassing challenge is how the the proposed assumptions boxes (what mitigating
application of the Three Star Approach is relevant activities/strategies need to be applied to and by
to the specific needs and small island developing whom) or in the main proposed activity boxes. These
states that make up the countries and territories gaps are significant in addressing the challenge
of the Pacific (UNICEF Pacific, 2017c). Having a of progressing from short-term to longer term
robust Theory of Change that is linked to this context outcomes. Similarly, in the country programme logic
Figure 8: Illustration of the ‘logic’ of the logical framework (DFID, 2011)
Verifiable
Means of
Objective Assumptions
Verification
Indicators
Impact
If assumptions around outcomes hold up, then go to impact
Outcomes
If assumptions around outputs hold up, then go to outcomes
Outputs
If assumptions around activities hold up, then go to outputs
Activities
34 Formative Evaluation of UNICEF Three Star Approach for WASH in Schools in the Pacific
Final Report
models, the links between the contributing outputs level changes in a corresponding column. The Kiribati
are weak. Figure 8 demonstrates the ‘logic flow’ of and Vanuatu logframes are examples of this issue
the logical framework. where critical assumptions of finance and support
for development of WASH infrastructure (essential
This is the seen in terms of gaps in the vertical for support for 2 and 3 Star status) and operations
logic (from outputs to outcomes at both Country and maintenance (O&M) are assumed rather than
Programme and Multi-Country Programme Theory being specifically addressed.
of Change levels). There is also a challenge to
horizontal logic in the contribution of project outputs Revisiting best practice in developing a Theory of
and outcomes in a programme where the outputs Change reveals a clear pattern of challenges to be
achieved in one column are insufficient to contribute addressed, as outlined in Table 17.
to and support the outputs, outcomes and higher-
Table 16: Best Practice and Challenges within the Three Star Approach
Theories of Change
Best Practice in Theory of Change Challenges within the Three Star Approach
framework for WASH in Schools Theories of Change
Context Lack of adequate context in the Theories of Change from
Critical to ensure that key contextual factors regional level downwards. Specifically with regard to the
(especially barriers and challenges) are impact of climate change and climate-related emergencies
highlighted and addressed in Theory of and the impact of context on programming (though this
Change is mentioned in the introduction to the UNICEF Pacific
Strategy Note (2018-2022).
Rights holders Clarity of focus on marginalised and excluded groups that
Clarity on rights holders and especially groups are mentioned in SDGs and Global WASH Strategies.
with special focus supports the development Largely absent in regional and country level Theories of
of activities and of appropriate indicators Change.
Desired Change Desired changes good in overview but not robust on
Essential to detail and therefore ensure that ‘pathways of change’.
logic is robust (no ‘missing middle’)
Actors in the Context Lack of detail in strategies and Theories of Change
Highlight skills and actors UNICEF brings on key actors – specifically beyond UNICEF and core
and complemented with actors from other partnerships.
organisations Highlighting different actors and their contributions helps
to draw out UNICEF skills and strengths.
Assumptions Inadequately defined due to lack of adequate contextual
Need to be clearly highlighted to ensure analysis. Full WASH Bottleneck Analysis (WASHBAT) have
that efficiency can be maintained only been carried out two countries.
Sphere of influence Recognise UNICEF role and position. Need to address
Direct / indirect, leveraged the challenge of UNICEF’s ability to reach and influence
change, directly through its interventions or indirectly
through collaboration and interaction with other partners5
Strategic Choices Challenged by the context and geography of the Pacific
region (analysis from UNICEF Pacific Strategy Note
2018-2022). Need to look beyond what UNICEF can do
‘directly’ to how can it influence/support activity and
change ‘indirectly’
Table continued on page 35
5 This is recognised as a major challenge in the UNICEF Pacific Strategy Note 2018-2022
Formative Evaluation of UNICEF Three Star Approach for WASH in Schools in the Pacific 35
Final Report
Table continued from page 34
Timeline Achievement of objectives (outputs and outcomes)
Timelines need to be robust. Test using frequently delayed. Key drivers of delays include
results matrix outputs, outcomes and risk responding to humanitarian crises, supply and skilled
columns labour challenges.
Indicators Indicators relate primarily to outputs and are often a re-
Need to be driven by local level need and statement of activities.
contribute to/inform higher level programme Indicators on inclusion and access at local level lack
progress, not other way around. adequate specificity.
An important tool for use in strengthening the 4.1.4. To what extent is the design of the Three
enabling environment is the WASH Bottleneck Star Approach for WASH in Schools likely to
Analysis Tool (WASHBAT). Despite its value in strengthen the enabling environment, demand,
supporting governments and sector partners to supply and quality of WASH in Schools in each
understand and develop plans to understand the country (i.e. policy, legislation and finance; human
sector ‘building blocks’, WASHBAT analyses are and physical resources in schools, including
not regularly carried out. Only two full WASHBAT facilities and training for teachers; demonstrated
analyses have been carried out in two countries to motivation of the school community to finance
date as registered on the WASHBAT site (Solomon and manage WASH in Schools resources; and
Islands, 2013, though excluding schools; Vanuatu, effectiveness of inputs for changing hygiene
2016, full analysis including schools). A partial behaviour)?
bottleneck analysis for Kiribati’s Kiribati WASH from
the Start programme was carried out in 2019 (not Information gained from the evaluation (review of
reported to washbat.org). secondary data, interviews with key informants
and country level visits and interviews)
Despite the focus on inexpensive, simple and provides good evidence that the design of the
sustainable steps to improve WASH infrastructure, Three Star Approach for WASH in Schools is
financing (both national and local) is not likely to support strengthening of the enabling
adequately addressed in strategy. Financing is environment and quality. The strong emphasis on
a major hurdle in the context of the Pacific where the role of ‘Group Handwashing’ to stimulate and
communities have few resources, governments and support behaviour change (and therefore stimulate/
administrations have limited capacity and funds and support demand) is a key aspect of the Three Star
the impact of disasters and climate change act as Approach that demonstrates the active building of an
major hindrances to sustainable progress. Whilst enabling environment. The emphasis on supporting
this is recognised in programme documentation and and stimulating demand and simplicity (clear and
highlighted in the Pacific Strategy Note (specifically accessible messages) has been adapted to the
the WASH section- 4), there is no evidence (from operating environment in each country.
the Theories of Change, programme documents/
plans etc) of how these major limitations can be However, the challenges with limited finance and
addressed. building an effective ‘supply side’ strategy also
have an impact on longer term sustainability.
Together with climate change and climate related
disasters, this poses a constant threat to the
erosion of capital and resources at community and
government levels. Table 17 illustrates and evidences
these points (evidence is from narrative reports,
secondary data and key informant interviews).
36 Formative Evaluation of UNICEF Three Star Approach for WASH in Schools in the Pacific
Final Report
Table 17: Design of Three Star Approach and Relevance to Dimensions of WASH
Likelihood of
Indicators of
Dimension Evidence from implementing countries improvement due
dimension
to design
Enabling Relevant policies Adoption of Three Star Approach as part of
Environment and strategies National Strategies for WASH in Schools Highly likely
(Fiji – Reach for the Stars, Kiribati, Vanuatu
Solomon Islands, FSM-Four Star Approach)
Policies developed in Fiji (currently awaiting Highly likely
revised policy to be finalised), Vanuatu – Positive evidence
WASH in Schools Policies (and 10 Year WASH of ownership and
in Schools Strategy). Kiribati: aligned with action.
key current and previous national policies
including the Kiribati Vision 20, National
Water Resources Implementation plan.
Solomon Islands - aligns with the existing
policies
FSM- no overarching WASH policies at state ,
or national level (including for WASH in Schools)
– new programme
Policies developed
are applied. Policies actioned: Highly likely
Vanuatu National WASH in Schools Coordinator
position within the Ministry of Education and
Training.
Kiribati: National Committee for WASH in
Schools, chaired by Ministry of Education.
FSM - clarifying national standards for WASH
in Schools.
Solomon Islands: willingness to rollout at a
national level
Strong awareness of standards from School
leadership Likely
Awareness of
standards Most schools have basic infrastructure
supplied by communities with no O&M Not likely unless
Budgets provision specific challenges
Major challenge as schools have limited addressed
budgets and supported by communities.
Becomes more of an issue as schools aim to
move from 1-2 and then from 2-3 Stars
Table continued on page 37
Formative Evaluation of UNICEF Three Star Approach for WASH in Schools in the Pacific 37
Final Report
Table continued from page 36
Supply Accessible toilets National standards. Likely
Demand for schools to improve WASH for but essential work
boys and girls. needed to progress
Progress on accessible WASH (mainly ramps). from 2-3 Star
Functioning Good progress though challenge where no
handwashing handwashing in home environment. Likely
but essential work
Use of COVID-19 response to further embed needed
behaviour change
Mechanisms Fiji: funding for upkeep/O&M is a barrier
for functioning FSM: Funding provided by the government Not likely
O&M – including (through Department of Education) for Critical challenge
financing schools does not currently include funds for that must be
implementing WASH in Schools activities addressed
and infrastructure. to support
Kiribati: resources adequate for piloting but sustainability and
challenges to the financing of infrastructure), progress
needs to be a considerable scale-up in
resources to effectively support a nationwide
rollout of the approach, including for technical
and management support and for facilities
and infrastructure.
Vanuatu: Plan to roll out Three Star Approach
across whole country but challenge of the
level of financing available for new WASH
infrastructure is considerably less than
what is required for all schools in Vanuatu to
achieve the minimum two-star rating
Quality Embedded Three Star Approach indicators included in Highly likely
in national national monitoring systems of Fiji (FEMIS), Recognise need
information Solomon Islands (SIEMIS), Vanuatu (VEMIS), to work on data
management FSM - strengthening national data collection gaps and use of
systems. system, however there are still data gaps. information
Menstrual Hygiene Strong progress on provision of facilities and Highly likely
Management support for MHM
Toilet facilities Recognition from students (especially girls) Highly likely
clean of benefit having clean toilets.
Demand Evidence of Demand is strong. There is however a Likely
demand and challenge to manage demand for services But need to
support from with supporting and developing strong local manage challenges
communities ownership. Impact of disasters impacts on to ensure demand
capacity of local communities to continue stays strong
support.
Challenge of lack of facilities in communities.
Evidence of good Evidence of good toilet use. Linked to Highly likely
toilet use cleanliness of toilets.
Importance of Recognised as important and built on using Highly likely
handwashing with opportunity of COVID-19 to stimulate hygiene
soap behaviour has been positive
38 Formative Evaluation of UNICEF Three Star Approach for WASH in Schools in the Pacific
Final Report
4.1.5. To what extent is the Three Star Approach promotion campaigns which included MHM due to
for WASH in Schools integrating appropriate UNICEF FSM technical WASH in schools guidance as
strategies to advance WASH benefits for boys reported by government stakeholders.
and girls (and women and men) of different ages
and abilities, including those at risk of being left Document reviews and fieldwork demonstrate
behind (e.g. minority and marginalised groups) in diverse strategies being employed at the school
Fiji, Kiribati, Solomon Island, Vanuatu and FSM? level to advance WASH benefits for girls. LLEE’s
research found evidence of all schools included in
their study made some effort to make MHM easier
Gender: at school, including MHM-specific bathrooms in
Fiji or waste disposal bins in toilets in Solomon
There are a number of ways in which the Islands (Live & Learn Environmental Education for
Three Star Approach is being integrated with UNICEF, 2019b). Other LLEE research shows that
appropriate strategies to advance WASH benefits older girls in Fijian schools have been given the
for girls. Firstly, there have been several research responsibility of managing MHM supplies at school,
publications commissioned and conducted by so that younger girls do not have to ask the teachers,
UNICEF to increase understanding of MHM in which can be a source of embarrassment (Live &
the countries of implementation, building greater Learn Environmental Education for UNICEF, 2019a).
evidence as to what barriers exist to girls during Interviews conducted in this research that Fiji in
menstruation and what changes could be made. particular has improved significantly in increased
Reports include: understanding and awareness around MHM. There
• Breaking Down Barriers: Coming of Age, is also evidence of creative ways to engage girls
Becoming the Change – Case Study on around MHM, such as educational dances and songs
knowledge, attitudes, and practices of MHM in in Kiribati (Ministry of Education Kiribati, 2018).
Kiribati Schools 2018
• WASH in Schools Empowers Girls’ Education in Access to necessary MHM supplies is difficult
Fiji 2017 for girls and impacts their education. Girls
• Disability-inclusive WASH and MHM for interviewed as part of this fieldwork said they still
students with disabilities in Fijian Schools, 2019 tended to miss school when they had their period.
• Incorporating MHM into national WASH in The aforementioned study conducted in Kiribati
Schools policies and guidelines in the Solomon points to the cultural taboos around period blood,
Islands, 2015 and the difficulties around disposal as a result
(Ministry of Education Kiribati, 2018). Burial in
A critical component of the Three Star Approach’s specific locations and burning are the most common
contribution is in its active stance towards ways that girls dispose of their MHM products, and
gender equality. The design of the Three Star so key consideration is required to adapt this to a
Approach is gender sensitive as per the UNICEF school-based context. There is evidence of UNICEF
Gender Continuum (UNICEF, 2019), as indicated by and Government of Kiribati working together to
the embedded gender-related outcomes within 1 develop further training on MHM and increase
star (gender-segregated toilets) and 2 star (provision awareness about its inclusion in the curriculum, as
of facilities and education for MHM). This is an many teachers in the study were unaware that it was
important distinction that gender dimensions are their responsibility to teach it.
present early in the scale of hygiene promotion as
opposed to be left until last or sidelined into separate This evaluation has found that UNICEF has
strategies. It is also included in the Pacific Multi- remained true to the ‘demand-led’ nature of the
country Theory of Change (Annex II). This has led to Three Star Approach, which has helped develop
improvements of hygiene for girls (including older conversations and awareness around gender-
girls) across participating countries as identified by related WASH. UNICEF was found to be taking a
this evaluation in the school visits, KIIs and study of supportive role to allowing communities and country
country policies. National standards and technical decision-makers to adopt a context-specific approach.
requirements manuals in Solomon Islands are Continued advocacy on UNICEF’s part through the
gender-mainstreamed and have requirements that publication of research and the encouragement
toilet blocks much include facilities that address of basic gender-related standards (as is currently
MHM such as gender-segregated changing areas and underway in FSM) will contribute to greater equity
showers. There are examples of at least two schools within the Three Star Approach’s implementation.
having renovated their ablution blocks, improved the Inclusion of gender-related indicators in the EMIS
girls’ shower block and installed MHM disposal bins of Fiji and Solomon Islands are also strong signs of
to comply with these standards. The baseline survey building appropriate strategies to support diverse
conducted in FSM in 2018 carried out with the student populations. This chimes with the pillars of
Ministry of Education focused on advancing hygiene the Three Star Approach.
Formative Evaluation of UNICEF Three Star Approach for WASH in Schools in the Pacific 39
Final Report
An approach that could strengthen the Rural / remote / urban differences:
implementation of the Three Star Approach is
further specificity around MHM supply provision Differences across rural, remote and urban
from a school perspective. Free access to sanitary WASH in Schools outcomes in the Pacific are
products at a school-level has been identified by pronounced and the challenges are very different.
girls and parents as a key driver to encouraging As noted in Section 1, urbanisation is rising rapidly
school attendance during menstruation (Ministry of in the Pacific context, with growing informal
Education Kiribati, 2018). This may not be financially settlements particularly in Honiara and Suva. The
or environmentally sustainable, as issues with WASH obstacles in informal settlements are linked
disposal of MHM products are an environmental with insecure land rights, lack of adequate space for
concern in some school communities in Vanuatu and WASH facilities (Anderson et al., 2019). Research
Solomon Islands.6 Research into small-scale pilots of around schools based in informal settlements in the
context-specific low-cost alternatives as suggested Pacific is lacking. Fieldwork conducted as part of this
by the Breaking Down Barriers report could build this evaluation pointed to the difficulties around parent /
component. guardian engagement in the urbanised communities.
Interviewees stated that rural primary schools
were more likely to have high engagement with
Children of different ages: the surrounding community, and therefore greater
likelihood of success of community fundraising
Younger children are clearly targeted as initiatives for WASH facilities. Three Star Approach
the majority of the Three Star Approach implementation partners stated that urban schools
implementation schools are primary schools. required more targeted approaches to building
The Three Star Approach field guides and technical community engagement and were less likely to fund
toolkits have been identified as high quality for WASH infrastructure / maintenance. An example
younger learners by the International Water Centre of this is from Fiji where the strategy with urban
(2018). The implementation in Solomon Islands was schools is to employ the Three Star Approach training
designed to fit around the routine and schedule of in conjunction with other school events to increase
primary schools, with age-appropriate instruction the likelihood of parent attendance.
in mind. The messages / routines on hygiene
and snatiation are designed to be delivered daily,
weekly, quarterly and yearly, increasing likelihood of Children with disabilities:
retention.
Clarity around the relevance and appropriate
Older children have benefitted from the Three strategies around disability inclusion has not been
Star Approach, however it is not targeted at them strongly evidenced in the Three Star Approach.
as yet. The Three Star Approach has been employed People with disabilities have highly variable needs,
in some junior secondary schools and senior a point noted in the Study on Disability Inclusive
secondary schools (e.g. in Solomon Islands and WASH by CBM (Sprunt et al., 2019). Too often access
Kiribati) however the majority of the implementation is seen as provision of a ramp to enable wheelchair
to date has been focused on primary schools. access. This issue is not helped by the Three Star
Programme documentation from Vanuatu states an Field Guide where the only illustrations of inclusive
acknowledgement that junior secondary schools will WASH show a young person in a wheelchair in a
need a different approach and will require curriculum meeting and using a ramp (pages 10 and 15) (UNICEF
mapping to link it into the broader educational & GIZ, 2013). There are notable exceptions such as
outcomes. Older children are more difficult to target the special school in Fiji constructing a foot pump to
with behaviour change models, so this will require run water out of a tap, but this discourse is largely
significant consideration when the time comes absent. UNICEF’s partner in the region LLEE has
(National WASH in Schools Steering Committee, conducted research on the topic of the four obstacles
2020). (Figure 9) that are not addressed within the Three
Star Approach’s design (Live & Learn Environmental
There is also good practice coming from Kiribati Education for UNICEF, 2019c).
in linking with young children and babies. WASH
from the Start is being implemented with a range
of Government of Kiribati ministries and focuses on
the first 1,000 days of a child’s life. The Three Star
Approach has been incorporated into this programme,
which now targets all schools nation-wide. This is
likely made easier as the range of approaches are
funded by MFAT, promoting coherence across the
WASH stages.
6 MHM products ending up in water sources or being thrown on the ground. Many commercially available MHM products are non-biodegradable
and made of various plastics that can impact waterways if not disposed of correctly. Very few communities in the Solomon Islands have rubbish
collection, so consideration of disposal within communities is central to this issue. (Mohamed et al., 2017)
40 Formative Evaluation of UNICEF Three Star Approach for WASH in Schools in the Pacific
Final Report
Figure 9: Inclusive Access to WASH (World Vision and CBM, 2019)
Hygiene
Getting In and
Water Accessw
Getting There
Getting On
4.1.6. How can the ongoing relevance of the Three rights holders. As already stated, usage of WASH in
Star Approach for WASH in Schools be assured School indicators in national education management
amidst a rapidly changing implementing context systems to identify high risk schools has been
in participating countries (economic, political, seen in Solomon Islands, greatly improving the
social, natural, aid-related, needs, priorities)? government’s ability to navigate outbreak risk. This
represents significant relevance of UNICEF’s efforts
The engagement of government is critically in building the WASH infrastructure for the country
important in supporting the development and and increasing resilience despite changing contexts.
application of the Three Star Approach for WASH
in Schools. This is seen specifically through linking The collection of disaggregated data that includes
the Three Star Approach to the work of governments disability which is then put into use is still a
in their policies and plans which has been evidenced challenge. The issue of data disaggregation has
in Fiji, Vanuatu, Kiribati and Solomon Islands, Chuuk been brought up regularly in plans and evaluations for
State FSM. Additionally, incorporating key indicators a number of years. The following point from the 2017
on WASH in Schools into national monitoring systems Situation Analysis of Children in Pacific Countries
as seen in Fiji, Solomon Islands greatly increases the highlights this:
Three Star Approach’s relevance.
‘This analysis has revealed several data gaps in the
The Three Star Approach role in countries’ Pacific Island countries. The absence of this data is
responses to the COVID-19 pandemic is in itself a key finding, but it also makes a full analysis
demonstrating the approach’s ongoing relevance. of the situation for children and women impossible.
As outlined in Section 1.1.1, some Pacific Island • There are numerous data gaps in health and
nations have been less impacted by COVID-19 having nutrition, WASH, education, child protection
no reported deaths from COVID-19 (e.g. Solomon juvenile justice and social protection, and,
Islands, FSM) whereas others in this evaluation where quantitative data do exist in all sectors,
(namely Fiji) have experienced long-term restrictions they are rarely broken down by rural-urban
and lockdowns, particularly due to the spread of the differences, gender, wealth disparities or for
Delta variant. The fieldwork conducted in Fiji took vulnerable groups such as refugee and asylum-
place between the first and the second wave of seeking children or children with disabilities.
the COVID-19 pandemic on Viti Levu and the data • Existing data collection mechanisms are under-
suggested that rights-holders (students, teachers, utilised or do not have the necessary resources
head teachers) combined the messaging from to perform properly.’ (UNICEF Pacific, 2017a)
COVID-19 prevention with the Three Star Approach,
stating that handwashing is important to stop the Addressing data disaggregation requires a clear
spread of the virus. Whilst this was obviously not understanding of its purpose and use (linked to
the intention of the approach having been designed supporting the voice of excluded groups) and
several years earlier, it is an unintended positive appropriate measures to collect and manage it.
to the relevance of the approach to the health of
Formative Evaluation of UNICEF Three Star Approach for WASH in Schools in the Pacific 41
Final Report
Maintaining and developing effective linkages 4.2 Coherence
with different stakeholders is critical. A strength of
the Three Star Approach for WASH in Schools is that
Overall Evaluation Question 2: Is the Three Star
it emphasizes the inclusion of multiple stakeholders
Approach for WASH in Schools compatible with other
and groups and alignment with other organisations/
WASH in Schools interventions (government, schools
donors. For example, The Three Star Approach is
and other actors, including those supported by other
fully embedded within MFAT’s Kiribati WASH from
development partners) in the participating countries,
the Start programme, with MFAT a critical partner
education sector, schools and communities?
for the Government of Kiribati to improve WASH
in Schools, including through the financing of
infrastructure. In the FSM, there is strengthened
Summary of Evaluation Question 2 –
collaboration between government agencies on
Coherence
WASH issues, particularly around hygiene and the
importance of handwashing. Importantly, with
There are important examples of
support from UNICEF, the Department of Education
governments institutionalising WASH in
and the Environmental Protection Agency, have also
schools in line with the Three Star Approach
strengthened collaboration, with the Environmental
which is a significant achievement.
Protection Agency increasingly involved in testing
Generally, this is tied into strong buy-in from
the quality of drinking water in school rainwater
different ministries. This includes some
tanks.
governments requesting roll-out nationwide,
a key opportunity to improve WASH for
UNICEF’s collaboration with NGOs provides
thousands of children. Communities and
opportunities to bring essential skills, resources
schools broadly to not have name recognition
and expertise. For example, LLEE who bring their
of the Three Star Approach, and whilst they are
expertise on working with excluded groups (especially
eager to improve WASH standards, they do
people with disabilities) have produced some
not have the financial capacity to do so.
helpful publications, including on inclusive access
(Live & Learn Environmental Education for UNICEF
Development partners and other actors
2019). On behalf of UNICEF, LLEE also assessed
in the WASH sector have a general
WASH in Schools programs in Fiji, Solomon Islands,
understanding of the Three Star Approach
Vanuatu and Kiribati during 2019. Two publications
and mostly work in line with it. Strategic,
were produced from those assessments (Live &
capacity-informed partnerships have not been
Learn Environmental Education for UNICEF, 2019a,
witnessed, with INGOs and other stakeholders
2019b). Recognising the limitations UNICEF faces in
in the region used more as implementing
directly supporting work across the Pacific ensuring
bodies. Questions around ‘why’, ‘who’, and
the ongoing relevance of the Three Star Approach
‘how’ seem to be rarely considered when
requires a breadth of partnerships with local and
working with partners.
international NGOs that are developed and nurtured.
Whilst there is evidence of a number of partnerships
with multilateral, government, INGO and NGO 4.2.1 What initiatives are governments in
agencies there is little evidence of partnerships the participating countries undertaking to
with private sector organisations in the region. institutionalise WASH in Schools and is the Three
One notable exception is the data management Star Approach for WASH in Schools compatible
company Akvo who supported the UNICEF Fiji and with this?
Solomon Islands team in the early stages of the
piloting of the Three Star Approach (Akvo, n.d.). For most Pacific Countries where the Three Star
Whilst this gap reflects the challenges around Approach is being implemented, strengthening
restricted private sector space which is seen in high WASH, and particularly WASH in Schools, is a key
costs due to limited choice/competition, it is a critical government priority. The onset of the COVID-19
area currently unaddressed, specifically with regard pandemic has provided extra impetus to government
to supporting the development of financing and efforts to strengthen WASH in Schools but it has
marketing hardware and appropriate technologies. clearly been a key area of focus for these countries
since before early 2020.
In recent years, national committees and/or
technical working groups have been established
in several countries with support from UNICEF
and, generally, have strong levels of buy-in
from across the different parts of government.
These are critical groups which help to facilitate
42 Formative Evaluation of UNICEF Three Star Approach for WASH in Schools in the Pacific
Final Report
collaboration and promote coherence between achieve at least Level 2 for each standard and that
national government agencies. This is certainly the do not address their shortcomings may ultimately
case in Kiribati where the Ministry of Education is lose accreditation status and be forced to close.
the chair of the National Committee for WASH in Similarly, in Vanuatu, all schools are now required to
Schools, but which also has representation from the submit a WASH Improvement Plan alongside their
Ministry of Health and Medical Services, the Ministry annual School Strategic Plan, which outlines where
of Infrastructure and Sustainable Energy and several improvements are required to WASH infrastructure
local NGOs. This forum has led to clear examples of and WASH practices and how the school intends to
collaboration between government agencies such address this.
as that observed between the ministries to improve
the design of WASH facilities and infrastructure 4.2.2 What initiatives are schools and communities
(such as toilets) in i-Kiribati schools, with technical undertaking to institutionalise WASH in Schools
assistance provided by UNICEF. Similarly, in FSM, and is the Three Star Approach for WASH in
the national Technical Working Group for WASH Schools compatible with this?
includes representatives from several government
agencies including the Department of Education The importance of improving WASH in Schools
and the Department of Health and has supported is keenly recognised at the community level and
collaboration on a range of issues relating to WASH the Three Star Approach appears to be a good
in Schools including on hygiene and handwashing. way to harness school/community-level efforts in
In the Solomon Islands, however, feedback from this regard. This is based on feedback from school
stakeholders indicated that while a WASH in Schools principals, parents, and other community groups,
Technical Working Group had been established although it should be noted that several stakeholders
it had not been meeting frequently, in part due to interviewed in countries such as Fiji and Kiribati were
the absence of quality ICT infrastructure to support unfamiliar with the Three Star Approach itself (i.e.,
virtual meetings which have been required since the interviews suggest that the Three Star Approach
onset of the COVID-19 pandemic. ‘label’ is not widely recognised at the community
level).
Importantly, participating countries are strongly
supportive of the Three Star Approach and some During stakeholder interviews there were several
governments have requested UNICEF to scale reports of community-level efforts to fundraise
up the approach nationwide. The support for the for improved WASH infrastructure, however the
approach is most clearly seen by the fact that several level of finance raised is generally insufficient to
countries have embedded the approach within their procure what is required (see section 3.3 below for
national policy and strategy documents. For example, further discussion on this) and, in fact, can lead to
in Vanuatu, the Government has embedded the Three another set of challenges if the materials used do not
Star Approach within its 10-year National WASH in meet national quality standards. In Fiji, for example,
Schools Strategy, which includes a target that 80% it was noted that while annual funding provided to
of schools achieve a minimum two-star performance schools should be sufficient to cover the costs of
rating by 2029. This has not come about by chance; the WASH infrastructure required to achieve two
UNICEF has been intentional in building trusted stars, other competing interests (such as sporting
relationships with key government stakeholders in equipment) can sometimes take precedence.
Vanuatu (particularly within Ministry of Education
and Training) and have empowered them to lead The assessment process and associated rating
efforts to strengthen WASH in Schools in Vanuatu, scale of the Three Star Approach seems to
including through the implementation of the Three promote considerable interest at the community
Star Approach. Similarly, in Kiribati, the Government level and drives competition between schools
recently updated its National Sanitation Policy to (and their local communities), who strive to
ensure the Three Star Approach is mainstreamed achieve the highest possible rating and ‘beat’ their
across the country. neighbours. The other side of this, however, is that
many schools struggle to maintain standards in the
UNICEF has also had success in adapting the intervening period between assessments due to a
Three Star Approach so that it aligns with existing lack of resources. This was noted during school visits
government systems and processes relating to in Kiribati and also in Fiji, where it was acknowledged
the education sector, and this approach has been that maintaining the momentum and energy
strongly supported by partner governments. observed in the lead-up to an assessment process
This is most clearly evident in FSM, where UNICEF is challenging.
has implemented a ‘Four-Star’ Approach so that it
aligns with the Department of Education’s existing
school accreditation system, which measures
school performance across a range of standards
on a four-point scale. Schools in FSM that do not
Formative Evaluation of UNICEF Three Star Approach for WASH in Schools in the Pacific 43
Final Report
4.2.3 What are other development partners in the achieve its strategic ambition, and influence policy
participating countries doing to institutionalise reform. This evaluation would note that UNICEF
WASH in Schools in the participating countries seems to work well with development partners who
and is the Three Star Approach for WASH in happen to be working in the WASH sector within a
Schools compatible with this? particular country, but questions of ‘why’ and ‘who’
and how this relates to the ambition of the Three Star
The Three Star Approach for WASH in Schools Approach for WASH in Schools do not appear to be
appears to be well understood by other systematically considered and do not appear to be
development partners and has broad support. In formalised.
particular, the MFAT provides a critical role in funding
WASH initiatives in participating Pacific Island
Countries and the Three Star Approach is embedded 4.3 Efficiency
within several of these projects (for example,
Solomon Islands Better Learning Environment
(SIBLE), the Kiribati WASH from the Start (initiative Overall Evaluation Question 3: Is the Three Star
and the Vanuatu WASH in Schools (Van-WASH in Approach for WASH in Schools implemented in an
Schools) programme). There is also clear alignment economic and timely manner?
between the Three Star Approach for WASH in
Schools and WASH programs implemented by other
major donor and development partners such as the Summary of Evaluation Question 3 –
World Bank’s Urban Water Supply and Sanitation Efficiency
sector project in the Solomon Islands, and the
European Union’s KIRIWATSAN project, which has Whilst resources for the WASH in Schools
now closed but which was working to improve water programme have been adequate for the initial
supply and sanitation systems in 8 outer islands of phase of the programme, there are serious
Kiribati. challenges to the quantity, level, quality and
timeliness of resourcing, implementation and
UNICEF has developed close relationships with management of activities to ensure that gains
NGOs and other development partners working can be sustained and built on.
in the WASH sector in participating Pacific Island
Countries through implementation of the Three Systemic weaknesses due to limited
Star Approach. These organisations often also capacities and supply and resource chains
participate in the national steering committees and/or seriously impact the programme and both
technical working groups which are often facilitated weaken and damage the areas of strength
and/or supported by UNICEF. In Vanuatu, UNICEF in approach and buy in from government,
has worked closely with Engineers Without Borders schools and communities. There is a clear
(for the delivery of sanitation and hygiene portions of challenge of budgeting for operations and
training workshops) and paid IsraAID (an Israel-based maintenance (O&M), with a need to embed
non-government organisation) to support facilitation financing of school facilities and infrastructure
during construction training workshops and follow- into the cost of improvements for schools.
up in Penama, while in FSM, Red Cross Micronesia Addressing these weaknesses starts with the
recently adapted its community resilience project theoretical underpinning of the programme
to focus on the same five schools involved in the at regional and country levels. Systemic and
pilot of the Three Star Approach. During interviews, structural challenges need to be considered in
stakeholders made several references to UNICEF programme planning with due attention paid
acting as a bridge at the national level between to threats and challenges to efficiency.
the technical and the policy and acknowledged that
UNICEF plays a key role in facilitating coordination
and coherence between government ministries, 4.3.1 To what extent is resourcing for the
NGO’s and other key stakeholders, which reduces implementation of the approach adequate
the risk of duplication of effort. (Finances, Human Resources, Technical Capacity)?
However, there are few examples where Feedback from stakeholders across the
collaboration between UNICEF and other participating country programmes shows that
development partners (beyond donors such as resources have been adequate to date to pilot the
MFAT) has been formalised or has led to joint approach and support improvements in WASH in
strategic planning, and there would appear to selected schools. The Three Star Approach for WASH
be opportunities to strengthen this. For example, in Schools is based on starting with ‘simple and
feedback from development partners in Fiji suggest inexpensive steps’ that can then be built on (UNICEF
there are opportunities for UNICEF to think more & GIZ, 2013). In rolling out the Three Star Approach to
strategically about who it could partner with to participating countries, the pilot phase has focused on
44 Formative Evaluation of UNICEF Three Star Approach for WASH in Schools in the Pacific
Final Report
working across a small number of schools, targeted “While UNICEF has made an important difference
at certain islands or areas. Achievement of ‘1 Star’ in FSM with limited resources in several key
requires minimal infrastructural costs from the school areas, the scale of the challenge in FSM suggests
which are largely met by local communities providing that much more needs to be done and more
inputs to construct basic latrines. Moving from 1-2 resources need to be made available. At the
Stars requires more improvements to latrines as school level, the approach has only been piloted
well as a stronger emphasis on hygiene education in 5 out of the 75 schools in Chuuk State, itself
and availability of a clean water supply: one of four states in FSM. Stakeholders also
noted that funding provided by the Government
Schools achieve two star status by making of FSM (through Department of Education) for
incremental changes in their hygiene education schools does not currently include funds for
programmes and modest upgrades to WASH implementing WASH in Schools activities and
facilities. These changes are designed to facilitate infrastructure.” (Stakeholder consultations, FSM)
the practice of hand washing with soap after
toilet use, in addition to before meals, and to There is a clear challenge to budgeting for
improve a school’s ability to meet girls’ needs by operations and maintenance (O&M) costs.
increasing the number of toilets and/or improving There is a recognition that O&M were usually
privacy and usability. (UNICEF & GIZ, 2013) excluded from budgets and plans. There is a need
to embed financing for O&M of school facilities
An important element of the Three Star Approach and infrastructure into the cost of improvements
for WASH in Schools is the way it aims to for WASH in Schools. For example, in Kiribati there
change WASH programming as perceived by a recognition of the need to embed financing for
schools, communities, and decision makers in O&M of school facilities and infrastructure into the
government. As schools move from 1-2 Stars (and cost of improvements for WASH in schools, noting
then to 3 Stars) the commitment from schools and there are several examples of schools in Kiribati
decision makers becomes more critical. Whilst the going backwards in their star ratings from their initial
changes can be modest, they still require funding, assessments because facilities and infrastructure
technical support and resources, which can be are not regularly maintained (including during school
challenging. For example, the initial focus in Kiribati holidays). Stakeholders suggested there should be
has been to pilot the Three Star Approach in four outer at least one salaried janitor or maintenance person
islands, working closely with key partners including on each outer island whose responsibility it is to
the Ministry of Education and LLEE. Feedback from oversee facilities and maintenance and respond
stakeholders suggests that while resources have to any maintenance concerns. Ideally these roles
been adequate to date to pilot the approach and would be funded by the Government of Kiribati
support improvements in WASH in selected schools, through the Ministry of Education. Interviews with
there needs to be a considerable scale-up in resources community stakeholders revealed that some local
to effectively support a nationwide rollout of the communities have contributed their own funds to
approach, including for technical and management procure and/or support the maintenance of facilities
support and for facilities and infrastructure. Whilst and infrastructure in schools, but the extent of this
this can be considered a question of effectiveness financing is limited. In addition, there are also risks to
the timeliness and availability of resources (physical using local materials and building techniques which
and financial) relates to the efficient use of resources do not meet national quality standards.
in support of effectiveness and sustainability.
Lack of attention to O&M costs impacts on
Leveraging institutional changes whilst also resilience. An additional challenge related to
supporting active community involvement is very adequate resourcing is the negative impact of
challenging, especially within the context of the climate change and natural disasters, such as tropical
Pacific. In Vanuatu, the Three Star Approach has been cyclones. From a finance and efficiency perspective,
successfully piloted at the school level in Penama the impact of financing re-construction whether by
since 2017. Feedback from stakeholder consultations communities, government or a mix of both acts as
indicates that this has been seen as an effective a negative pressure on the availability of adequate
strategy to balance resources given the complexity financing and makes it more challenging to move
of the operating environment. Stakeholders also forwards and improve.
reflected that the pace of implementation of the
approach has been “about right” and, importantly, in Data from the Vanuatu Annual Reports for the
step with the capacity of the Government of Vanuatu Van-WASH in Schools programme (in which the
which ensures it is the government that continues to Three Star Approach is embedded) submitted
lead. In FSM and Kiribati there is a recognition of the by UNICEF to MFAT indicate considerable
challenges of replicating the project. Evidence from budget underspends. For example, in the 2019-
stakeholder consultations illustrates this point: 20 fiscal year, total expenditure was equal to
just 42 % of planned expenditure, with UNICEF
Formative Evaluation of UNICEF Three Star Approach for WASH in Schools in the Pacific 45
Final Report
identifying delays to procurement of supplies due There is a real need to look at creative ways of
to COVID-19 and Tropical Cyclone Harold (which building and support to building technical capacity
damaged infrastructure in up to 45 % of all schools) especially at local levels. This point is clearly linked to
as some of the key drivers for the underspend. In supporting a more appropriate and efficient approach
total across the first three years of the Van-WASH in to O&M.
Schools programme, total expenditure was just 32
% of planned expenditure. This information is further 4.3.2: To what extent is implementation of the
discussed in Section 4.3 Efficiency. Three Star Approach for WASH in Schools in each
country based on a clear understanding and
There have been challenges with national staff strategy for achieving results in that context?
turnover which have impacted efficiency. UNICEF’s
approach to having WASH officers and WASH The implementation of the Three Star Approach
consultants embedded in ministries and departments for WASH in Schools across the five countries has
across the five Pacific counties supports upstream been adapted and to various degrees ‘tailored’ to
influencing and system strengthening as well specific country contexts, with FSM and Vanuatu
as downstream action and are clearly valued. as particular examples of this. In most countries, the
The limitations of such an approach relate to application of the Three Star Approach is embedded
challenges when dealing with staff changeovers and in broader WASH programs funded by MFAT (Kiribati,
replacements. Vanuatu, FSM). It is also important to highlight
UNICEF’s intentional approach to build trust and
Staff turnover in schools can be both positive relationships with government stakeholders and
and negative. A challenge with turnover of senior let them lead. This approach does have a downside
staff and teachers in schools has been noted in however, where sometimes other stakeholders can
Fiji, Kiribati and Solomon Islands. Interviews with feel that progress is too slow given the need to
key informants highlighted that in Kiribati, school improve WASH. Clearly it is hard to hard to balance
principals were strong advocates of the approach these elements.
with a challenge noted of achieving and maintaining
Three Star Approach momentum when they moved An important example of impacting country
to a different school, which many do. Some key level strategies is seen in the creation of the
informants stated that having standard requirements National WASH in Schools Coordinator position
for facilities and infrastructure (through government in Vanuatu, funded by UNICEF but now formally part
policies) then it wouldn’t matter if a school principal of the Ministry of Education and Training structure.
moved on because they would be able to apply the Additionally, the WASH Coordinator in the Solomon
same framework in their new setting and would know Islands was a key part of the National Disaster
immediately where improvements were required. Committee. The creation and localised funding/
This highlights the importance of having standard support for key posts that can help drive forwards
requirements for facilities and infrastructure as well improved WASH in Schools in terms of building the
as motivated and engaged local communities. enabling environment – policy, programme design
and institutionalisation (UNICEF & GIZ, 2013).
There are structural challenges with technical
capacity. Despite the positive assessment above, The above examples of supporting strategy,
adequate technical capacity across the five countries capacity, and institutionalisation of WASH in
especially with regard to support for outlying areas Schools through provision of funding for key
and islands is a very real challenge. Discussions with positions as well as initially providing the skilled
key stakeholders in Kiribati and Vanuatu highlighted people to fill such posts, demonstrates an approach
the challenges with this point: the initial focus in that could be adopted in other Pacific Island countries.
Kiribati has been to pilot the Three Star Approach in This idea was raised in Kiribati with a comment from
four outer islands, working closely with key partners a key informant that it would be better to employ
including the Ministry of Education and LLEE. The a cadre of additional island coordinators who could
following quote from Vanuatu further evidences this strengthen the link between Ministry of Education
point: and outer island communities and advocate for
the approach rather than employ another UNICEF
‘The Government of Vanuatu has indicated it technical adviser.
would like the Three Star Approach rolled out
across all provinces of the country. However, The Three Star Approach has the capacity to
even with additional resources provided by MFAT be highly effective in that it is so adaptable
to support the roll out, stakeholders indicated it and can be applied in widely differing contexts.
could take up to 5 years for school infrastructure Each country has started from very different places
needs across the country to be met.’ (Stakeholder (e.g. Vanuatu has higher average WASH standards
consultations, Vanuatu) than Solomons Islands, as per section 1.1.2) but
the same approach can be adapted to the specific
46 Formative Evaluation of UNICEF Three Star Approach for WASH in Schools in the Pacific
Final Report
WASH context of individual countries and regions are instances where work was planned for the final
within countries. However, also as mentioned earlier quarter of the year when schools and communities
(in section 4.1 Relevance) gaps and weaknesses in often close, which inevitably pushed out completion
developing appropriate Theories of Change feed into dates. Additionally, implementing partners reported
the development of appropriately detailed plans and lengthy financial processes in Solomon Islands.
results frameworks that then contribute to making They stated a knock-on effect of delays to making
appropriate and efficient decisions most commonly payments can resulted in delays to activities.
because there is not enough country/cultural context
in them. The COVID-19 pandemic has had an inevitable
impact on programming and costs. As in many
An example of the lack of contextualised approach contexts, COVID-19 has impacted efficiency of a
can be evidenced in the Solomon Islands. number of programmes and whose effects are
UNICEF’s own Situation Analysis of the Status of ongoing in the region at the time of writing. For
Children in the Solomon Islands (UNICEF Pacific, example, in Solomon Islands it was expected that
2017b) points to how families broadly in the country the National WASH Coordinator position was to
do not value investing in WASH infrastructure and be absorbed by the Solomon Islands Government
are starting from a much lower baseline than other however due to budgetary constraints, the
implementation countries. The Solomon Islands position will continue to be funded by UNICEF. In
can be a difficult environment in which to conduct Fiji, the programme required a six month no-cost
system strengthening and behaviour change due to extension, primarily as a result of the challenges
cultural practices of ‘wantok’ and ‘kastom’ which can of implementation with Ministry of Education,
influence attitudes towards expectations of financial Heritage and Arts and difficulties commencing the
or infrastructure support (Iyabora, 2016). Key infrastructure component. Delays were further
informants reported that there were target schools exacerbated through a shift to remote working.
that have turned away the Three Star Approach Undoubtedly, children being out of school will have
because it did not come with guaranteed ‘top of the reversed some of the progress made over the last
range’ WASH infrastructure. Despite this awareness few years and a significant financial investment
of context, this evaluation found no evidence of a will be required to re-ignite and retrain WASH
systematised approach to bolster the Three Star stakeholders.
Approach in such settings.
4.3.4: To what extent are coherence and
4.3.3: To what extent are outputs achieved on harmonisation of initiatives and approaches used
time and within budget? to leverage efficiencies?
The timeliness of achieving outputs has been There is encouraging evidence of how UNICEF’s
a challenge across the different country working with and supporting key government
programmes. For example in Kiribati there was departments supports collaboration. For example,
a 60% underspend with the MFAT Kiribati WASH in FSM stakeholders identified examples of
in Schools programme in 2020 (in which the Three strengthened collaboration between the departments
Star Approach is embedded). The primary reasons of Education and Health on WASH issues, such as
given for this underspend relate to the challenge of the implementation of preventative measures in
procuring goods and services in Kiribati (exacerbated schools of relevance to WASH, particularly around
further in the context of the COVID-19 pandemic). hygiene and the importance of handwashing. Also
Similar examples are also recorded in Vanuatu, with in FSM, the Department of Education with support
the Annual Reports for the Van-WASH in Schools from UNICEF collaborated with the Environmental
programme (in which the Three Star Approach Protection Agency who are increasingly involved
is embedded) submitted by UNICEF to MFAT in testing the quality of drinking water in school
indicate considerable budget underspends. In the rainwater tanks. Whilst in Vanuatu UNICEF has
2019-20 fiscal year, total expenditure was equal to developed good working relationships with NGOs
just 42 % of planned expenditure, with UNICEF and other development partners working in the
identifying delays to procurement of supplies due WASH sector in Vanuatu and several are members of
to COVID-19 and Tropical Cyclone Harold (which the National WASH in Schools Steering Committee.
damaged infrastructure in up to 45 % of all schools) This includes Engineers Without Borders, World
as some of the key drivers for the underspend. In Vision and the Red Cross.
total across the first 3 years of the Van-WASH in
Schools programme, total expenditure was just 32 UNICEF is well known for the critical role it plays
% of planned expenditure. in facilitating national steering committees/
technical working groups, which are important
In some situations, unrealistic timeframes and forums where coherence and harmonisation can
cumbersome processes regarding infrastructure be promoted. In Fiji, there is a degree of coherence
construction have had a negative impact on emanating from the National WASH Cluster, along
timeliness. For example in Solomon Islands, there with the other seven national clusters hosted by the
Formative Evaluation of UNICEF Three Star Approach for WASH in Schools in the Pacific 47
Final Report
Ministry of Health and Medical Services. This provides 4.4.1 To what extent does the Three Star Approach
an open space for government, stakeholders and for WASH in Schools contribute to strengthening
development partners to share different approaches. the enabling environment, demand, supply and
Other actors in Fiji are also working in line with the quality of WASH in Schools in each country (i.e.
Three Star Approach. Some key informant interviews policy, legislation and finance; human and physical
have stated that the clusters have been less robust resources in schools, including facilities and
during the COVID-19 pandemic, as seen in the lack training for teachers; demonstrated motivation
of regular meetings held in the transition to online. of the school community to mainstream WASH
This has been challenging for UNICEF and has into day to day school activities, planning,
undermined the coherence and harmonisation of programming and budgeting; and effectiveness
ongoing WASH in Schools work. of inputs for changing WASH behaviour)?
The challenge here relates to the points made At the school level, the Three Star Approach
in the coherence evaluation question (section has been implemented initially as a ‘pilot’ in
3.2) on the critical importance of UNICEF being participating Pacific Island Countries, with a view
strategic about who it partners with and why in to broader scale-out. In Vanuatu, for example, the
each country. This is a vital issue for UNICEF as Three Star Approach has been implemented in 64
application of the Three Star Approach for WASH schools in Penama province (only), while in Kiribati
in Schools by UNICEF alone is not sufficient to the Three Star Approach has, to date, been piloted
achieve sustained change. It is clear that there are in 32 schools on four outer islands. Similar pilot
opportunities to leverage efficiencies and work in projects have been implemented in FSM, Fiji, and
conjunction with other WASH approaches rather Solomon Islands.
than against.
UNICEF performance reports indicate that,
overall, there have been improvements in WASH
4.4 Effectiveness for many of the schools that have participated
in the pilot schemes when assessed against the
Three-Star rating scale. For example:
Overall Evaluation Question 4: Is the Three Star • In Vanuatu, a higher number of pilot schools
Approach for WASH in Schools contributing to the were assessed as reaching 1 star or even 2 stars
enabling environment, demand, supply and quality in Q1 2020 compared to assessments
for WASH in Schools in each country, for the benefit completed in mid-2019
of girls and boys (and women and men) of different • In Kiribati, most pilot schools on outer islands
ages and abilities, including those at risk of being left (including Maiana and South Tarawa) were
behind? reportedly between 1–2 stars during baseline
assessments (although there is some evidence
these schools have gone backwards in
Summary of Evaluation Question 4 -
subsequent assessments)
Effectiveness
• In FSM, the five pilot schools are all meeting
national minimum benchmarks for WASH in
There is clear evidence that pilot schools
Schools (2 stars of a 4-star scale)
have experienced improvements in their
• In Solomon Islands, 9 of 15 schools have
star ratings, reflecting an improvement in
achieved 2 stars (although the ambition is to have
WASH behaviours, and this has also been seen
42 schools achieve 2 stars by the end of 2021)
amongst girls to some extent. Additionally,
• In Fiji, the original target of moving 100 schools
there has been significant policy reform and
from 0 to 1 star within three years was easily
improvements in the enabling environment
exceeded (212 schools achieved this)
that bolster WASH in schools. The lack of
WASH infrastructure at both school and
Progress strengthening the enabling environment
community level however is a major constraint
for WASH in Schools through implementation
to further improvement.
of the Three Star Approach is apparent across
most participating Pacific Island countries. The
There has been little progress responding
response to COVID-19 has provided additional
to the unique needs of children with
impetus to the critical emphasis of the Three Star
disability, partly due to many stakeholders
Approach on handwashing and hygiene. There is
holding a simplistic view of disability and
strong government buy-in to the approach, and
guidance notes on the Three Star Approach
governments in Kiribati, Vanuatu and FSM have all
reflect this (i.e. exclusively referring to people
committed to rolling out the approach nationwide.
in wheelchairs). The strategies for monitoring
The Three Star Approach for WASH in Schools
and reporting across the Three Star Approach
has been the driver of several key reforms to
stand to be improved, as well as learning and
government policy, systems and processes, such
information exchanges at a regional level.
as the inclusion of WASH in Schools in the national
48 Formative Evaluation of UNICEF Three Star Approach for WASH in Schools in the Pacific
Final Report
school accreditation framework in FSM, and the damage to infrastructure and other O&M issues
requirement in Vanuatu for all schools to submit a are not rectified. This situation has recently led to
WASH Improvement Plan along with their annual some schools in Kiribati going backwards in their
School Strategic Plan. assessments against the Three Star scale. Similar
reports were received regarding schools in Fiji,
The Three Star Approach has been an important including one school visited for this evaluation that
contributor to reforms to national standards was rated at 2 stars but which did not have working
relating to WASH in Schools (for example this was toilets.
noted in stakeholder interviews with government
representatives in Kiribati), although implementation An important part of the ambition behind the
and enforcement of the standards is inconsistent Three Star Approach for WASH in Schools is that
in many cases and further development and it should benefit girls and boys of different ages
streamlining of the standards is still required. Some and abilities. This evaluation finds some evidence
participating Pacific Island Countries now have that this is occurring in participating Pacific Island
national standards that require schools to have Countries but would contend that more needs to be
gender-segregated toilets (for example, in Kiribati), done. As previously noted, the Three Star Approach
while there has also been progress developing for WASH in Schools has led to some clear
standards relating to MHM in some countries (for examples of improvements for girls in terms of
example, in Kiribati and Vanuatu). Further work national standards for WASH in Schools (such as the
is required to continue standardising national requirement for gender-disaggregated toilets in FSM
WASH in Schools requirements so there is and Kiribati), although adherence to these standards
consistency within each country and to ensure is inconsistent. Participating countries are, however,
greater specificity. For example, in FSM, schools at different stages in terms of national standards
are currently required to have access to fresh relating to MHM for older girls. In FSM, for example,
water, but there are no agreed standards relating the school accreditation framework does not yet
to the volume of clean water required per student. address the needs of older girls (including for MHM),
Similarly, standards relating to the maximum number while in Kiribati the provision of sanitary pads and
of students per toilet currently differ between the rubbish bins with lids is a requirement for schools. In
Department of Education and the Department of Vanuatu, while there is a results indicator for MHM in
Health in FSM. the Three-Star Approach results framework, it refers
only to the provision of supplies and does not relate
The Three Star Approach for WASH in Schools to facilities/infrastructure.
has led to improvements in WASH infrastructure
in participating pilot schools (for example, new and This evaluation would note there appears to have
separate toilets for girls and boys, installation of been little progress responding to the unique the
handwashing stations and new rainwater tanks), needs of children with disability. During interviews,
such as in Kiribati. There were also reports of stakeholders in multiple participating Pacific Island
improvements in WASH supplies in pilot schools in Countries largely considered ‘disability’ in terms of
FSM and Vanuatu, such as through the provision of physical disability (i.e., children in a wheelchair), and
soap and hygiene kits. Despite these improvements, discussions centred around whether schools had
the lack of WASH infrastructure at both the ramps that would provide children in a wheelchair to
school-level and the community-level more toilets. However, there does not, as yet, appear to
broadly is considered to be a major constraint have been sufficient consideration within the Three
to further improvement of WASH practices and Star Approach for WASH in Schools of the needs of
behaviours. Key donors such as MFAT are planning children with other types of disability (for example,
and/or implementing major investments in WASH vision impairment or cognitive or psycho-social) and,
infrastructure in many Pacific Island countries but, in several cases, there was a view that the needs
even so, demand is expected to greatly exceed the of children with disabilities should be met within
available supply of WASH infrastructure over the special schools (rather than in mainstream schools).
short to medium term. This emerged during interviews with government
and non-government stakeholders in Fiji and Kiribati.
The lack of budget for ongoing maintenance of While the Three Star Approach provides a useful
WASH facilities and infrastructure at schools is a mechanism for these issues to be promoted, there
major challenge and was identified as a key risk appears to have been limited traction to date. In
during stakeholder interviews in all participating Vanuatu, feedback from stakeholder interviews also
Pacific Island Countries. For example, in Kiribati, indicated that more needs to be done for children with
pilot schools were observed making a big effort disability, both in terms of access to infrastructure
at the assessment stage to maximise their rating but also in terms of improving awareness around the
against the Three Star scale, but then were challenges faced by these children. One important
reportedly unable to maintain the same standards in and recent development in Vanuatu is that Ministry
the intervening period. Without sufficient resources, of Education and Training contracted Wan Smolberg’s
Formative Evaluation of UNICEF Three Star Approach for WASH in Schools in the Pacific 49
Final Report
Rainbow Disability Theatre Group to perform WASH- infrastructure in schools that were damaged by
related plays and deliver interactive workshops Tropical Cyclone Harold in April 2020, providing a
for selected schools in Pentecost, with a focus on strong indication of the value the community places
accessible infrastructure and practices. on WASH in Schools.
4.4.2 To what extent does the Three Star Approach 4.4.3 Are any unplanned / unanticipated changes
encourage WASH behaviour change in students’ (positive or negative) happening in schools
families and communities (e.g. eliminating open and communities as a result of the Three Star
defecation, handwashing after using the toilet Approach for WASH in Schools (for girls and
and before eating, MHM, etc.)? boys, as well as men and women of different
ages and abilities, including those at risk of being
There was consistent feedback during stakeholder left behind)?
interviews that the Three Star Approach for
WASH in Schools encourages behaviour change This evaluation did not uncover an extensive
amongst school students, including increased use number of ‘unplanned’ or ‘unanticipated’ changes
of toilets for defecation, handwashing using soap, as a result of the Three Star Approach. One
and other improvements to hygiene practices. These stakeholder from the NGO sector interviewed in
practices have been supported by training programs FSM noted that absenteeism in a participating
and communication materials provided by UNICEF pilot school had been considerably reduced since
as part of the Three Star Approach (for example, this the introduction of the Three Star Approach, but
came through strongly during interviews with both this could reasonably be expected given children in
government and non-government stakeholders in many schools piloting the Three Star Approach have
FSM). greater access to clean and fresh drinking water
and soap for handwashing and are therefore likely
There were also several reports of students to have improved health outcomes. Stakeholders
promoting improved WASH behaviours in their interviewed in Kiribati reported that some students
communities although the extent to which from pilot schools had been observed bringing water
this is possible is often limited by the available bottles with them to fill with clean drinking water and
WASH infrastructure within households. This was taking them home at the end of each day.
highlighted during interviews with stakeholders in
Fiji and Kiribati. The behaviour changes appear to 4.4.4 What methods/measures are in place to
be strongly supported by parents and there were monitor the implementation and results of the
anecdotal reports in Fiji of some parents purchasing Three Star Approach for WASH in Schools in each
soap as a result of students’ increased understanding country, and to share lessons and good practice
of good hygiene practices. In Vanuatu, UNICEF data between schools, communities, development
reported to MFAT in 2019-20 before and after Tropical partners and countries (including on achieving
Cyclone Harold for 18 affected schools in Pentecost benefits for girls and boys of different ages and
showed that performance on ‘sanitation’ and ‘water’ abilities, and those at risk of being left behind)?
had stalled (largely due to infrastructure damage)
but there were improvements in the scores for The Three Star Approach has been the catalyst
hygiene, education and management, indicative of for some significant reforms at the national level
good WASH behaviours and practices within these in several participating Pacific Island Countries
schools. in terms of data collection and monitoring
for WASH, including WASH in Schools. There
There were some important differences observed has also been some good progress embedding
in the experience of students in rural/outer island WASH in Schools indicators and data into national
communities (pilot schools in Kiribati, Vanuatu management information systems. For example, in
and FSM) versus communities from urban centres Fiji, with support from UNICEF, SDG indicators have
(Fiji and Solomon Islands). Stakeholders reflected been integrated into the Fiji Education Management
that a key driver for this was that parents of students Information System (FEMIS) and reporting against
in urban centres were more likely to be engaged these indicators is now a requirement for schools
in paid work away from their local community, and in Fiji to receive their education grants. Similarly, in
therefore have less capacity to be reinforcing key Vanuatu, UNICEF played a critical role in supporting
behaviour changes in WASH practices. Ministry of Education and Training to design and
embed 21 WASH in Schools indicators (including
The strong community-level support for improved for gender, disability and MHM) and data collection
WASH practices, supported by the Three Star processes into the Vanuatu Education Management
Approach for WASH in Schools, is apparent in Information System (VEMIS), which is owned by
multiple participating Pacific Island Countries. the Government of Vanuatu and used to inform
In Vanuatu, for example, local communities played decision-making. Important progress has also been
a critical role in rebuilding WASH facilities and made in FSM, with UNICEF working closely with the
50 Formative Evaluation of UNICEF Three Star Approach for WASH in Schools in the Pacific
Final Report
government to strengthen national data collection taking these lessons and ideas for good practice
and management processes, including through back to their home islands. Similar learning events
introduction of the data collection tool Akvo in Chuuk have reportedly been held in Fiji and have provided
State. important forums for stakeholders to share lessons
and discuss challenges.
This evaluation acknowledges the complexity
associated with data collection and monitoring There is little evidence, however, of formal
relating to the Three Star Approach in the Pacific opportunities to share information and discuss
and notes that this has been further exacerbated by lessons learned at the intra-country/regional
challenges associated with COVID-19, which has led level within the Pacific (i.e. to share experiences
to restrictions on travel over the past 15 months or with UNICEF staff and partners from other
so. Data collection can also be expensive given the participating Pacific Island countries). The similarities
time and costs involved (for example, high transport in the context suggest there would be considerable
costs were identified as a key barrier in the Solomon value in establishing more formal mechanisms at the
Islands). In FSM, for example, only 13 of the 75 Pacific intra-country/regional level to allow UNICEF
schools in Chuuk State are on the mainland, and data staff to share information, lessons learned and
collection for schools located in the outer islands examples of good practice.
requires travelling long distances by boat. There are
also challenges accessing schools and gathering
data in other participating Pacific Island countries 4.5 Sustainability
but in FSM, the lack of available data means the
government is unable to determine the approximate
rating of schools (other than the five pilot schools) Overall Evaluation Question 5: Do governments,
as per the Three Star (Four Star in FSM) rating scale. schools, students and communities have the
requisite capacity to sustain and scale up the Three
However, while the challenges are appreciated, Star Approach for WASH in Schools?
there is an urgent need for UNICEF’s monitoring
practices and reporting relating to the Three Star
Approach to be strengthened, as they currently Summary of Evaluation Question 5 -
vary considerably in both form and quality between Sustainability
offices of participating Pacific Island Countries. For
example, some UNICEF country offices (Vanuatu) The Three Star Approach for WASH in
provide detailed monitoring and analysis of progress Schools in the Pacific contains sustainable
against intended outcomes, but others (Kiribati) elements, however a more targeted strategy
provide only incidental mention of the Three Star is required in order to ensure that gains do
Approach within a much broader annual report that not revert back, particularly considering
is prepared for a different programme, and which the pace of roll-out. Components that do
does not appear to include outcome level indicators reflect sustainability are the development
and targets that are tied to/identified as being of ‘change makers’ in host governments,
relevant to the Three Star Approach. In FSM, while progress within advocacy for improved MHM
regular monitoring does seem to be completed and the simplicity inherent in the design
(monthly), the reports sighted by this evaluation itself. One concern for sustainability is around
were largely activity-based and not written in terms the lack of detailed strategy for wider roll-
of progress towards a longer-term goal or set of out, particularly in Vanuatu and FSM, as vast
strategic objectives. The lack of consistency in the amounts of finances, technical capacity and
approach across the different UNICEF offices makes human resources will be needed to make the
it very difficult to assess overall progress within and implementation a success.
between participating countries as they do not seem
to report on progress towards the same goal and set Challenges are caused primarily by supply-
of strategic objectives. side constraints, as communities, students
and schools are seen as largely incapable
This evaluation identified some good examples of self-advocating effectively to improve
of learning and information exchange within WASH infrastructure. There are some good
participating Pacific Island Countries relating to examples of U Report being used to mobilise
the Three Star Approach for WASH in Schools. community ‘voice’, this could be strengthened
For example, in Kiribati, UNICEF has facilitated further. Vulnerable children, parents and their
annual inter-island learning exchanges on the main communities with limited resources often
island of South Tarawa, providing a forum for Island prioritise other needs. Whilst the approach is
Education Coordinators to share information and robust and well-situated, further thinking is
lessons learned on strengthening WASH in schools required to build sustainability to ensure its
on their particular island, with the coordinators then ongoing impact.
Formative Evaluation of UNICEF Three Star Approach for WASH in Schools in the Pacific 51
Final Report
4.5.1 What are the sustainable aspects of the UNICEF’s brand recognition as a technical expert
Three Star Approach for WASH in Schools that in WASH and education, alongside its high-level
can be scaled up to institutionalise WASH in broad, regional learning exchanges across the Asia /
Schools in the participating and other Pacific South Asia region, result in developing government
Island countries, with due consideration of boys stakeholders to be keenly engaged in WASH after taking
and girls (and women and men) of all ages and part. Often these individuals come from one focal
abilities, and those that are at risk of being left ministry and can fall prey to changeable government
behind? politics, as has been witnessed in Fiji. Reaching out
across the ministerial organogram and including
There are clear elements from the side of host other relevant stakeholders from other ministries
governments that indicate the sustainability of such as health, sanitation and education, would build
the Three Star Approach. Key examples of this further in support of the Three Star Approach.
include the commitment from the Governments
of Vanuatu and Solomon Islands that the WASH Approaches employed in improving gender-
Coordinator position, currently funded by UNICEF, related WASH, specifically MHM, indicate
have been included in the ministerial organograms, strong likelihood for sustainability. As outlined in
with the hope that they will take over financial Relevance 4.1.5, a number of country-context specific
responsibility. Additionally, the insertion of a number research pieces have been commissioned on MHM
of SDG-related WASH indicators into the national in the implementing Three Star Approach countries,
EMIS of several countries, including Solomon building a greater understanding of the diversity
Islands, Vanuatu, Fiji and FSM, greatly bolsters the of cultural, economic and social barriers to healthy
ability to monitor the status of WASH in schools. Fiji, WASH for girls. Advocacy from UNICEF at a country-
for example, has included the toilet to student ratio level and regional level has resulted in gender being
in their EMIS. This illustrates the benefit of having included in national WASH standards, particularly
relevant disaggregated data that supports effective relating to gender disaggregated toilets and design
programme management whilst also providing data standards for MHM rooms. There remains further
that links to the relevant SDG Indicators. In this research to be done regarding the economic and
case 6.2.1: “Proportion of population using (a) safely sustainability considerations of provisions of MHM
managed sanitation services and (b) a hand-washing supplies in schools.
facility with soap and water.” (SDG Tracker, 2021)
Some countries, notably Fiji and FSM, have linked In the implementation of the Three Star
the input of data to obtaining education grants, Approach, there has been a lack of recognition
ensuring that all schools provide WASH information of the diversity of disability. The roll-out of the
on which their star rating is calculated. approach remains restrictive with regards to the
experience and engagement with people with
Efforts to build ‘change makers’ within physical psychosocial disabilities. Schools report that
governments have broadly been successful, reaching 3 stars (the highest rating in most countries)
however a greater number and breadth of these is the most difficult and often stick at 2 stars (as
would further bolster sustainability. Research was the objective in Solomon Islands). As outlined
in scale up of WASH approaches highlight the in other sections of this report, the biggest benefits
importance of having ‘passionate owners’ to sustain for children with disabilities are concentrated in the
interventions (McClure & Gray, 2015). An example three-star rating, and the primary requirements are
that highlights this dynamic is the first Permanent focused on ramps for wheelchair access, only one
Secretary of Education for Fiji involved with Three component of the disabled community.
Star Approach – key informant interviews with
UNICEF staff and implementing partners stated The national level roll-out of the approach
that the Permanent Secretary became motivated presents a simultaneous opportunity and threat
incredibly quickly and used their social capital to build for the Three Star Approach’s success. Vanuatu
strong support for the Three Star Approach which led has committed to rolling out the Three Star Approach
to broader government engagement. Additionally nationally; Chuuk State in FSM intends to use it in
in Vanuatu, the Ministry of Education is highly every school and Solomon Islands has suggested
appreciative of the approach, and eager to roll out it plans to take it to a larger scale. Whilst on the
nationally, as evidenced in key informant interviews surface this indicates good prospects for sustaining
conducted for this evaluation and the creation of the changes made to date, this also presents a key
the National WASH in Schools Coordinator position risk of the maxim ‘pilots never fail, and rarely scale’.
funded by UNICEF but now formally part of the O&M resourcing (both financial and human) will be
Ministry of Education and Training structure. critical to maintain behaviour change and continue
improving WASH outcomes, as outlined in Relevance
and Efficiency sections. Appropriate investment,
human resourcing and building coalitions amongst
partners will be critical to face this next stage.
52 Formative Evaluation of UNICEF Three Star Approach for WASH in Schools in the Pacific
Final Report
4.5.2 To what extent does the Three Star Approach is harmonization between the two approaches in that
for WASH in Schools involve and mobilise where CLTS is implemented, catchment schools in
multiple stakeholders (including students, their the target communities are mobilized to develop their
families, communities, school staff, national, own WASH improvement plans including building
local and regional government, NGOs, other demand for good hygiene practices and behaviours
development partners etc.) to support WASH in at school level. Although institutional competition
Schools programmes? between the approaches is not evidenced, there
was perceived competition with both government
The design of the Three Star Approach lends stakeholder and implementing partner interviews
itself well to meaningful mobilisation of diverse making comparisons between CLTS and Three Star
stakeholders. The central tenet of the simplicity Approach, at times unfavorably towards the Three
of the approach results in individuals quickly Star Approach. Overall, however there is evidence
understanding the approach and being capable of that the approaches are working alongside one
communicating it to their peers. This was evidenced another to support WASH in schools.
in all evaluation countries from key informants at
government, implementing partner and WASH The Three Star Approach can result in schools
coordinator level. Trainings organized by UNICEF being motivated to improve WASH practices
at regional and sub-national level are found to be within the right conditions. The Three Star
useful and motivating as reported in key informant Approach was designed in response in part to the
interviews with implementing partners. lack of progress in hygiene behaviours, and hygiene
remains central to its rollout. Greater knowledge
UNICEF is seen as a trusted technical partner about hygiene specifically was noted through the
by national governments and the broader fieldwork. There was limited recognition of the name
development arena. Interviews with national of the approach (e.g. ‘Reach for the Stars’ in Fiji,
government counterparts often stated that UNICEF SIBLE / Three Star Approach in Solomon Islands)
was well-recognised for the technical expertise and however this does not signify a lack of effectiveness.
willingness to adapt to the country context without In Kiribati, the competition around achieving a higher
pushing their own agenda. It was also seen as an star rating was well received and prompted high
organization that contributed to the wider WASH engagement in improving hygiene standards during
infrastructure with other development partners, the activity.
providing important infrastructure such as WASH
cluster coordination. This plays a key role in elevating 4.5.3 To what extent are the experiences and
the status of WASH in the country’s political / evidence from the implementation of the Three
cultural landscape, which is critical considering the Star Approach for WASH in Schools used by
trend of annual rate of change of basic sanitation schools, students, their families and communities
coverage and drinking water in the Pacific was too to advocate to governments to prioritise WASH in
slow between 2000 and 2020 to meet 2030 targets Schools in policy-making and resource allocation
(UNICEF, 2021a). – with due consideration of boys and girls of all
ages and abilities, and reaching those that are at
At the national level, UNICEF can be seen to play risk of being left behind?
a coordinating role, as opposed to providing
strategic leadership. Within the Three Star There is evidence that communities want to
Approach, there is a tension between responding improve WASH practices, increasing pressure from
to the need of better WASH (and therefore quickly the demand-side. Interviews with headmasters and
moving to scale) in comparison to letting the national teachers highlight the role of the training in improving
governments drive the reform process. On the their understanding of WASH. At times however,
whole, UNICEF has chosen the latter, which provides this can undermine their interest in the Three Star
for greater country ownership, but can weaken Approach as some community and school leaders
UNICEF’s influence in instances where the Three look for infrastructure investments prior to engaging
Star Approach is no longer prioritized. This was noted in behaviour change. This was reported in Solomon
in Fiji, as a result of staff disruption in the relevant Islands, which notably has lower rates of WASH
government ministry. infrastructure than other Pacific Island countries
(UNICEF Pacific, 2017b).
The principles outlined in the Three Star
Approach mostly align with the activities of Students can articulate the importance of
other NGOs and INGOs in the region. However, WASH to an extent, however they have limited
promoting greater connection with other approaches capacity to influence their parents, families and
to improving WASH is challenging. In Solomon communities. Whilst there are positive examples
Islands, community-led total sanitation (CLTS) is a such as students encouraging parents and caregivers
WASH approach employed in Northern Malaita, a to buy soap, on the whole their impact remains
different island from the Three Star Approach. There constrained by financial pressures faced by families.
Formative Evaluation of UNICEF Three Star Approach for WASH in Schools in the Pacific 53
Final Report
Students reported that practicing their healthy WASH communities is often described as more challenging
behaviours at home due to lack of facilities: “We in urban contexts, with the heterogenous populations
taught our families [about WASH] they are happy but and increased likelihood of being engaged in formal
practising it is challenging because we don’t have / paid employment. This is further exacerbated in
WASH facilities at home and people often forget. informal settlements, increasingly found across
If communities have same facilities like at school the Pacific within its rapid urbanization rates,
then it would be easier to practice our knowledge” characterized by their poor access to WASH facilities
(Students, transect walk, Solomon Islands). This and decreased incentive for long-term investment in
point is corroborated with research conducted by facilities (Keen & Barbara, 2015).
LLEE (Live & Learn Environmental Education for
UNICEF, 2019b). The Three Star Approach has not as yet overcome
the ongoing behavioural, cultural and financial
The lack of student voice is a concerning dynamic barriers preventing communities from investing
in an approach designed for young people. Having in WASH infrastructure. The cultural values of
a voice is a key pillar of self-advocacy (New South healthy WASH practices are highly divergent in
Wales Department of Education, 2020) and the countries studied. In the Solomon Islands
increasing student participation and autonomy are for example, research and interviews noted that
linked with increased engagement, achievement and community and family investment in sanitation
well-being (Gonski et al., 2018). Children and young facilities are frequently not prioritized. Families
people by and large are unable to self-advocate for with budgetary constraints – further exacerbated
improved WASH practices in a meaningful way. invariably by COVID-19 – are more likely to spend on
WASH clubs, once established in schools as part of consumer products, food and mobile phones and do
the Three Star Approach, rarely remain functioning. not see WASH as essential (UNICEF Pacific, 2017b).
This was evidenced by fieldwork in Fiji in which only Fieldwork revealed that families and communities do
two of the 15 schools visited had functioning WASH not utilise the Three Star Approach implementation
clubs, with similar reports coming from the Solomon experience as a means to advocate to governments to
Islands. Students in FGDs state: “We tried telling prioritize WASH in Schools. This is in part due to their
them after hearing teachers told us in class. But lack of awareness of the approach, as seen in focus
some listen and follow most of them just ignored group discussions with parents and communities
us.” This issue of children being unable to influence in Fiji found that none of the parents knew what
the adults around them is also identified an obstacle the Three Star Approach / Reach for the Stars was.
in LLEE research, notably in Solomon Islands and Some interviewees suggested a ‘triggering’ method
Vanuatu (Live & Learn Environmental Education for as utilized in the CLTS approach may be required to
UNICEF, 2019b). further educate the community around WASH health
and livelihood impacts.
There is evidence of U Report, UNICEF’s social
messaging and data collection tool, being 4.5.4 To what extent does the Three Star Approach
used in Kiribati to improve WASH behaviour. for WASH in Schools contribute to increased
U Report is currently being used in the COVID-19 government, community and school capacity
prevention response, through building data around to mitigate the impact of natural disasters and
understanding and perception of COVID-19 risk climate change on WASH in Schools and WASH in
(Humanitarian Response Info, 2020). There are communities – including for girls and boys (and
also examples of U Report being used in FSM on men and women) of different ages and abilities,
getting opinion pools of what young people want including those at risk of being left behind?
the government to focus on (e.g. education, health)
and Solomon Islands looking at online media safety The evaluation found little linkage between the
(UReport, 2021). The platform offers a quick way to Three Star Approach and increased government,
engage a broad range of stakeholders and build a community and school capacity to mitigate the
sense of contribution to the decision-making when impacts of natural disasters and climate change
used effectively. by nature of its design. Mitigation, meaning the
ability to make the impacts of climate change less
The strategy of how to influence parents and severe, is out-of-reach for schools and communities
communities and monitor improvements was and to a large extent Pacific Island government,
unclear from the outset, so progress is not as the entire Pacific region contributes less than
easily captured. The Theories of Change for the 0.03% of total greenhouse gas emissions (Salem,
countries did not outline the approach nor indicators 2020). Adaptation to the impacts of climate change,
for success for this dimension, however anecdotal meaning the capacity to reduce the negative effects,
evidence suggests that communities have little are similarly limited as schools, communities and
capacity to self-advocate. Additionally, the dynamic governments do not have the financial capacity to
between urban, rural and remote communities is combat rising sea levels and build cyclone-proof
often overlooked. Engagement with parents and infrastructure, and both events are increasingly likely
54 Formative Evaluation of UNICEF Three Star Approach for WASH in Schools in the Pacific
Final Report
(IBERDROLA, 2021). This inability however is not robust in response to shocks, such as tropical
attributable to a fault in design or deficiency of the cyclones. This was particularly noted in Vanuatu
Three Star Approach – it is simply not designed to after Tropical Cyclone Harold in April 2020, where
address these threats. local communities rebuilt damaged facilities and
infrastructure in schools. Secondary field monitoring
The components however that can be linked to reports that some hygiene behaviours were re-
the Three Star Approach relate to its intended established quickly after the impact of the disaster,
outcomes around improved hygiene. There reflecting the value that the local community places
was evidence of hygiene behaviours in Three Star on healthy WASH.
Approach schools and communities remaining
5. CONCLUSIONS
The principles of this formative evaluation on relationship building approach employed by UNICEF,
the Three Star Approach for WASH in Schools a dimension of critical importance in the Pacific
in the Pacific are based in utility and realism. where personal relationships are a foundational
As a result, the conclusions and recommendations aspect in building trust across stakeholders.
have been designed to be strategic and logical as
well as practical, and applicable to a broad range When the encouragement of daily routines to
of audiences. Evidence from evaluation questions promote healthy habits (handwashing, provision
outlined in Section 4 have been synthesised into of soap, access to clean water and clean toilets)
common themes. is implemented, meaningful increases in hygiene
behaviour are observed. Noticeable improvements
are made quickly once initial training has been rolled
Strengths of the Approach and its out, with schools often going from 0 stars to 1 or
implementation: 2 stars in relatively short amounts of time. This
signifies a real improvement in hygiene information
The Three Star Approach as a ‘demand driven’ and understanding and will directly result in reduced
approach is highly effective at distilling illness and disease whilst healthy practices are
complex information into accessible steps. The conducted. Targeting teachers with basic hygiene
transformation of complex hygiene messaging into knowledge is an efficient way to target thousands
easily digestible pieces of information and the star of children.
concept was found to be effective across a broad
range of evidence in elevating hygiene promotion.
This is instrumental in building ownership and Limitations of the Approach and its
support for both the pilot phases of the Three Star Implementation:
Approach but additionally strengthening WASH in
schools more broadly. This evaluation found evidence The Theories of Change developed at regional
of individuals who were previously unengaged in and country-specific levels do not meet best
hygiene promotion being incentivised and invigorated practice and therefore impact on implementation
by the Three Star Approach. and most importantly scale up and sustainability.
Whilst the Theories of Change at regional and
The flexibility inherent in the Three Star Approach country level are helpful, they do not adequately
is a strong selling point, as well as the way in address the key issues of context, the role of other
which UNICEF has implemented it. The design of actors, spheres of influence (direct, indirect and
the Three Star Approach is found to be simple and leveraged). The impact of weak Theories of Change
easily adaptable in different contexts. Communities is seen in critical ‘logic gaps’ in programme plans and
can support improvements to toilet construction in results frameworks where critical assumptions, for
schools using local resources. Governments can also example on the challenge of financing and capacity,
refine the steps (stars) to their context and situation that are likely to cause a programme to fail are not
as evidenced by FSM refining the Three Star addressed. Developing robust Theories of Change
Approach to the Four Star Approach. Additionally, the supports the development of strong programmes
method of implementation taken by UNICEF is well by UNICEF as well as providing a framework for
appreciated by host governments, who have high conversations with other development partners on
respect for UNICEF’s technical expertise. Moreover, linkages, complementarities, and potential gaps with
host governments have responded strongly to the their programming.
Formative Evaluation of UNICEF Three Star Approach for WASH in Schools in the Pacific 55
Final Report
Poor monitoring, evaluation and reporting WASH. UNICEF has partnered with a number of
practices of theT hree Star Approach restrict quality INGOs, NGOs and other UN bodies across the Pacific
decision-making and learning opportunities. for decades, however issues of limited institutional
Lack of meaningful monitoring, oversight and capacity and short-sighted relationship building are
accountability mechanisms impeded the impact of present across the host countries. Building robust
the Three Star Approach in all five countries. Inability WASH coordination bodies that meet regularly and
to draw out local, national and regional insights has are centred on trust is a critical element of this.
undermined UNICEF’s capacity to lead strategically,
as well as hindered the growth of resources around Whilst UNICEF has played an important role in
the implementation of Three Star Approach for other supporting the establishment of WASH in Schools
Pacific countries. Key opportunities are pending for through the Three Star Approach, it is now
this approach to have significant impact, namely critical for UNICEF Pacific to focus and build its
Vanuatu and FSM and the lack of quality monitoring ‘thought leadership’ to strengthen and transform
and evaluation will hamper wider roll-outs. This will WASH in Schools. The application of the WASH in
cost the regional programme significant adaptability Schools Three Star Approach in the Pacific is a good
and the benefit of course correction. It is imperative example of UNICEF engaging in an area of critical
that UNICEF address this shortfall to embed positive importance where it has the legitimacy, track record
changes to date. and standing to make a significant contribution to
affecting change and progress towards the SDGs
The lack of funding for the O&M dimension of the for children and young people and through them for
Three Star Approach undermines effectiveness future generations in the Pacific.
and sustainability. Broadly, community-based / rural
schools are more likely to be able to fundraise and to Application of the Three Star Approach has
make changes in their WASH infrastructure, however been successful in engaging with governments
this is challenged in urban schools. Similarly, slippage and communities on embedding and improving
has occurred in the schools visited in this fieldwork WASH in Schools. However, to achieve sustainable
due to facilities breaking or not being maintained and transformational change and make the progress
appropriately (e.g. cleanliness, blockages, lack of needed to bring the progress on SDG 6 on track with
minor upkeep). A key impediment to sustainability regard to WASH in Schools will require significant
of the approach is schools’ inability to maintain effort and resources that are beyond any single
infrastructure due to a lack of funding, skills and agency or organisation. This will require developing
access to supplies. Guidance on addressing this new ways of working, development of new and
strategic hurdle is lacking and stakeholders quickly different forms of collaboration and partnerships.
lose momentum after the initial push, losing hard- UNICEF is strongly positioned to contribute to
won gains. this through further development of its ‘thought
leadership’ (Jolly, 2015).
Disability inclusion is not sufficiently addressed
by the design and implementation of the Three Evidence to guide the scale up of the Three Star
Star Approach. Disability inclusion is extremely Approach is lacking (linked to lack of quality
restrictive from the outset of the approach, with M&E) and this will be critical for next steps. As
the majority of guiding documents having limited Vanuatu aims for national roll-out and Solomon Island
references to the diversity of experience within the is not far behind, there will be an enormous step in
disability community. Provisions are made within the building the technical knowledge, human resourcing,
Three Star Approach for requests for ramps, but this and management capacity for this approach to be
still actively excludes a number of physical, social/ successful. The pilots to date have been small in
emotional, cognitive and sensory disabilities. The comparison to whole island or whole country roll-
majority of disability-related improvements do not outs, and techniques of the approach have not been
occur until the Three Star rating, which is often out- sufficiently tested (nor sufficient evidence generated)
of-reach for schools due to the financial investment to inform management of the implementation.
required for the infrastructure within the final star. Whilst evidence could be drawn from India and
other regions where the Three Star Approach has
been implemented, the Three Star Approach in
Opportunities for expansion / the Pacific has not been robustly examined to the
strengthening extent necessary for implementation in thousands
of schools simultaneously.
Recognising the strength of UNICEF’s role in
WASH and specifically WASH in Schools and Design and implementation of the Three Star
also taking account of the limitations on direct Approach has a clear emphasis on local ownership
support, it is critical that greater emphasis is and children’s voice. This could be strengthened
placed by UNICEF on working with partners in through increased feedback mechanisms. Design
the Pacific to develop a strategic approach to documents reflect age-appropriate strategies for
56 Formative Evaluation of UNICEF Three Star Approach for WASH in Schools in the Pacific
Final Report
including children and young people in support of countries and progress. Changes to national
WASH in schools, which is linked to higher rates standards and design requirements have gender-
of sustainability of behaviour change. Participating related dimensions, including MHM, which is a
countries also reflected good practice examples considerable success for the Three Star Approach.
around older students mentoring younger students Context-specific research has been conducted
on MHM, and competitions within local districts to across the participating countries, filling a pre-
fundraise and improve WASH infrastructure. WASH existing gap in understanding localised bottlenecks
clubs are not active in all schools and there are and taboos. Further standardization of government
limited mechanisms for children to self-advocate for requirements, advocacy and exploration of locally
improved WASH outcomes. appropriate MHM products are needed to continue
breaking down barriers for girls’ healthy WASH
Gender-related WASH practices have resulted practices.
in improvements for girl students across all
6. RECOMMENDATIONS
The recommendations outlined below build on presented in a logical fashion and build on each other.
the analysis in the findings section (Section 4) and The first three recommendations focus on building
the conclusions drawn (Section 5). A key finding a strong theoretical underpinning for the Three Star
and conclusion of this formative evaluation is the Approach for WASH in Schools in its application in
need for a strong logical underpinning of the WASH in the Pacific Islands and Territories. Recommendations
Schools programme that is then developed and built 4-6 build on the first three recommendations and are
out across the different programme locations. With focused specifically on major areas of challenge.
this core concept in mind, the recommendations are
Figure 10: Recommendations from formative evaluation
ygetartS
snoitarepO
laoG
R2: Develop sufficiently R3: Build research and
R1: Construct practical and robust detailed programme indicators develop a UNICEF-specific
Theories of change, in which
and ensure timely and robust approach to the ‘scale up’
assumptions, context and
monitoring/reporting process of the three Star
parnterships are clear
against these Approach
R4: Centre the importance of
R5: Share good practice on R6: Build local ownership and
disability as a key priority and
operations and maintenance and sustainability through maximising
continue progress on
consider mandatory requirements the voice of rights holders
gender-related WASH
Vision of a equitable, resilient and sustainable application of
the Three Star Approach for WASH in Schools across the Pacific
Formative Evaluation of UNICEF Three Star Approach for WASH in Schools in the Pacific 57
Final Report
Recommendation 1: Suggested actors:
Construct practical and robust Theories of UNICEF Pacific, with relevant UNICEF country staff
Change, in which assumptions, context and for country-level conceptualisation.
strong partnerships are well-grounded with clear
interlinkages between different levels. Timeframe:
This first recommendation should be completed,
The WASH in Schools programme needs to develop in conjunction with the development of the next
strong Theories of Change at both regional and Regional Strategic Plan, following the context
country levels. Well-constructed and sufficiently analysis.
detailed Theories of Change are an essential tool
to address the key contextual challenges that
affect the Pacific Island nations. Additionally, it will Recommendation 2:
require significant prominence and analysis given to Develop sufficiently detailed and relevant
resilience as a key element of programme activities, programme indicators and ensure timely
outputs and indicators. An important tool to use with monitoring/reporting against these. These
a Theory of Change process are WASH Bottleneck should be derived from and explicitly linked to
Analyses. the regional and country-specific Theories of
Change.
In addition, the Theories of Change need to provide
an understanding of how UNICEF will address Programme indicators need to be relevant to the
the relevance and sustainability of its approach as context and be sufficiently detailed to provide
well as maximising efficiency to WASH in Schools adequate information on achievement including
through developing meaningful, strategic, and agile reach, inclusion and quality. Where indicators link
partnerships. These are supported through a nuanced to higher-level SDG indicators, it is important to
approach to utilising UNICEF staff, consultants, and consider whether more detailed programme level
national staff to support a more sustained, effective, indicators (for example on inclusion and types of
and efficient approach to system strengthening. access) need to be developed that will then feed into
higher-level (SDG-focused) more generic ‘framing
A significant challenge to developing the Theories of indicators’ (INTRAC, 2017; Pratt et al., 2003).
Change is how to be comprehensive without becoming
overly detailed and impractical. Within this process: a) develop detailed country-specific (and where
possible localised) indicators to take into
a) It is recommended that prior to carrying out the consideration the relevant WASH context.
development of the Theories of Change that This will support improved use of information
WASH Bottleneck Analyses (at regional and collected to monitor and improve services and
country levels) are carried out together with key programming;
partners and stakeholders. This should provide b) require formal internal monitoring and reporting
the foundation for regular Bottleneck analyses in a consistent style across the Pacific,
at country level that will support the ongoing including developing tool and processes to
development of the programme; monitor progress in meaningful ways;
b) it is recommended that developing robust c) use reporting to increase data-informed
Theories of Change are carried out at the same programming
time as developing programme plans, applying d) host regular informal and formal sharing
an iterative approach whereby assumptions that sessions around the Three Star Approach with
are highlighted and worked out in the Theories relevant external stakeholders to build a greater
of Change are then applied and tested against breadth of institutional knowledge
draft versions of programme plans (specifically e) develop a consistent and accessible knowledge
results frameworks); management strategy around the Three Star
c) a specific area of focus should be on identifying Approach to build an evidence body for other
programme risks in results frameworks that Pacific Island countries and other WASH
will need to be addressed by changes to the strategies.
programme logic (sometimes termed ‘killer
assumptions’). For example, the issue of finance Suggested actors:
(from both government and communities) UNICEF Pacific, with relevant UNICEF country staff
cannot just be left as an assumption but needs for country-level conceptualisation.
to be addressed.
d) Consideration should be given to critical Timeframe: This is suggested to occur around the
programmatic decisions including what success same time as Recommendation 1, in the latter part
looks like for the parent and community aspect of the Strategy development process.
of the Three Star Approach (if any) and how this
will be measured.
58 Formative Evaluation of UNICEF Three Star Approach for WASH in Schools in the Pacific
Final Report
Recommendation 3: Approach stakeholders around the diversity
Build research base and develop a UNICEF- of disability and accommodations and
specific approach to the ‘scale up’ process of the adjustments that can (and should) be made to
Three Star Approach for WASH in Schools. further support inclusion;
c) find community champions and elevate voices
Whilst this recommendation is critical for all of children and young people with disability
programming it is most immediately relevant for the (linked to Recommendation 7)
Vanuatu WASH in Schools Programme as it aims for d) continue strong progress made on
the national roll out and Kiribati as it starts to broaden mainstreaming gender-related WASH, and
its scope. UNICEF should: explore options into provision of MHM supplies,
a) develop robust outcome harvesting including low cost, handmade sustainable
approaches to measuring progress and build solutions or mandatory requirements for school
local and regional M&E capacity (linked to budgeting to provide sanitary products.
Recommendation 1 and 2) build a greater
understanding of what works for the Three Star Suggested actor:
Approach for WASH in Schools in the Pacific; messaging to come from UNICEF Pacific, however
b) invest in key personnel to encourage ownership expectation that shift will be visible across
of the Three Star Approach within UNICEF implementing partners and UNICEF country offices.
and in government and non-government
implementing partners. Timeframe:
c) design a system strengthening approach to This is suggested to occur after completion of
capacity gaps (as identified in the new Theories Recommendation 1 + 2.
of Change);
d) where possible, advocate for larger pilots
and more rigorous testing of the Three Star Recommendation 5:
Approach’s implementation, rather than Share good practice on O&M and consider
immediate national roll-out. This will allow mandatory requirements for them to be
for a greater diversity of testing contexts embedded in school management.
and further refinement of tools required to
implement effectively. Utilise this to trial Providing guidance, and where possible mandatory
differing approaches to O&M (further detailed requirements, around the importance of O&M will
in Recommendation 5) and gender / disability build sustainability of the approach and its potential
inclusion (further detailed Recommendation 4). to transition from pilot to national scale as intended
in Vanuatu and in Chuuk State, FSM.
Suggest actors: a) continue to amalgamate contextualised
UNICEF Pacific should commission the research examples of strong O&M in practice, and
which could be conducted by implementing partner share good examples in Three Star Approach
(e.g. LLEE) or other research specialist. Relevant meetings, linked to Recommendation 2.
UNICEF country offices to advocate for larger pilots. b) advocate to government partners around the
either i) the provision of budgetary support for
Timeframe: O&M or ii) if not possible then provide increased
This is suggested to occur after completion of training for school management committees
Recommendation 1 + 2. and headteachers to budget for WASH O&M.
If possible, include a mandatory budgetary line
to be submitted with school grants.
Recommendation 4: c) Develop human resource ‘pipelines’ of skillsets
Centre the importance of disability as a key around the WASH infrastructure, taking into
priority and continue progress being made on consideration socio-cultural dimensions of
gender-related WASH. gender and disability. Leadership positions in
the Pacific are often held by men, whereas
Ensure that the principles of Leave No One Behind studies show women in community can play
and ‘focus first on those furthest behind’ in the vital roles in increase the consistency and
2030 Agenda are centralised. Conceptualisation of quality of water management (Thompson et
disability as a diverse group is needed/. UNICEF al., 2017).
should: d) Utilise opportunities for community
a) elevate the messaging around the diversity engagement in WASH in Schools to promote
of disability in the Pacific, as well as the and support O&M costs and activities. Utilise
experience of marginalisation faced by school- learning on O&M from other UNICEF WASH
aged children with disability. programmes, specifically CLTS evaluations.
b) develop training for implementing partners, e) Support the development of alternative
WASH coordinators and relevant Three Star approaches to O&M during the design phase,
Formative Evaluation of UNICEF Three Star Approach for WASH in Schools in the Pacific 59
Final Report
including consideration for facilities with high Suggested actor:
capital outlay and low O&M costs, as these messaging to come from UNICEF Pacific, however
have the potential to be cheaper in 5–10-year suggestions for feedback mechanisms to come
timeframes. from schools themselves, including Parent Teacher
Associations. Cultural context and appropriateness
Suggested actor: of feedback mechanism is critical here, so best
ideally examples of strong O&M to come advised to devise localised strategies.
from participating schools themselves. WASH
coordinators in participating countries to amalgamate Timeframe:
suggestions. UNICEF Pacific to work in conjunction This is suggested to occur after completion of
with host governments to develop human resource Recommendation 1 + 2.
pipelines.
Timeframe:
This is suggested to occur after completion of
Recommendation 1 + 2.
Recommendation 6:
Build local ownership and sustainability through
maximising the voice of rights holders.
The voice of children and young people is critical
to enacting UNICEF’s vision, creating child-friendly
schools and ensuring the sustainability and safety
of the Three Star Approach. This is particularly vital
with regards to girls and people with disabilities, and
ties into Recommendation 4. To elevate the voice of
rights holders, UNICEF should:
a) build recognition and usage of tools to support
voice of young people, for example through
UNICEF tool U-Report, and also develop
‘analogue’ ways of collecting and responding
to feedback from children and young people on
their experiences of WASH in schools. This is of
particular importance to marginalised groups.
b) re-invigorate the WASH committee structure
at school level by providing clear templates
of what committees are responsible for in a
meaningful way. Develop local and regional
clusters of WASH committees to elevate
their sense of responsibility and engagement.
Provide awards and recognition to students
who participate in the WASH committee. Use
committees as a way to collate feedback from
students regarding their WASH needs.
c) Utilise teachers and Parent Teacher
Associations as vehicles for change within their
schools and to push initiatives through. Focus
on mainstreaming the Three Star Approach
through existing school management system,
which will help bolster sustainability and allows
for access to regular school funding for WASH
activities.
60 Formative Evaluation of UNICEF Three Star Approach for WASH in Schools in the Pacific
Final Report
REFERENCES
Akvo. (n.d.). Tracking WASH infrastructure in the schools of Solomon Islands with UNICEF.
https://akvo.org/stories/south-east-asia-pacific/tracking-water-sanitation-and-hygiene-wash-
infrastructure-in-solomon-islands-schools-with-unicef/
Anderson, A., Hall, N., Henry, C., Savage, A., & Reid, S. (2019). Water, Sanitation and Hygiene in the Pacific
and the Need to Meet SDG 6. https://espace.library.uq.edu.au/view/UQ:71ab031
Asian Development Bank. (2019). Sector Assessment: Water and Other Urban Infrastructure and Services .
https://www.adb.org/sites/default/files/linked-documents/51271-001-ssa.pdf
Asian Development Bank. (2020). Strengthening Water, Sanitation, and Hygiene Practices and Hygiene
Behavioral Change in the Pacific .
Australian Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade. (2019). Federated States of Micronesia Country Brief.
Australian Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade. (2021a). Fiji.
Australian Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade. (2021b). Kiribati.
Australian Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade. (2021c). Solomon Islands Country Brief.
Benshaul-Tolonen, A., Zulaika, G., & Sommer, M. (2020). Measuring Menstruation-Related
Absenteeism Among Adolescents in Low-Income Countries. https://link.springer.com/
chapter/10.1007/978-981-15-0614-7_52
Brown, S. (2021). The Impact on COVID-19 on Foreign Aid.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2020). When and How to Wash your Hands.
DFID. (2011). Guidance on the Revised Logical Framework. https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/
government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/253881/using-revised-logical-framework-
external.pdf
Ethical Research Involving Children. (2015). International Charter for Ethical Research Involving Children.
Francois, M. C., Lauff, A., & Yamakoshi, B. (2017). WASH in Schools Empower Girls’ Education in Fiji. UNICEF
Pacific.
Future Directions. (2019). Food and Water Security in Vanuatu. https://www.futuredirections.org.au/
publication/food-and-water-security-in-vanuatu/
Global Handwashing Day. (n.d.). Children As Agents Of Change: Lessons From UNICEF. Retrieved August 17,
2021, from https://www.globalhandwashingday.org/children-as-agents-of-change-lessons-from-unicef/
Gonski, D., Arcus, T., Boston, K., & Gould, V. (2018). Through Growth to Achievement: Report of the Review
to Achieve Educational Excellence in Australian Schools.
Green Growth Knowledge Platform. (2016). Vanuatu 2030: the People’s Plan. https://www.
greengrowthknowledge.org/national-documents/vanuatu-2030-peoples-plan-national-sustainable-
development-plan-2016-2030
Humanitarian Response Info. (2020). Water, Sanitation and Hygiene (WASH) COVID19 Response in Kiribati.
https://www.humanitarianresponse.info/sites/www.humanitarianresponse.info/files/documents/files/
wash_covid19_wash_in_hcf_proposal_27march2020_007_clean.pdf
IBERDROLA. (2021). Adapting to climate change: what will the Earth look like in 2030?
International Water Centre. (2018). UNICEF Kiribati WASH in Schools Review.
INTRAC. (2017). Programme Indicators.
IOD PARC. (2020). UNICEF Pacific Formative Evaluation of the Three Star Approach - Inception Report.
Iyabora, E. j. (2016). Managing Wantok System Influence: Improving the Business Climate in Solomon
Islands. Pacific Update Conference. https://devpolicy.org/Events/2016/Pacific%20Update/2b%20
Private%20Sector%20Development/2b_Emmanuel%20Iyabora_2016%20Pacific%20Update%20Conf.
pdf
Jolly, R. (2015). The UN: an incubator and implementer of big ideas? Conversations with Thought Leaders.
https://blogs.unicef.org/blog/the-un-an-incubator-and-implementer-of-big-ideas/
Keen, M., & Barbara, J. (2015). Pacific Urbanisation: Changing Times. State, Society and Governance in
Melanesia.
Levine, V. (2013). Education in Pacific Island States. https://www.eastwestcenter.org/sites/default/files/
private/pip008.pdf
Live & Learn Environmental Education for UNICEF. (2019a). Catalogue: Resilient WASH in Schools
Technologies and approaches to Operations and Maintenance.
Live & Learn Environmental Education for UNICEF. (2019b). Effective Approaches to Engage and Empower
Children as Agents of Change in WASH in Schools.
Formative Evaluation of UNICEF Three Star Approach for WASH in Schools in the Pacific 61
Final Report
Live & Learn Environmental Education for UNICEF. (2019c). WASH in Schools Programs in Pacific Island
Countries.
Love, M., Beal, C., Gonzalez-Botero, D., Bugoro, H., Panda, N., Roiko, A., Benjamin, C., Hagabore, J., Ooi,
J., Magreth, C., & Souter, R. T. (2020). Pacific Community Water Management Plus: Phase 1 Findings
Report for Solomon Islands.
MacDonald, M., Chan, T., Elliott, M., & Kearton, A. (2017). Temporal and thematic trends in water, sanitation
and hygiene (WaSH) research in Pacific Island Countries: a systematic review . https://iwaponline.com/
washdev/article/7/3/352/31613/Temporal-and-thematic-trends-in-water-sanitation
McClure, D., & Gray, I. (2015). Managing the Journey to Scale Up Innovation. https://www.thoughtworks.
com/insights/blog/managing-journey-scale-innovation
McLeod, E., & Bruton-Adams, M. (2019). Lessons From the Pacific Islands – Adapting to Climate Change
by Supporting Social and Ecological Resilience. https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/
fmars.2019.00289/full
Ministry of Education Kiribati. (2018). Breaking Down Barriers - Coming of Age, Being the Change.
Mohamed, Y., Hugget, C., Macintyre, A., McSkimming, D., & Barrington, D. (2017). The Last Taboo: Menstrual
Hygiene Management in the Pacific. https://iwda.org.au/assets/files/The-Last-Taboo-_-Menstrual-
Hygiene-Management-in-the-Pacific.pdf
Monash University. (2016). Pacific Indicators for Disability-Inclusive Education - The Guidelines Manual.
https://www.monash.edu/education/research/projects/pacific-indie/outcomes/docs/pacific-indie-
guidelines-final-tagged-web.pdf
Movono, L. (2021). Cases linked to Delta strain explode in Fiji, as government struggles to control outbreak.
ABC News.
Natalegawa, A., & Bismonte, C. (2021). A Patchwork Vaccine Rollout in the Pacific Islands. The Diplomat.
National WinS Steering Committee. (2020). Vanuatu WASH in Schools Steering Committee Meeting
December 2020.
New South Wales Department of Education. (2020). Why student voice matters.
New Zealand Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade Aid Programme. (2018). Kiribati WASH in Schools Final
Activity Completion Report.
OECD DAC. (2019). Evaluation Criteria: Adapted Definitions and Principles for Use.
Pacific RISA. (2015). Innovative tools for Water Supply Sanitation and Hygiene (WASH) a priority for Fiji
schools. Innovative tools for Water Supply Sanitation and Hygiene (WASH) a priority for Fiji schools
Pacific Water. (2007). Federated States of Micronesia.
Pacific Water. (2020). Federated States of Micronesia. http://www.pacificwater.org/pages.cfm/country-
information/federated-states-of-micronesia.html
Pacific Women. (2017). Vanuatu.
Permanent Mission of the Republic of Vanuatu to the UN. (2019). Climate Change.
Pratt, B., Adams, J., & Bakewell, O. (2003). Sharpening the Development Process: A Practical Guide to
Monitoring and Evaluation.
Pryke, J. (2021). The Pacific went a year without COVID. Now, it’s all under threat. The Conversation.
Salem, S. (2020). Climate Change and the Sinking Island States in the Pacific. https://www.e-ir.
info/2020/01/09/climate-change-and-the-sinking-island-states-in-the-pacific/
SDG Tracker. (2021). Ensure access to water and sanitation for all. https://sdg-tracker.org/water-and-sanitation
Secretariat of the Pacific Regional Environment Programme. (2021). Capacity Development. https://www.
sprep.org/programme/environmental-governance/capacity-development
Sphere. (2021). Sphere Standards.
Sprunt, B., Burke, L., & Loloma, T. (2019). Disability-inclusive WASH and menstrual hygiene management for
students with disabilities in Fijian schools. CBM.
Sustainable Development Goals Hub. (n.d.). Decade of Action.
The Pacific Community. (2021). COVID-19: Pacific Community Updates.
Thompson, K., O’Dell, K., Syed, S., & Kemp, H. (2017). Thirsty for change The untapped potential of women
in urban water management.
UNDP Climate Change Adaptation. (n.d.). Solomon Islands.
UNICEF. (2010). Raising Clean Hands: Call to Action for WASh in Schools Advocacy Pack 2010. https://inee.
org/system/files/resources/UNICEF_Raising_Clean_Hands_Call_to_Action_2010_en.pdf
UNICEF. (2016). UNICEF Strategy for Water, Sanitation and Hygiene 2016-2030.
UNICEF. (2017). Strategy Note for the 2018-2022 Pacific Multi - Country Programme of Cooperation.
UNICEF. (2018a). Fiji Ministries and partners commit to WASH for Quality Life. https://reliefweb.int/report/fiji/
fiji-ministries-and-partners-commit-wash-quality-life
62 Formative Evaluation of UNICEF Three Star Approach for WASH in Schools in the Pacific
Final Report
UNICEF. (2018b). Revised Evaluation Policy of UNICEF.
UNICEF. (2018c). UNICEF Strategic Plan 2018-2021.
UNICEF. (2019). Gender Equality - Global Annual Results Report 2019. https://www.unicef.org/media/71421/
file/Global-annual-results-report-2019-gender-equality.pdf
UNICEF. (2021a). In the Pacific, thousands of people will still lack access to safe water, sanitation and
hygiene in 2030 unless progress increases – warn WHO, UNICEF.
UNICEF. (2021b). Procedure on Ethical Standards in Research, Evaluation, Data Collection and Analysis.
UNICEF & GIZ. (2013). Field Guide: The Three Star Approach for WASH in Schools. http://globalhandwashing.
org/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/UNICEF_Field_Guide-3_Star-Guide1.pdf
UNICEF & WHO. (2021). WASH in Schools Data . https://washdata.org/data/school#!/dashboard/new
UNICEF EAPRO. (2013). A snapshot of water and sanitation in the Pacific - 2013 sub-regional analysis and
update. https://reliefweb.int/report/world/snapshot-water-and-sanitation-pacific-2013-sub-regional-
analysis-and-update
UNICEF (Internal). (n.d.). Fiji WinS Supplemental Proposal.
UNICEF Pacific. (2015). Three Star Approach to WASH in Schools - pilot project. https://unicefpacific.akvoapp.
org/en/project/2752/#summary
UNICEF Pacific. (2017a). Situation Analysis of Children in the Pacific Island Countries. https://www.unicef.
org/pacificislands/media/661/file/Situation-Analysis-Pacific-Island-Countries.pdf
UNICEF Pacific. (2017b). Situation Analysis of Children in the Solomon Islands.
UNICEF Pacific. (2017c). WASH Strategy Note Pacific Multi Country Programme (2018-2022).
UNICEF Pacific. (2018). Pacific WASH Resilience Guidelines.
United Nations. (2015). Transforming our world: the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. Declaration. .
https://www.un.org/ga/search/view_doc.asp?symbol=A/RES/70/1&Lang=E
United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs. (n.d.). Small Island Developing States.
United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs. (2021). The 17 Goals. https://sdgs.un.org/goals
United Nations Development Programme. (2020). Human Development Reports.
United Nations Evaluation Group. (2016). Norms and Standards for Evaluation.
UReport. (2021). U Report - About. https://solomonislands.ureport.in/about/
WASH Reference Group. (2020). Submission: Inquiry into strengthening Australia’s relationship with
countries in the Pacific Region. file:///C:/Users/Kate/Downloads/WASH%20Reference%20
Group%20submission%20-%20Inquiry%20into%20strengthening%20Australia%E2%80%99s%20
relationship%20with%20countries%20in%20the%20Pacific%20Region%20(1).pdf
Water Aid. (2016). Solomon Islands WASH Sector Analysis. https://sirwash.weebly.com/
uploads/4/2/7/6/42764129/solomon_islands_wash_sector_analysis_-_final_05092016.pdf
WaterAid. (2016). WASH and Inequalities.
WHO. (2019). Sanitation. https://www.who.int/news-room/fact-sheets/detail/sanitation
WHO. (2021). Situation Report. Progress on household drinking-water, sanitation and hygiene: Five years into
the SDGs. . https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/progress-on-household-drinking-water-sanitation-
and-hygiene-five-years-into-the-sdgs
World Bank. (2015). Poverty Profile of the Federated States of Micronesia.
World Bank. (2019). Safer, More Reliable Water for Kiribati. https://www.worldbank.org/en/news/press-
release/2019/12/18/safer-more-reliable-water-for-kiribati
World Health Organisation. (2015). Human Health and Climate Changes in the Pacific.
World Health Organisation and UNICEF. (2021a). Household WASH Data.
World Health Organisation and UNICEF. (2021b). Monitoring Water Services.
World Health Organisation and UNICEF. (2021c). Progress on Household Drinking Water, Sanitation and
Hygiene 2000-2020: Five Years into the SDGs.
World Vision. (2021). Global Water Crisis: Facts, FAQs and how to help. https://www.worldvision.com.au/
global-water-crisis-facts
World Vision and CBM. (2019). Guidelines for locally sourced and cost-effective strategies to modify existing
household toilets and water access.
Worldmeters. (2019). Vanautu Population.
Worldometer. (2020). GDP by Country. https://www.worldometers.info/gdp/gdp-by-country/
Formative Evaluation of UNICEF Three Star Approach for WASH in Schools in the Pacific 63
Final Report
ANNEX I: TERMS OF REFERENCE
TERMS OF REFERENCE
INSTITUTIONAL CONSULTANCY
Evaluation of WASH in Schools Three Star Approach application in the Pacific
Requesting Section(s): WASH and Planning, Monitoring and Evaluation
Date: 18 May 2019
Programme Area and Specific Project Involved: 2.2 Communities have improved access to basic drinking
water and sanitation, including in schools and health facilities, particularly in target countries.
UNICEF Pacific is looking for a qualified international JMP data often shows disparities in terms of WASH
individual consultant or teams of consultant access in rural and in urban areas. In terms of schools
with lead member to conduct evaluation of WASH which is relevant for this evaluation focus, the context
in Schools Three Star Approach programme strategy varies from islands to islands as many schools are
in the Pacific. community owned and some communities invest
more than in others. But overall, there is ownership
1. Background from communities to improve WASH in schools.
Every child, no matter who they are or where they
live, has a right to live in a protected and clean At the national level across the Pacific, governments
environment allowing them to reach their full are champions of WASH in Schools and they have
development potential (UNICEF Strategic Goal so demonstrated through WASH in Schools policies
4). Advancing the commitments of Pacific Islands in Fiji and in Kiribati, standards and guidelines
Countries and Territories to achieve the Sustainable that incorporate WASH and/or WASH in Schools
Development Goals, UNICEF Pacific has adopted the in Solomon Islands and in Vanuatu. There is also
WASH in Schools Three Star Approach since 2015 to coordination between various ministries for example
improve access to basic drinking water and sanitation in Kiribati, between Ministry of Education and
in schools for children, especially girls and those with Ministry of Infrastructure and Sustainable Energy,
a disability. A core strategy of the WinS is to build and in Vanuatu, Department of Water and Ministry of
the capacity of children, teachers and communities Education and/or Health.
in becoming agents of change for improved hygiene
behaviour such as handwashing with water and soap The geographical location of the islands call for
at critical times, increased knowledge on menstrual continued support for meeting the needs of hard
hygiene management and increased demand for to reach schools and communities, addressing
safe drinking water and the use of toilet instead of equity (gender and children with a disability, or small
open defecation. children) in terms of the supply; and having model
designs for infrastructure.
Pacific Island Countries are exposed to a wide
range of natural hazards, including earthquakes, UNICEF as a lead agency in WASH in Schools in
tsunamis, volcanoes, landslides, floods, drought, the Pacific has made considerable progress with
and cyclones, and are threatened by the impacts of a 30 per cent increase in schools with improved
climate change, including sea level rise, increased water and sanitation conditions through WinS
saltwater intrusion and coastal erosion and reduced implementation on 4 atoll islands in Kiribati, 2015-
freshwater availability. Environmental sustainability 2018, the mainstreaming of WASH in Schools
challenges put the entire countries in the region SDG core questions7 and the Three Star rating in
at risk of having to be abandoned if not urgently Fiji national Education Management Information
addressed. These mounting pressures are placed on Systems, a National Technical Standards for WinS
top of daily challenges that also must be addressed implementation in Solomon Islands and integration
for sustainable development to be possible, such as of WASH module in annual teacher’s in service
rapid and unplanned urbanisation, lack of access to training in Vanuatu.
education, as well as inadequate infrastructure and
services, such as a lack of access to improved water The UNICEF Pacific multi-country programme
supply and sanitation. (MCP) 2018-2022 is now entering its second year of
implementation. This provides a unique opportunity
In terms of socio-economic context, communities to strengthen accountability to children by conducting
are dispersed across small islands with a divide in a formative evaluation of the WASH in Schools Three
many countries in the Pacific in urban and rural areas. Star Approach as it is adopted in the four Pacific
7 https://www.who.int/water_sanitation_health/monitoring/coverage/wins-core-indicators-and-questions-4-pager.pdf
64 Formative Evaluation of UNICEF Three Star Approach for WASH in Schools in the Pacific
Final Report
Islands Countries and Territories. The WASH in • Education and Health Ministries are core
Schools Three Star Approach has been adopted in but also other ministries or government
Fiji (from a pilot in 2015 but now is at scale), Kiribati departments including women and youth
(atoll island first implementation from 2015 to 2018), focused ministries (at national and provincial/
Solomon Islands (since 2016), in Vanuatu (since island level). The information will be useful
2017) and 2018 introduction in Federated States of to determine gap and priority focus in the
Micronesia.8 four determinant areas of the Enabling
Environment framework (institutional
The WinS “provides safe drinking water, improves arrangements, demand, supply and quality) in
sanitation facilities and promotes good health planning, budgeting and monitoring SDGs
outcomes9”. By doing so, it aims to reduce hygiene • Universities and research institutes, in the
related disease, increase student attendance and region and abroad.
contributes to dignity and gender equality of school • WASH programme implementing partners
children and contribute to fulfil Child Rights to and other development partners working in
WASH in the Pacific10. To fully achieve these goals, WinS to learn and increase accountability by
the initiative aims to institutionalise WinS in the improving WinS implementation
education sector by replicating simple intervention • Donors to inform their investment.
models such as “3-star Approach11”.
The findings and recommendations of this
An independent evaluation is needed to understand evaluation will be used to adjust WinS strategies
whether WinS is achieving the desired results and implementation modalities when necessary,
and how can the WinS pilot be brought to scale and to identify what changes are required for future
and replicated in Fiji, Kiribati, Solomon Islands, replication and/or scaling, as well as help strengthen
Vanuatu and potentially FSM. The findings and the WinS Three Star approach in pacific countries.
recommendations of the evaluation will inform on UNICEF will be engaged in planning and managing
success and challenges around implementation of of the Evaluation while partners will be engaged
WinS and the way forward for addressing remaining in reference groups to review key outputs, and
gaps in fostering children’s rights through WASH. should be engaged in the planning, and findings and
The evaluation also aims to improve the Pacific recommendations must be validated and prioritized
WASH Strategy and to inform the mid-term review with partners.
of the current Multi-Country Programme in 2020.
These tools will be useful for WinS programme
design, monitoring and evaluation by UNICEF and 3. Objective(s):
development partners, provide a focus area for The objectives are to establish the extent to which
investment by both governments and donors. the WinS Three Star Approach achieved its desired
results as it is implemented in Fiji, Kiribati, Solomon
Islands and Vanuatu and inform the way forward
2. Purpose of the assignment to advancing the WASH agenda under Goal 4:
The main purpose of this formative evaluation is to “every child lives in a safe and clean environment”
generate evidence that will inform the replicability of UNICEF’s 2018-2021 Strategic Plan, the Global
and/or scalability of the WinS Three Star approach WASH Strategy and UNICEF Pacific MCPD.
in Fiji, Kiribati, Solomon Islands, Vanuatu and FSM.
The purpose of evaluation is therefore to foster Specifically, the evaluation aims to:
learning and improvement of the WinS Three Star • Assess relevance, effectiveness, efficiency of
approach, identify priority focus for government the WinS Three Star Approach, and whether
partners and donors in the four determinant areas is contributing to sustainable and resilient (a)
of the WinS Enabling Environment framework schools and (b) communities.
(institutional arrangements, demand, supply and • Validation of the WASH in Schools Three Star
quality),and increase accountability by assessing Theory of Change
the effectiveness of the WinS Three Star approach • Identification of the pre-conditions from pilot
in building sustainable and resilient schools and to scale up and replication, to other countries
communities and in changing children’s behaviour as in the Pacific region
agents of change. • Determine the extent to which children’s
learned WASH behaviours in schools
To this end the primary audience includes: contribute to behaviour change at homes
• UNICEF Pacific who will use the information (among their parents).
to improve the WASH Strategy during the mid-
term review of the Multi-Country Programme
Document in 2020.
8 Results Framework and ToC will be provided to recommended candidates.
9 WASH in Schools Mapping ( http://washinschoolsmapping.com/about.html )
10 UNICEF Field Guide: The Three Star Approach for WinS 2013, p.3
11 Stepped approach focusing on group handwashing with soap and to improve conditions in schools. It aims to help schools meeting the essential
criteria for a healthy and protective learning environment for children. (UNICEF Field Guide 2013, p.2)
Formative Evaluation of UNICEF Three Star Approach for WASH in Schools in the Pacific 65
Final Report
4. Scope proposal assessment by UNICEF.
The evaluation will cover WinS programme
implementation from 2015 to 2018 but must also Below is a general requirement for the technical
look as far back to 2011 when WinS began to proposal;
mature through development of a number of tools,
i) Desk review and refinement of methodology.
guidelines, standards and capacity building trainings
The list of references and documentations will be
were specifically developed. The evaluation is not
shared with the selected Evaluation team.
project focused and therefore, the build-up work
which began in 2011 needs to be factored in. ii) Data collection, field work (site visit/interviews)
The systematic use of qualitative (e.g, structured
The geographical12 scope covers four countries with interviews and focus groups) and quantitative (e.g.
the possibility of a fifth country (FSM, in Chuuk). The recent survey results, existing routine data) methods
evaluation team is invited to consider field visits to are required to collect the additional evidence during
all four countries including areas where UNICEF has the country visit. The meeting with key stakeholders
not implemented WinS. will be accompanied by UNICEF national staff during
• Fiji. WinS was implemented in primary the field work in Fiji, Solomon Is and Kiribati.
schools in Viti Levu
Due to the nature of this “formative evaluation” with
• Kiribati. WinS was implemented on 4 islands
time and budget limitation, it is highly recommended
(Abaiang, Maina, Marakaei and North Tarawa).
to identify key areas for site visit and data collection,
• Solomon Islands in Guadalcanal province.
focus group discussion in the field based on the desk
• Vanuatu in Penama Province.
review analysis. The respondents and methods/tools
(interview, questionnaires, and focus group) need to
The WinS interventions include both upstream work
be strategically selected based on the evaluation
with government (improving monitoring via Education
questions.
Management Information Systems, developing WinS
Policy with specific focus on gender and attaching iii) Analysis and Reporting
WASH to budget lines for schools) and downstream The final stage of analysis and reporting will be
work with schools (capacity building training to conducted remotely (Please see section 6 below
WASH committees and clubs, executing daily group for more detail). The results of analysis need to
handwashing programs and cleaning schedule). The systematically respond to the evaluation questions,
interventions also involve partnerships internally and the report will be written in a reader-friendly
within UNICEF (WASH, Education, Health, M&E and manner. Before finalization of the evaluation
C4D sections) and externally (children, especially report, UNICEF will organize one day workshop,
girls, men and women, WASH implementing gathering project team, stakeholders, beneficiaries
partners13 and donors. and the evaluation team, to discuss together
recommendations and action plan drawn from
the evaluation. This workshop would help ensure
5. Methodology recommendations are appropriate and owned by the
The evaluation will be formative, non-experimental, project team and stakeholders, this workshop will be
with a theory-based and utilization focused approach, facilitated by UNICEF WASH section.
to assess the relevance and effectiveness of the
intervention on it WinS Outcomes. Given that a As much as possible, a contextualized perspective is
key objective of the intervention is to assess the to be factored into the evaluation for each evaluation
replicability and sustainability of the programme, criteria, identifying potential variations/differences
this systematic use of qualitative (e.g, structured between WASH programme components, across
interviews and focus groups) and quantitative (e.g. WASH country programmes, and between UNICEF
recent survey results, existing routine data) methods and other development partners. The evaluation
must be explored. The overall methodology will needs to follow the UNEG Norms and Standards
involve extensive / comprehensive desk review of for Evaluations (2016) as well as UNEG and UNICEF
case studies, documents and data already available ethical guidelines. It also needs to respect UNEG
in UNICEF, complemented by interviews/ surveys Guidance on integrating Human Rights and Gender
of key stakeholders particularly with those often Equality in Evaluation and the UN-SWAP Evaluation
marginalized such as girls and women, children with Performance Indicators. Further, the evaluation
a disability and elderly. UNICEF recommends the methodology must include specific questions and
use mobile technologies for rapid data collection approaches (for example, consideration for time
and consider innovative approaches in the evaluation and location of interviews) to ensure the evidence
design, analysis and dissemination includes women and girls. The technical proposal
should also clearly refer to triangulation, sampling
An initial proposal for a more detailed methodology plan and methodological limitations and mitigation
is to be submitted at the time of submission of the measures.
technical proposal which will be used as a basis for
12 These are the locations where WinS was implemented but may not all be visited by the evaluator(s).
13 Fiji example of WASH in Schools in Emergencies (WinSiE) by UNICEF, government and development partners as part of WinS e-course by Emory
University submission paper.
66 Formative Evaluation of UNICEF Three Star Approach for WASH in Schools in the Pacific
Final Report
The evaluation will occur in three phases: 1) inception development assistance. Value for money and impact
phase, 2) data collection and analysis phase, and 3) will be not included in the evaluation because of the
reporting and communication phase. Alternative lack of baseline data for comparison. Nevertheless,
approaches can also be proposed. The methodology the evaluation should consider informing what level
will be further specified and finalized by the selected of data is needed to determine value for money and
evaluation team in collaboration with UNICEF during impact. A set of preliminary questions, though not
the inception phase. limited, are listed below for consideration against
each of the criteria to be tested during the evaluation.
The evaluator is recommended to elaborate the list
6. Evaluation Criteria and Questions: of questions during the submission of their technical
The evaluation criteria will align with the ones proposals, which will be used for the selection
recommended by the OECD DAC for evaluating process by UNICEF.
The evaluation will focus on the following criteria;
1. Relevance 1. To what extent are the objective of WinS still valid for PICT (given their context)?
To what extent is it aligned to the Government Goals and the Sustainable Goals as
well as to UNICEF Strategic Plan Goals?
2. Is the ToC of the WinS Three Star Approach consistent with intended impact?
3. How can the new Country Program’s objectives, approaches and modalities be
more relevant and adapted to the fast-changing overall environment (economic,
social, aid-related) and WASH-specific context in programming countries
2. Effectiveness 4. To what extent does WinS Three Star approach contributed to building sustainable
and resilient schools and communities and in changing children’s behaviour as
agents of change?
5. When and under what conditions water and sanitation behaviours change at
community level?
6. When and to what extent is WinS reducing open defecation (OD),
7. To what extent are children effective at changing their parents’ behaviour?
8. When and to what extent is WinS:
- reducing open defecation (OD),
- improving household water treatment,
- improving hygiene practices (handwashing and menstrual hygiene management),
- driving institutional change in governments (national and local)14[1]?
- contributing to achieving equity 15[2] – leaving no one behind?
9. What kind of monitoring framework should be established to ensure validity and
comparability of data in all countries where WinS is being replicated in (consider
which ones function well and which ones need to be improved and how these be
better aligned)?
3. Efficiency 10. Is WinS implemented in the most cost-effective and efficient manner (deliverables
achieved on time and on budget adequate and well-spent resources)?
4. Equity 11. Is WinS project integrating appropriate strategies to advance gender equality,
and promote the inclusion and participation of minority and marginalized groups?
(men, women, boys, girls and differently abled people)?
12. To what extent WinS prepare schools to identify, assess, manage and absorb risks
and shocks from emergency situations16?
13. Did the project contribute to equitable participation and benefits to various groups
(men, women, boys, girls and differently abled people)?
5. Sustainability 14. To what extent will WinS continue after UNICEF funding ceases?
15. “What were the major factors enabling or constraining scale-up of the WinS Three
Star approach? with specific consideration for country’s specific capacity context.
16. What are the simple, sustainable and scalable aspects of WinS that can be
integrated into education (especially ECD) and Health17 interventions?
17. How is WinS addressing emerging climate and disaster challenges (e.g. extreme
weather events, resource degradation, pollution, disasters and climate change
related impacts) or opportunities (e.g. for disaster risk reduction or adaptation) to
promote resilience in target schools and communities?
14 [1] See Annex 1 for a visual outline for this question.
15 [2] See as an example – Equity of Access to WASH in Schools, but also consider Gender – Fiji MHM report.
16 Fiji example of WASH in Schools in Emergencies (WinSiE) by UNICEF, government and development partners as part of WinS e-course by Emory
University submission paper.
17 See Annex 1 B for a visual outline for this question.
Formative Evaluation of UNICEF Three Star Approach for WASH in Schools in the Pacific 67
Final Report
7. Work Schedule/Work Plan process is completed. There will be flexibility in
The duration of the contract is for a total of 78 days extending at no cost as may be required to ensure
across a period of 6 months inclusive of 14 days of necessary field visits are completed and offset any
travel and 10 weeks of work. A week is 5 days. The emergency situations with prior approval.
anticipated period is from 1 July 2019 to 15 January
2020 and may change based on when the selection
Duration
In country Remote
Activity (working
support support
days)
Phase 1: Inception (Total number of days: 13)
1. Participate in a briefing session on the assignment with technical
X 1
committee (through skype call)
2. Review and analyze the relevant documents, reports, materials X 5
3. Construct the WinS Three Star Theory of Change for the Pacific X 1
4. Draft and final submission of inception report X 3
5. Finalization of the questions and sub-questions of the evaluation X 3
Phase 2 : Data collection and analysis( Total number of days: 40)
1. Identification of the evaluation methodology, information/data
collection method for each evaluation question, sampling for
X 3
interviews and field visits, and development of data collection, and
data analysis plan (in Fiji)
2. Development of detailed planning for the evaluation with support of
X 2
WASH section for logistical arrangement (field visit) (in Fiji)
3. Data collection in Fiji, Kiribati, Solomon Islands and Vanuatu:
interviews with stakeholders and beneficiaries, field observations, X 35
measurements / tests 2 weeks in each country (6 weeks total)
Phase 3 : -Reporting Phase ( Total number of days: 25 )
1. Processing and analysis of the collected data, and drafting of the
X 10
interim report
2. Data preliminary findings validation workshop with partners (3 days
x 9
in every country)
3. Completing the interim report by incorporating feedback from the
technical committee and an action plan proposal prioritized for X 3
UNICEF and other stakeholders.
4. Submission of the Final report, a PowerPoint presentation and Brief
X 3
incorporating feedback
Total duration = 78 days
68 Formative Evaluation of UNICEF Three Star Approach for WASH in Schools in the Pacific
Final Report
The payment will be made upon the successful submission of following deliverables:
Payment
Deliverables Due Dates
Terms
Revised/agreed on updated Inception Report (after incorporation of
End July 2019 20%
feedback from reference group) accepted by UNICEF
Comprehensive list of relevant references (desk review)
Field Visits and summary of interviews Mid-October 2019
Interim Evaluation Report
50%
Advanced Draft Evaluation Report
End November 2019
Final Evaluation Report
Final versions of PowerPoint presentation, Evaluation Brief and Final
22 December 2019 30%
Evaluation Report
NB. The evaluation reports must be compliant with;
The final evaluation report should not exceed more 9. Internal Information
than 60 pages (without the annexes) and will include Reasons why this assignment cannot be done by
at least the following: a UNICEF staff member: The assignment cannot be
• Executive Summary done by UNICEF staff because it is supposed to be
• Brief description of the program, its context, an independent evaluation.
financial arrangements, areas of intervention,
timing, implementation modalities and actors
• Evaluation Purpose, Objectives and Scope 10. Management and quality assurance:
(including timing of evaluation) The evaluation team will operate under the guidance
• Methodology, including challenges / limitations and supervision of UNICEF evaluation management
• Findings including analysis in terms of relevance, team comprised of the Planning, Monitoring and
efficiency, effectiveness, sustainability, gender Evacuation (PME) Specialist and the Chief of WASH
equality, equity and human rights Programme. The PME specialist will provide the
• Conclusions and lessons learned technical oversight throughout the implementation
• Recommendations of the evaluation, and the Chief of WASH programme
• Annexes – The following elements are expected will provide day-to-day management (and contractual)
to be in the Annex: of the evaluation process, including logistical support
- ToRs of the evaluation team and evaluation budget. The
- List of persons interviewed, and sites visited management team will check whether the findings
- List of documents consulted and conclusions from the evaluation are relevant and
- More details on methodology, such as data propose improvements to the recommendations if
collection instruments, including details of required. In addition, the team will follow-up on the
their reliability and validity evaluation recommendations with a management
- Evaluators biodata and/or justification of team response.
composition
- Evaluation matrix A Reference Group will be established by UNICEF to
- Results framework ensure quality assurance. The Group will include the
- List of the data with maximum disaggregation UNICEF Pacific Research and Evaluation Committee
(RESEC), UNICEF East Asia and the Pacific (EAPRO)
Regional Adviser WASH and Evaluation advisor,
8. Payment Schedule: and technical staff from UNICEF as necessary.
As per UNICEF DFAM policy, payment is made The Reference Group will assess the quality of key
against approved deliverables. No advance payment evaluation products, including methodology and
is allowed unless in exceptional circumstances evaluation instruments, inception and final reports
against bank guarantee, subject to a maximum of 30 with technical assistance from RESEC. The UNICEF
per cent of the total contract value in cases where East Asia and the Pacific Regional Office (EAPRO),
advance purchases, for example for supplies or particularly the EAPRO Regional Adviser WASH and
travel, may be necessary the EAPRO Evaluation Advisor, will provide oversight
and technical support.
Formative Evaluation of UNICEF Three Star Approach for WASH in Schools in the Pacific 69
Final Report
11. Official Travel • Proven experience with similar programme
• The Consultant will arrange his/her own travel evaluations in the WASH sector in developing
from place of residence to countries where countries using UNEG Norms and Standards,
work is carried out. Air tickets will be purchased preferably for the fields of WASH in school,
in Economy Class for the most direct and most hygiene behaviour changes approaches including
economical itinerary, provided it is not longer CLTS (Community-Led Total Sanitation), and
than the lowest fare by more than 4 hours. community interventions.
• UNICEF will approve quotes prior to purchase • Outstanding knowledge of and experience
of air ticket and reimburse travel costs and with field research and both quantitative and
subsistence allowances upon submission of qualitative data collection principles, methods
receipts. and analysis.
• Where applicable living allowance will be • Previous experience in carrying out similar
paid for field work to cover subsistence and assignments for UNICEF and/or other
accommodation. Consultant must put this as UN agencies and/or other development
part of the financial proposal. organisations.
• The consultant should not travel without a • Knowledge of challenges and issues on
signed contract and authorization to travel prior development including gender equality and
to the commencement of the journey to the human rights, and vulnerability in the Pacific
duty station. Island Countries and/or Small Island Developing
• Unless authorized, UNICEF will buy the ticket States will be an asset.
of the consultant where applicable. In some • Languages: excellent command of the English
cases, the consultant may be authorized to buy language
their travel tickets and shall be reimbursed at the
most economical and direct route but this must Above all, the qualified applicant(s) must demonstrate
be agreed beforehand. Consultant must put this commitment to deliver the final products in line with
as part of the financial proposal. the set TOR within the agreed timeline.
• The candidate selected will be governed by
and subject to UNICEF’s General Terms and
Conditions for individual contracts. APPLICATIONS
Applicants must submit: (i) a cover letter including:
a narrative explaining why they are qualified for this
12. Work Place consultancy and dates of availability; (ii) financial offer
The institution (with the team of maximum 3 (professional fees and living allowance); (iii) scan
consultants) will not be based in UNICEF and must of highest degree. (iv) examples of previous work
use their own laptop/other resources to be budgeted relevant to the consultancy; (v) technical proposal
in their quotation.
13. Qualifications and Specialized Knowledge/
Experience Required:
A multidisciplinary, gender balanced, and culturally
diverse team (maximum of 3) has added advantage.
The team leader for a team of consultants should
meet the following specific qualifications at the
minimum:
• Training and experience in the field related to
water, sanitation and hygiene with academic
qualifications (at least a master’s degree) in civil
engineering, mechanical engineering, sanitary
engineering, social sciences or combination of
it.
• Credible international expert with at least 8
years of professional experience in planning,
implementation, management, monitoring and
evaluation of integrated water, sanitation and
hygiene programmes in developing countries
70 Formative Evaluation of UNICEF Three Star Approach for WASH in Schools in the Pacific
Final Report
ANNEX II: THEORIES OF CHANGE
Pacific Multi Country Programme WASH Theory of Change
Risks:
All children in the Pacific, and their families, are accessing adequate, - Unstable political environment
equitable, affordable drinking water, sanitation and hygiene. - Changed Government priorities –
economic constraints
THEN
- Natural disasters hinder progress and
increase costs/divert resources.
Governments have institutional Sufficient and sustainable Individuals and communities Governments and communities
frameworks for policy planning, quality WASH infrastructure in have knowledge and skills to have capacity to absorb and
budgeting and coverage of communities and facilities adopt and sustain safe WASH recover from disaster or effects
WASH practices of climate change
THEN THEN THEN THEN
Assumption: Governments
continue to commit to improving • Targeted advocacy (including gender • Governments and communities
WASH policies and same level specific and adolescent health integrate drinking water safety
of WASH investment • Governments develop targeted efforts) are carried out at and security planning and
standards for WASH national and community levels on other innovative risks
• G sy o 1 v s e t r e n m m f e o n r t s e v e i s d t e a n b c li e s h a n a d data IF i f m ac p i l l e it m ie e s n d t e a s ti i o g n n s a , n A d N D • b C e a n p e a fi c t i s ty o d f e W ve A lo S p H m , A en N t D of sector IF m pl a a n n a n g in e g m f e o n r t W to A o S ls H i n se t r h v e ic ir e s, AND
generation with capacity to • Government puts in place institutions (including schools and • Governments set up coordination
analyse and identify most innovative funding healthcare facilities) on planning, mechanisms to absorb and
deprived communities and mechanisms for scaling and managing, implementing, monitoring allocate efforts and resources in
WASH needs and coverage managing WASH interventions. and delivering WASH services incl. humanitarian situations.
particularly for adolescent girls, gender segregated facilities, AND
IF children with a disability, • Individuals have improved knowledge
women and men, AND on safe WASH practices and the skills
• Governments use evidence to and confidence to use those practices, Assumption: Individuals are
develop policy and WASH AND willing to apply knowledge and
interventions guidelines, AND Assumption: Donors • Communities are empowered through change behaviours
• Governments include SDG remain engaged training and high level participation in
WASH indicators in EMIS, HIS decision making of designs, operations
and other information databases. and maintenance (esp. women/girls)
CURRENT SITUATION: One-third of children in the Pacific are not having their right to
sanitation and at least one-in-ten not having their right to safe drinking water met.
Source: WASH Strategy Note: Pacific Multi
Integrated, four-country WASH in Schools Programme Logic
All children in the Pacific, and their families, are accessing adequate, equitable,
affordable drinking water, sanitation and hygiene.
Output from
Output 1: Output 2: Output 3: Output 4:
Governments have institutional Sufficient and sustainable Individuals and communities Governments and communities
The MCDP
frameworks for policy planning, quality WASH infrastructure in have knowledge and skills to have capacity to absorb and
WASH TOC
budgeting and coverage of communities and facilities adopt and sustain safe WASH recover from disaster or effects
WASH practices of climate change
Fiji Fiji Fiji Fiji
Contributing Wins Policy/Standards; Advocacy for WinS budget and improvement WinS monitoring training for District Not specifically addressed.
outputs from WinS budget allocation in FEG; Wins arrangement established Officials; WinS training for Head
Monitoring in FEMIS and District; Teachers, PTA and Managers;
country Kiribati
specific D im is p s le e m m e in n a t t a io ti n o n o f a M rra o n E g W em in e S n t; Kiribati A te d a v c o h c e a r t i p n r g o f f e o s r s W io i n n a S l d in e c v l e u l s o io p n m i e n n t t h e Not specified, but climate change
Theory of Localising WinS 3-Star approach WASH options assessed, selected module and disaster risk reduction integrated
Change to Fiji context and installed in target schools; into WASH facility designs
Scalable WASH options demonstrated
Kiribati
Kiribati WASH materials prepared and Solomon Islands
WASH options assessed, selected Solomon Island taught in schools
WASH improvement plans finalized
and installed in target schools Functional girl-friendly WASH
and engineering designs initiated.
facilities and services provided at Solomon Islands
Solomon Islands target schools School committees and teachers
National WASH in Schools policies, mobilized, trained and engaged in Vanuatu
standards and guidelines developed Vanuatu supporting WASH in Schools Wins Three Star Approach –
including infrastructure, implemented
Vanuatu W inc in lu s d T in h g re i e n f S ra ta st r r A uc p t p u r r o e a , c im h p – l emented V Tr a a n in u i a n t g u packages for WinS in the Penama province (the use of
Implementation of a National WinS in the Penama province provided to enhance capacity of the Drinking Water Safety
programme supported school management, communities Plan approach)
and government institutions provided.
Tools for gender and disability
inclusive WinS approaches
developed and implemented
Source: WASH Strategy Note: Pacific Multi Country Programme (2018-2022). April 2017. UNICEF Pacific office.
Formative Evaluation of UNICEF Three Star Approach for WASH in Schools in the Pacific 71
Final Report
Fiji WASH in Schools Programme Logic
Activity Activity
Need Inputs Outputs Outcomes
Phase 1 Phase 2
WINS Policy WINS budget
Funding / standards and imp.
Arrangement
established
Advocacy for
WINS budget Improved WINS
Staff / TA
allocation in FEG WINS in FEMIS supply,
Schools in Fiji infrastructure,
to reach basic WINS and hygiene
level of water, WINS Monitoring monitored programme
sanitation, and - FEMIS WINS monitoring and rated
hygiene access - District training for
and services monitoring District officials
and to become
healthy learning
environments Improved
forchildren. Implem Dissemination WINS Training for Teacher, PTA,
enting of MoE WINS Head Teachers, and manager
implementation PTA, and
Partner knowledge
arrangement Manager School children
on WINS
in Fiji have
access to basic
water,
Advocating for
sanitation
Localising WINS WINS inclusion
3 star approach in the teacher Sustainable and hygiene
to Fiji context PD module WINS capacity services.
Source: Live & Learn Environmental Education. November 2019. WASH in Schools Programs in Pacific Island
Countries: Achievements, Challenges, Design Frameworks and Regional Approaches.
Solomon Islands WASH in Schools Programme Logic
Goal of the Activity: School leavers and communities in the Solomon Islands
contribute constructively to Social and economic development.
Long-term outcome: Solomon Island Government Long-term outcome: Improved social outcomes, focusing on
Long-term consistently supports WASH services for all schools. education and health, outcomes for school children in target.
outcome(s)
Medium-term Medium-term outcome: WASH and solar infrastructure Medium-term outcome: Students in target
outcome(s) and service delivery in schools is managed in a sustainable areas demonstrate improved attendance.
manner at school, provincial, and national level.
Short-term outcome:
Short-term Short-term outcome: Short-term outcome:
Schools and communities have the
outcome(s) Officials are able to menage WASH Improved teaching and learning
knowledge and skills to improve
service delivery in schools. environments in target schools.
service delivery.
Outputs Output 1: Output 2: Output 3: Output 4:
National WASHผ School committees Functional girl-friendly Operational solar
in Schools policies, and teachers mobilized, WASH facilities and power systems at
standards, and trained, and engaged services at target target schools and
guidelines developed. in supporting WASH school provided. staff houses installed.
in schools.
Source: Live & Learn Environmental Education. November 2019. WASH in Schools Programs in Pacific Island
Countries: Achievements, Challenges, Design Frameworks and Regional Approaches.
72 Formative Evaluation of UNICEF Three Star Approach for WASH in Schools in the Pacific
Final Report
Vanuatu WASH in Schools Programme Logic
Goal of the Activity: School leavers and communities on Vanuatu
contribute constructively to social and economic development.
Long-term outcome: WinS facilities and practices Long-term outcome: Improved educabon and health
are functional and resourced in Vanuatu outcomes for school children throughout Vanuatu,
with a focus on Panama province.
Long-term
outcome(s)
Medium-term outcome: WinS facilities and practices are Medium-term outcome: Improved attendance, especially
Medium-term reliably managed at school, provincial, and national level a P m en o a n m g a a p d r o o le v s in c c e e n t s c g h ir o ls o l a s n . d children with a disability in
outcome(s)
Short-term outcome: Schools and communities in Penama Short-term outcome: Students in Penama province using
Short-term province have the knowledge and skills to implement and improved WASH Facilites and appropriate practices.
outcome(s) manage WinS facilities / upgrades.
Output 1: Output 2: Output 3: Output 4:
Outputs Implementalon of a National Training package for WinS to Tool(s) for gender and/or WinS. Three Star Approach,
WASH in Schools (WinS) enhance capacity of school disability inclusive WinS including infrastructure,
programme supported. management, communities, approaches developed implemented in Penama
and Government institutions and implemented. province.
provided.
Source: Live & Learn Environmental Education. November 2019. WASH in Schools Programs in Pacific Island
Countries: A
Kiribati WASH in Schools Programme Logic
Goal: Improved WASH practices leads to sustainable economic development?
and improved public health, human development, and environmental management for people in Kiribati
Long-term outcome: Kiribati implements relevant policies and evidence-based planning
to improve health and education in communities.
Medium-term outcome: Policy and decision
Medium-term outcome: Students, teachers,and
makers review and update national level WASH
wider community have improved WASH practices.
policy, planning, and budgeting allocations.
Short-term outcome: Students, teachers, and wider Short-term outcome: Policy and decision makers
community have increased knowledge and skills to have knowledge to inform policy, planning, and
improve WASH practices. budget decisions.
Output 1: Output 2: Output 3:
WASH in schools materials WASH options are assessed, Scalable WASH options
developed and taught. selected, and installed. demonstrated.
Source: Live & Learn Environmental Education. November 2019. WASH in Schools Programs in Pacific Island
Countries: A
Formative Evaluation of UNICEF Three Star Approach for WASH in Schools in the Pacific 73
Final Report
ANNEX III: DRAFT INTEGRATED
PROGRAMME LOGIC
Full human development for children in the Pacific
Improved educational and health outcomes for children in the Pacific
All children in the Pacific, and heir families, access adequate, equitable,
affordable drinking water, sanitation, and hygiene (MCP WASH ToC) Schools in the Pacific provide healthy learning environments for learners
G f b r u a o d m v g e e e r w n ti m n o g r e k , n s a t s n fo d i r m c in p o c v le l e u m r s a i e g v n e e t p o in o f s l W i t c it y i u n , t S p io la n n a n l ing, I s ( n M k d il C i l v s P i , d t W o u a a A l d s S o H a p n , t d T a o c n C o d ) m su m s u ta n i i n ti e s s a f h e a W ve A k S n H o w pr le ac d t g ic e e a s n d C t i c n o o o s u b m c n a h m t s r o i i c u e o n s l d s i r t , i i n e p k s a i r n h t g i a c v u w e la a i r m t l e y p r i n r a o n p v d e a r d s t a i a c n c ip i c t a a e t t s i i n o s g n G h d a i o s v v a e e s t r c e n a r m p o a e r c n i e t t y f s f , e t s o c c t a s h b o o s o f o ls c rb , li m a a n n a d t d e c r o c e h m c a o m n v g e u e r n . f i r t o ie m s
Pacific Island Country Government have Teachers, learners (boys and girls), and their families Sufficient and sustainable WASH Governments, schools, and communities
strengthened institutional frameworks for and communities, have increased knowledge of the infrastructure in schools for boys and girls have increased capacity to prepare for and
equitable and sustainable WinS, particularly risks of poor WASH practices (open defecation, respond to disasters and adapt to climate
in participating countries. unsafe water, and lack of hand washing) and unsafe change for WinS, particularly in participating
hygiene management (including MHM) and the skills countries.
to adopt safe sanitation and good hygiene practices,
particularly in target countries (WASH, MCP, output 1)
Assumption 1: Assumption 2: Assumption 3: Assumption 4: Assumption 5: Assumption 6:
Political spaceexists to Three-Star Approach is effective Three-Star Approach encourages Governments are responsive Three-Star Approach provides There is effective harmonization
influence government in strengthening and leveraging constructive tension between to the demand for creating an adequate incentives and and coherence between different
policy and decision-making the influencing capacity of demand and supply for effective, enabling environment for encouragement for schools stakeholder interventions to
on WinS learners to garner community sustainable WASH in schools effective, sustainable WASH to improve WASH facilities strengthen comprehensive WASH
support for sustainable WASH in schools and practices in schools.
in schools
S c fo o t r r m e e n m ff g e u t c h n t e i i t v n y e t , t h o s e u d s c e t a m a p in a a n c a i b d t l y e a o n W f e A le n S a a H r b n l i e i n n r g s s e c a n h n v o d i o r t o l h s n e m s e c n h t o ol S a h n a u d b p i p t e s o s r ( t t T a h s b c r li e h s e o h - o S d ls t a a i t l r y o A r s o p t u p re t r i o n n a g e c t s h h e t p o n r o p h g r y o r g a m i m e o n m t e e i n e h g d e u a a c l r t a e h t ) y io n S a (T f u f h o p r r e p d e o a - r b S t l t s e a c r W h A o A p o S p ls H r o t o i a n c e f h r s a p t s a r t b o ru l g i c s ra t h u m r a e p m p i r n o g p a ri r a e t a e ) ,
(Three-Star Approach programming area) Fiji: Strengthen WinS Fiji: Advocacy to include WinS Vanuatu: Establish improved WASH
training for teachers, inclusion in teacher professional infrastructure in Penama province
PTAs, and managers development model
Solomon Islands: Support the development of
national WASH in schools policies, standards, Solomon Islands: Establish functional,
and guidelines Vanuatu: Develop a training girl-friendly ASH facilities and services
package to enhance WinS Vanuatu: Develop and implement at target schools
capacity of school management, tools for gender and/or disability
Kiribati: Strengthening knowledge of policy and communities, and government -inclusive WinS approaches Solomon Islands: Install operational solar
d an e d ci s b i u o d n g -m et a d ke e r c s is t i o o n in s form WinS policy, planning, institutions p an o d w s e t r a s ff y s h t o e u m se s s at target schools
Solomon Islands: School committees and teacher Legend Results pathway 1 Results pathway 3
F p an i o j d i li : c c A y o d p v v l e o a r n c a a n g c i e n y g o f f o b W r u i d n i g n c e S lu ti s n iv g e F m ij o i: n S ito tr r e in n g g t a h n e d n r g a o ti v n e g r n o m f W en in t S Kiriba a ti r : e S t t r r a e in n e g d th a e n n d t h m e o k b n il o iz w ed le . d T g o e s u an p d p o s r k t i W lls A o S f H te i a n c s h c e h r, o l o e l a s rners, Impact R W e i s n u S l t o s u p tc a o th m w e a s y 2 R W e A s S u H lts o p u a t t c h o w m a e y s 4
and wider communities to improve WASH practices
74 Formative Evaluation of UNICEF Three Star Approach for WASH in Schools in the Pacific
Final Report
ANNEX IV: EVALUATION MATRIX
EVALUATION MATRIX: Evaluation of the Three Star Approach in
Fiji, Kiribati, Solomon Islands, Vanuatu and FSM
Over-arching evaluation question: What are the simple, scalable and sustainable aspects of the Three Star Approach for WASH
in Schools that can strengthen WASH in Schools in the Pacific? What are the requirements and conditions for simple, scalable
and sustainable aspects of the Three Star Approach for WASH in Schools to strengthen WASH in Schools in Pacific countries,
with due consideration of girls and boys of different ages and abilities, including those at risk of being left behind? )
Evaluation criterion: Relevance
Evaluation Question 1: Do the objectives and design of the Three Star Approach for WASH in Schools address and respond
to changing global, country and schools’ WASH needs, policies and priorities, as well as those of girls and boys (and men and
women), including those at risk of being left behind?
Sub-evaluation Data sources and data Data analysis Data
Nr Measure / indicator
question collection methods methods Availability
1.1 To what extent are the Extent to which the 1. Review of the 2030 1. Content analysis of
objectives and design of objectives and design Agenda for Sustainable information extracted
the Three Star Approach of the Three Star Development, especially from relevant
for WASH in Schools Approach for WASH SDGs 6 (clean water documents.
aligned with changing in Schools align with and sanitation); 3 (good
2. Content analysis of
global priorities, including relevant SDGs health and well-being); 5
data from KIIs.
those related to gender (gender equality); and 10
equality, inclusion, (reduced inequalities) 3. Triangulation of
the environment and information from
2. Review of Three Star
climate change (including document analyses
Approach Field Guide
preparing schools and KIIs.
to identify, assess, 3. KIIs (UNICEF;
manage and absorb Implementing partners,
risks and shocks from Government - national
natural disasters and and sub-national,
pandemics)? community leaders,
implementing partners)
How can this be
strengthened?
1.2 To what extent are the Coherence between 1. Review of Three Star 1. Comparative
objectives and design the focus of Three Approach for WASH in analysis of
of the Three Star Star Approach for Schools Field Guide information extracted
Approach for WASH in WASH in Schools from relevant
2. Review of Three Star
Schools aligned with country strategies documents.
Approach implementation
Governments’ (changing) and government-
strategies/plans in Fiji, 2. Content analysis of
policies/plans, needs identified WASH in
Kiribati, Solomon Islands, data from KIIs.
and goals in Fiji, Kiribati, Schools needs and
Vanuatu and FSM.
Solomon Islands, Vanuatu goals 3. Triangulation of
and FSM? 3. Review of relevant information from
Government documents document analyses
How can this be
(WASH and WASH and KIIs.
strengthened?
in Schools policies,
strategies, etc.) –
including the extent
to which they address
inclusiveness and
resilience.
4. KII’s (UNICEF staff,
government - national
and sub-national,
Implementing partners,
CSOs)
Formative Evaluation of UNICEF Three Star Approach for WASH in Schools in the Pacific 75
Final Report
1.3 To what extent is the Coherence between 1. Review of the Three 1. Comparative
Three Star Approach for the focus of 3-Star Star Approach for WASH analysis of data
WASH in Schools aligned country strategies in Schools Field Guide extracted from
to UNICEF’s Strategic and relevant UNICEF relevant documents.
2. Review of the
Plan Goals for WASH? Strategic Plans
Three Star Approach
(Global, Pacific and
implementation
country - Fiji, Kiribati,
strategies/plans in Fiji,
Solomon Islands,
Kiribati, Solomon Islands,
Vanuatu and FSM)
Vanuatu and FSM.
3. Review of relevant
UNICEF strategies
(Global, Pacific and
Country- Fiji, Kiribati,
Solomon Islands, Vanuatu
and FSM)
1.4 To what extent is the Coherence between 1. Review of WASHBAT 1. Comparative
design of the Three Star WASHBAT analyses analyses in each country, analysis of
Approach for WASH and Three Star including the extent information extracted
in Schools likely to Approach design in to which they address from relevant
strengthen the enabling each country inclusiveness and documents.
environment, demand, resilience.
Coherence between 2. Content analysis
supply and quality
WASH in Schools/ 2. Review of Three Star of information from
of WASH in Schools
WASH advocacy Approach implementation KIIs, FGDs, transect
in each country (i.e.
strategy(ies) strategies/plans and walks and direct
policy, legislation and
and entry points Theory of Changes for observation.
finance; human and
to strengthen Fiji, Kiribati, Solomon
physical resources 3. Triangulation of
the enabling Islands, Vanuatu and
in schools, including information from
environment, FSM.
facilities and training for document review,
demand, supply and
teachers; demonstrated 3. Review of independent KII, FGDs, transect
quality of WASH in
motivation of the school evaluations of the Three walks and direct
Schools.
community to finance Star Approach for WASH observation.
and manage WASH in Coherence in Schools and WASH
Schools resources; and between WASH in Schools programmes
effectiveness of inputs in Schools/WASH in Fiji, Kiribati, Solomon
for changing hygiene mainstreaming Islands, Vanuatu and FSM
behaviour)? strategies / plans and (where available).
anticipated gender
What are the enablers/ 4. Review of UNICEF
equality outcomes of
conditions for change? WASH in Schools/WASH
Three Star Approach
mainstreaming, inclusion
How can this be interventions
and advocacy strategies
strengthened?
Coherence between in the Pacific/each
advocacy strategies country
and anticipated
5. KIIs (UNICEF;
behaviour change
Implementing partners,
outcomes Three
Government - national
Star Approach
and sub-national,
interventions
community leaders,
Coherence between implementing partners,
Three Star Approach CSOs)
implementing
6. FGDs with teachers
strategies and
absorptive capacity 7. Transect walks and
of students, schools, direct observation
government and (schools and
communities in each communities)
country.
76 Formative Evaluation of UNICEF Three Star Approach for WASH in Schools in the Pacific
Final Report
1.5 To what extent is the Quality of gender 1. Review of UNICEF 1. Comparative
Three Star Approach and inclusiveness strategies to strengthen analysis of
for WASH in Schools analyses in gender equality and information extracted
integrating appropriate WASHBAT for each inclusiveness in WASH from relevant
strategies to advance country in Schools in the Pacific/ documents.
WASH benefits for boys each country
Extent to which 2. Content analysis of
and girls (and women and
strategies to address 2. Review of WASHBAT information from KIIs,
men) of different ages
gender equality and in each country, FGDs and transect
and abilities, including
inclusiveness in the especially the extent walks.
those at risk of being
Three Star Approach to which they address
left behind (e.g. minority 3. Triangulation of
align with gender inclusiveness and
and marginalised groups) information from
and inclusiveness resilience.
in Fiji, Kiribati, Solomon document review,
elements of
Island, Vanuatu and FSM? 3. Review of Three KII, FGDs, transect
WASHBAT in each
Star Approach design/ walks and direct
What are the enablers/ country
implementation observation.
conditions for change?
strategies and Theory of
How can this be Changes for Fiji, Kiribati,
strengthened? Solomon Islands, Vanuatu
and FSM, specifically
the extent to which they
address inclusiveness
and resilience.
4. Review of independent
evaluations of the
Three Star Approach
for WASH in Schools
and WASH in Schools
programmes, especially
findings pertaining to
gender equality and
inclusiveness.
5. KIIs (UNICEF;
Implementing partners,
Government - national
and sub-national,
community leaders,
implementing partners,
CSOs)
6. FGDs with teachers
7. Transect walks and
direct observation
(schools and
communities)
1.6 How can the on-going Adjustments made 1. Review of Three Star 1. Content analysis of Quality and
relevance of the Three to the design and Approach implementation information extracted compre-
Star Approach for implementation strategies/plans and from relevant hensiveness
WASH in Schools be of the Three Star budgets in Fiji, Kiribati, documents. of progress
assured amidst a rapidly Approach in response Solomon Islands, Vanuatu report and risk
2. Content analysis of
changing implementing to changes in the and FSM, including matrices
information from KIIs.
context in participating implementing amendments over time.
countries (economic, context, and the 3. Triangulation of
2. Review of programme
political, social, natural, effects of those information from
progress reports and
aid-related, needs, changes. document review
independent evaluation
priorities)? and KIIs
Extent to reports, where available.
which progress
3. Review of programme
reporting reflect
risk matrices.
on achievement
of results, and 4. KIIs (UNICEF;
associated challenges Implementing partners,
and improvements. Government - national
and sub-national,
Uptake of
development partners)
recommendations
from independent
evaluations of WASH
and WASH in Schools
programmes
Formative Evaluation of UNICEF Three Star Approach for WASH in Schools in the Pacific 77
Final Report
Evaluation criterion: Coherence
Evaluation Question 2: Is the Three Star Approach for WASH in Schools compatible with other WASH in Schools interventions
(government, schools and other actors, including other development partners) in the participating countries, education sector,
schools and communities?
Sub-evaluation Data sources and data Data analysis Data
Nr Measure / indicator
question collection methods methods Availability
2.1 What initiatives are Extent to which Three Review of Three Star Content analysis of
Governments in the Star Approach aligns Approach implementation information extracted
participating countries with and supports strategies/plans in Fiji, from relevant
undertaking to Government Kiribati, Solomon Islands, documents.
institutionalise WASH in initiatives to Vanuatu and FSM,
Content analysis of
Schools and is the Three strengthen WASH in including amendments
information from KIIs.
Star Approach for WASH Schools over time.
in Schools compatible Triangulation of
Government policies and
with this? information from
strategies to strengthen
document review
What can be done to WASH in Schools in Fiji,
and KIIs
strengthen this? Kiribati, Solomon Islands,
Vanuatu and FSM
KIIs (UNICEF;
Implementing partners,
Government - national
and sub-national,
development partners)
2.2 What initiatives are Extent to which Review of Three Star 1. Content analysis
schools and communities Three Star Approach Approach implementation of information
undertaking to aligns with and strategies/plans in Fiji, extracted from
institutionalise WASH in supports schools’ Kiribati, Solomon Islands, relevant documents.
Schools and is the Three and communities’ Vanuatu and FSM,
2. Content analysis of
Star Approach for WASH own initiatives to including amendments
information from KIIs.
in Schools compatible strengthen WASH in over time.
with this? Schools 3. Triangulation of
Review of school
information from
What can be done to strategies/plans to
document review
strengthen this? strengthen WASH in
and KIIs
Schools
KIIs (implementing
partners, development
partners, community
leaders, CSOs)
FGDs with teachers
2.3 What are other Extent to which Review of Three Star 1. Content analysis
development partners Three Star Approach Approach implementation of information
in the participating aligns with and strategies/plans in Fiji, extracted from
countries doing to complements Kiribati, Solomon Islands, relevant documents.
institutionalise WASH initiatives Vanuatu and FSM,
2. Content analysis of
in Schools in the supported by including amendments
information from KIIs.
participating countries other development over time.
and is the Three Star partners to 3. Triangulation of
Review of information
Approach for WASH in strengthen WASH in information from
held by Government
Schools compatible with Schools document review
(national and sub-
this? and KIIs
national) and
What can be done to development partners
strengthen this? on WASH in Schools
interventions
KIIs (UNICEF;
Implementing partners,
Government - national
and sub-national,
development partners)
78 Formative Evaluation of UNICEF Three Star Approach for WASH in Schools in the Pacific
Final Report
Evaluation criterion: Efficiency
Evaluation Question 3: Is the Thee Star Approach for WASH in Schools implemented in an economic and timely manner?
Sub-evaluation Data sources and data Data analysis Data
Nr Measure / indicator
question collection methods methods Availability
3.1 To what extent is Rationale for 1. Review of UNICEF 1. Content analysis of Detailed
resourcing for the initial selection of Three-Star design information extracted information
implementation of the participating schools. document and from relevant on resourcing
approach adequate budget allocations documents. (finances,
Planning and
(Finances, Human for management and human
resourcing (Finances, 2. Content analysis of
Resources, Technical implementation at resources,
Human Resources, information from KIIs.
Capacity)? regional, country and equipment
Equipment and
school/ community 3. Triangulation of and materials,
Where are the gaps and Materials, Technical
levels. information from technical
what are the implications Support) for
document review, support)
for institutionalising implementation and 2. Review of Three-Star
KIIs and FGDs.
WASH in Schools? scale-up, including country monitoring/
meeting needs of progress reports and
Are there any trade-
girls and boys (and independent evaluation
offs in terms of quality,
men and women) of reports (where available).
effectiveness, scalability,
different ages and
equity and inclusiveness? 3. KIIs (UNICEF,
abilities, including
government - national
How can this be those at risk of being
and sub-national,
addressed? left behind.
community leaders,
Breakdown of implementing partners,
available budget CSOs, programme
for programme development partners)
management and
4. FGDs with teachers
activities - including
activities to meet the 5. FGDs with parents
needs of girls and
boys (and men and 6. Review of School
women) of different Development Plans
ages and abilities,
including those at
risk of being left
behind.
Capacity and reach
of implementing
partners.
Availability of
technical support
from implementing
partners and country
teams.
Formative Evaluation of UNICEF Three Star Approach for WASH in Schools in the Pacific 79
Final Report
3.2 To what extent is Coherence between 1. Review of 3-Star Detailed
implementation of the WASHBAT analyses approach programme information
Three Star Approach and implementing design documents, on resourcing
for WASH in Schools in strategies for the implementing strategies, (finances,
each country based on a Three Star Approach M&E Frameworks, human
clear understanding and in different contexts. budgets, monitoring resources,
strategy for achieving and progress reports equipment
Coherence between
results in that context? – including the extent and materials,
Three Star Approach
to which they address technical
How can this be implementing
inclusiveness and support)
strengthened? strategies, Theory of
resilience.
Changes and M&E
Frameworks. 2. KIIs (UNICEF,
Government, teachers,
Extent to which
community leaders,
progress reporting
implementing partners,
reflects on
CSOs, development
achievement of
partners)
results, associated
challenges (including 3. FGDs with teachers
resourcing) and how
to overcome them.
3.3 To what extent are Extent to which 1. Review of UNICEF Detailed
outputs achieved on time outputs are delivered Three Star Approach, budgets
and within budget? according to work WASH in Schools and and financial
plans and budget WASH programme records
What are the main
allocations. documents and
factors influencing this?
monitoring/ progress
How can this be reports at regional and
strengthened? country level – including
the extent to which they
address gender equality,
inclusiveness and
resilience
2. KIIs (UNICEF,
implementing partners,
programme development
partners, government -
national and sub-national)
3. FGDs with teachers
3.4 To what extent Coherence between 1. Review of UNICEF
coherence and the ThreeStar 3-Star, WASH in Schools
harmonisation of Approach and other and WASH programme
programmes and UNICEF programmes documents and reports
approaches used to to strengthen WASH – including the extent
leverage efficiencies? in Schools/WASH. to which they address
inclusiveness and
What are the main Coherence
resilience.
factors influencing this? between the 3-Star
approach and other 2. KIIs (UNICEF,
How can this be
development partner Government, community
strengthened?
programmes to leaders, implementing
strengthen WASH in partners, CSOs,
Schools/WASH. development partners)
3. FGDs with teachers
80 Formative Evaluation of UNICEF Three Star Approach for WASH in Schools in the Pacific
Final Report
Evaluation criterion: Effectiveness
Evaluation Question 4: Is the Three Star Approach for WASH in Schools contributing to an enabling environment, demand,
supply and quality to strengthen the WASH in Schools in each country, for the benefit of girls and boys (and women and
men) of different ages and abilities, including those at risk of being left behind?
Sub-evaluation Data sources and data Data analysis Data
Nr Measure / indicator
question collection methods methods Availability
4.1 To what extent Rate of schools’ 1. Review of Three-Star 1. Content analysis of
does the Three Star progression from implementation strategy, information extracted
Approach for WASH none to one, two Theory of Change, M&E from relevant
in Schools contribute and/or three-star Framework, as well as documents.
to strengthening the ratings monitoring and reporting
2. Content analysis of
enabling environment, arrangements in each
Enabling factors information from KIIs.
demand, supply and country.
and challenges in
quality of WASH in 3. Triangulation of
progressing from 2. Review of programme
Schools in each country information from
none to one, two strategies and plans
(i.e. policy, legislation document review,
and/or three-star to mainstream gender,
and finance; human KIIs and FGDs.
ratings inclusiveness and
and physical resources
resilience.
in schools, including Enabling factors
facilities and training for and challenges in 3. Review of WASHBATs
teachers; demonstrated maintaining one, two-
motivation of the or three-star ratings 4. Review of advocacy
school community to strategies to influence
mainstream WASH the enabling environment
into day to day school for safe, accessible
activities, planning, WASH facilities for boys
programming and and girls of all abilities,
budgeting; and including those at risk of
effectiveness of inputs being left behind
for changing WASH
5. KIIs (Government,
behaviour)?
community leaders,
Does it benefit girls and implementing
boys of different ages partners, CSOs, other
and abilities, including development partners)
those at risk of being left
6. FGDs with teachers
behind?
What are the enablers/
conditions for change
(including affordable
WASH infrastructure, the
star-rating of schools and
the capacity of children
as agents of change)?
How can this be
strengthened?
Formative Evaluation of UNICEF Three Star Approach for WASH in Schools in the Pacific 81
Final Report
4.2 To what extent does the Appropriateness 1. Review of monitoring/ 1. Content analysis of
Three Star Approach of strategies progress reports and information extracted
encourage WASH and initiatives to independent evaluation from relevant
behaviour change in strengthen boys’ and reports (where available) documents.
children’s families girls’ capacity and – with special attention
2. Comparative
and communities agency to influence to gender equality,
content analysis of
(e.g. eliminating open WASH behaviour inclusiveness and
information from KIIs,
defecation, handwashing at home and in the resilience.
FGDs, community
after using the toilet and community.
2. FGDs with teachers transect walks and
before eating, MHM,
Parents’ and observation.
etc.)? 3. FGDs with parents
caregivers’
3. Triangulation
What are the enablers/ knowledge/ 4. Observation during
of information
conditions for change? understanding school and community
from document
of risks of poor visits
How can this be review, KIIs,
WASH practices
strengthened? unsafe hygiene 5. KIIs (community FGDs, community
management. leaders, implementing transect walks and
partners, CSOs) observation
Evidence of parents’
and caregivers’ steps 6. Community Transect
to adopt safe WASH walks, guided by
practices at home. community leaders
Communities’ WASH 7.FGDs with students
behaviour (men and (girls and boys of
women) - Evidence different ages and
of steps to adopt abilities)
safe sanitation
and good hygiene
practices in the
community (signs
of open defecation,
conditions of
standpipes, taps,
wells, toilets,
wash facilities and
surroundings, etc.)
Communities’
knowledge and
options to maintain
safe WASH practices
during disasters and
emergencies.
4.3 Are any unplanned / Evidence of changes 1. Review of Three 1. Content analysis of
unanticipated changes in the WASH in Star Approach for information extracted
(positive or negative) Schools enabling WASH in Schools from relevant
happening in schools environment, design documents, documents.
and communities as a demand, supply implementing strategies/
2. Comparative
result of the Three Star and quality that are plans, monitoring/
content analysis of
Approach for WASH in not articulated in progress reports and
information from KIIs,
Schools (for girls and programme designs, independent evaluation
FGDs, transect walks
boys, as well as men and plans/strategies and reports (where available)
and observation.
women of different ages Theories or Change. – with special attention
and abilities, including changes experienced 3. Triangulation of
Movement of
those at risk of being left by girls and boys) and information from
output and outcome
behind)? men and women) of document review,
indicators in an
different ages and KIIs and FGDs.
What are the implications opposite direction
abilities, including those
of this? of what was
at risk of being left
anticipated.
How can it be behind. inclusiveness and
addressed? resilience.
2. FGDs with teachers
3. FGDs with parents
4. Observation during
school and community
visits
5. KIIs (community
leaders, implementing
partners, CSOs)
6. Community Transect
walks, guided by
community leaders
7. FGDs with students
(girls and boys of
different ages and
abilities)
82 Formative Evaluation of UNICEF Three Star Approach for WASH in Schools in the Pacific
Final Report
4.4 What methods/measures Appropriate 1. Review and 1. Analysis of Availability
are in place to monitor Monitoring, assessment of information extracted of up-to-
the implementation and Evaluation and programme M&E, from relevant date, tailored
results of the Three Star Learning strategy(ies) knowledge management documents. knowledge
Approach for WASH in in place to ensure and learning strategies manage-ment
2. Comparative
Schools in each country, validity and / plans at country and and learning
content analysis of
and to share lessons and comparability of regional levels strategies/
information from KIIs.
good practice between data in all countries plans for Three
2. Review of monitoring/
schools, communities, where the Three 3. Triangulation of Star Approach
progress reports and
development partners Star Approach for information from for WASH in
independent evaluation
and countries (including WASH in Schools is document review, Schools in the
reports (where available)
on achieving benefits for being implemented, KIIs and FGDs. Pacific
– with special attention
girls and boys of different and consolidation of
to gender equality,
ages and abilities, and good practice (with
inclusiveness and
those at risk of being left special attention to
resilience.
behind)? inclusiveness and
resilience). 3. Review of reports
Are methods/measures
from information sharing
methodologically sound Appropriate
workshops, events, etc.
and consistent with knowledge
the results framework, management 4. KIIs (UNICEF,
i.e. will it generate the and information government partners,
data required to monitor dissemination implementing partners,
implementation and strategies/plans CSOs, development
results? Do they allow in place to enable partners, community
aggregation to monitor replication of leaders)
progress and results good practice and
against the overall, MCP strengthening 5. FGDs with teachers
results framework of framework. (boys and girls of
which WASH in Schools different ages and
forms part? Uptake of abilities)
recommendations
How can it be from independent
strengthened? evaluations of
WASH and WASH in
Schools programmes
in Three-Star
implementation
strategies.
Formative Evaluation of UNICEF Three Star Approach for WASH in Schools in the Pacific 83
Final Report
Evaluation criterion: Sustainability
Evaluation Question 5: Do governments, schools, students and communities have the requisite capacity to sustain and
scale up the Three Star Approach for WASH in schools?
Sub-evaluation Data sources and data Data analysis Data
Nr Measure / indicator
question collection methods methods Availability
5.1 What are the sustainable Rate of schools’ 1. Review of Three Star 1. Content analysis of Availability
aspects of the Three Star progress form none Approach monitoring/ information extracted of relevant
Approach that can be to three star-ratings progress reports and from relevant information
scaled up and adapted independent evaluations documents from
Contributing factors
to strengthen the WASH (where available). monitoring/
and challenges to 2. Comparative
in Schools enabling progress
progressing from 2. KIIs (UNICEF, content analysis of
environment, demand, reports and
none to one, two or Government, community information from KIIs,
supply and quality, with indepen-dent
three-star rating leaders, implementing FGDs, transect walks
due consideration of boys evaluations
partners, CSOs, other and observation
and girls (and women Contributing factors
development partners)
and men) of all ages and and challenges in 3. Triangulation of
abilities, and those that maintaining a one, 3. Workshop with information from
are at risk of being left two or three-star UNICEF on key findings document reviews,
behind? rating of the evaluation
KIIs, FGDs,
What are the enablers/ 4. Observation during transect walks and
conditions for change? school visits observation
How can this be 5. Community Transect
strengthened? walks
6. FGDs with teachers
7. FGDs with students
(boys and girls of
different ages and
abilities)
5.2 To what extent does the School ownership 1. Review of Three Star 1. Content analysis of
Three Star Approach for and commitment Approach monitoring/ information extracted
WASH in Schools involve to the Three Star progress reports and from document
and mobilise multiple Approach independent evaluations reviews
stakeholders (including, (where available).
Government 2. Comparative
students, their families,
commitment and 2. KIIs (UNICEF, content analysis of
communities, school
support for WASH Government, community information from KIIs
staff, national, local and
in Schools, including leaders, implementing and FGDs.
regional government,
a focus on equity, partners, CSOs, other
NGOs, media, FBOs, 3. Triangulation of
inclusiveness and development partners)
PPPs, other development content analyses
reaching those who
partners) to support 3. FGDs with teachers from document
are at risk of being
WASH in Schools review, KIIs and
programmes? left behind 4. FGDs with parents FGDs.
Community
What are the enablers/
involvement and
conditions for change?
support towards
How can this be realising safe and
strengthened? sustainable WASH
practices in schools.
CSO involvement
and support towards
realising safe and
sustainable WASH
practices in schools.
Harmonisation
of the Three Star
Approach with other
development partner
WASH in Schools/
WASH programmes.
84 Formative Evaluation of UNICEF Three Star Approach for WASH in Schools in the Pacific
Final Report
5.3 To what extent are Schools’ advocacy 1. Review of Three Star 1. Content analysis of Availability of
the experiences and capacity, including Approach monitoring/ information extracted information
evidence from the the use of WASH progress reports (schools from document and analysis of
implementation of the monitoring data to and government) and reviews the advocacy
Three Star Approach advocate for change independent evaluations element of
2. Comparative
for WASH in Schools (where available). the Three Star
Students’ agency content analysis of
used by schools, Approach
to advocate for 2. Review of government information from KIIs
students, their families for WASH in
change, based on and school WASH and FGDs.
and communities to Schools
their experience and policies and strategies/
advocate to governments 3. Triangulation of
evidence. plans (including the
to prioritise WASH in content analyses
extent to which it
Schools in policy-making The role and from document
addresses advocacy
and resource allocation - involvement of Civil review, KIIs and
for gender equality,
with due consideration of Society in drawing FGDs.
inclusiveness and
boys and girls of all ages on Three-Star
and abilities, and reaching data/experiences resilience) The analysis
those that are at risk of to advocate for 3. Review of government framework will be
being left behind? change in schools and school WASH based on the rights-
based approach,
and communities, budgets (including
What are the enablers/ i.e. juxtaposing the
including those provision for gender-
conditions for change roles and capacity
at risk of being sensitive activities/items,
(including influencing of rights-holders
left behind, and students with disabilities
capacity, political and duty-bearers,
holding government and provisions for those
space, and government and considering the
and communities at risk of being left
responsiveness)? role of civil society
accountable to behind).
in representing the
How can this be support and enable
4. KIIs (Government, voice of rights-
strengthened? change
UNICEF, community holders and holding
Government leaders, implementing duty-bearers
commitment to partners, CSOs, other accountable.
conduct robust development partners)
monitoring of Three-
5. FGDs with teachers
Star participating
schools’ progress and 6. FGDs with students
to act upon it.
Government and
schools’ resourcing
for WASH in Schools.
Formative Evaluation of UNICEF Three Star Approach for WASH in Schools in the Pacific 85
Final Report
5.4 To what extent does the Extent to which 1. Review of Three Star 1. Content analysis of Availability of
Three Star Approach resilience against Approach monitoring/ information extracted information
for WASH in Schools natural disasters progress reports (schools from document on the main-
contribute to increased and climate change and government) and reviews streaming
government, community are incorporated independent evaluations of resilience
2. Comparative
and school capacity in Three Star (especially the extent in the Three
content analysis of
to mitigate the impact Approach design, to which it addresses Star Approach
information from KIIs,
of natural disasters strategies/plans, resilience) for WASH
FGDs, transect walks
and climate change on implementation, in Schools
2. Review of government and observation
WASH in Schools and M&E and learning (design,
and school WASH
WASH - including for girls 3. Triangulation of planning, and
Stakeholders’ policies and strategies/
and boys (and men and content analyses implement-
awareness of the risk plans (especially the
women) of different ages from document tation)
of natural disasters extent to which it
and abilities, including reviews, KIIs, FGDs,
and climate change addresses resilience)
those at risk of being left transect walks and
and how to mitigate
behind? 3. Review of government observation
its impact on WASH
and school WASH
What are the enablers/ in Schools
budgets (including
conditions for change
provision for resilience)
(including influencing
capacity, political 4. KIIs (Government,
space, and government UNICEF, community
responsiveness)? leaders, implementing
partners, CSOs, other
How can this be
development partners)
strengthened
5. FGDs with teachers,
especially in schools
impacted by natural
disasters and climate
change
6. FGDs with students,
especially in schools
impacted by natural
disasters and climate
change
7. Transect walks (schools
and communities),
especially in schools and
communities impacted
by natural disasters and
climate change
8. Observation during
schools and community
visits, especially in
schools and communities
impacted by natural
disasters and climate
change.
86 Formative Evaluation of UNICEF Three Star Approach for WASH in Schools in the Pacific
Final Report
ANNEX V: ORIGINAL AND REVISED
EVALUATION QUESTIONS18
ecnaveleR
Original Evaluation Questions Revised Evaluation Questions
Key Evaluation Questions Key Evaluation Questions Justification for change
Nr Question/s Nr Question/s
OR 1 To what extent are the RR 1 Do the objectives and design The revised question emphasises
objectives of WASH in of the Three Star Approach the evaluation’s focus on the
Schools still valid for PICTs for WASH in Schools address Three Star Approach for WASH
(given their context) and respond to changing in Schools, rather than WASH in
global, country and schools’ Schools in general. The question
WASH needs, policies and is re-phrased to emphasises the
priorities, as well as those of conceptualisation and design of
girls and boys (and men and the Three Star Approach, rather
women), including those at than its implementation (which is
risk of being left behind? dealt with under Effectiveness).
Dimensions of relevance are
specified and include gender
equality, inclusion and resilience
(in the sense that those
vulnerable to natural disasters and
climate change are at risk of being
left behind).
OR 2 To what extent is it aligned Different aspects of the original
to the government’s goals, question have been separated
the Sustainable Development out and are addressed under
Goals and UNICEF’s Strategic Relevance and Coherence,
Plan Goals? respectively. See RR 1.1, 1.2 and
1.3; also RC 1 and ReC 2.1.
OR 3 Is the Theory of Change of See REffi 1.2 and REffe 1.4.
the Three Star Approach for Coherence between the Three
WASH in Schools consistent Star Approach Theory of Change
with the intended impact? and longer-term WASH in Schools
outcomes is one of the indicators
for these questions.
OR 4 How can the new country See RR 1.6
programme’s objectives,
approaches and modalities be
more relevant and adapted
to the fast-changing overall
environment (economic,
social, aid-related)?
18 The following abbreviations are used in this table:
OR – Original Relevance question; RR – Revised Relevance question
RC – Revised Coherence key evaluation question; ReC – Revised Coherence sub-evaluation question
OEffi – Original Efficiency question; REffi – Revised Efficiency question
OEffe – Original Effectiveness question; REffe – Revised Effectiveness question
OS – Original Sustainability question; RS – Revised Sustainability question
OEq – Original Equity question
Formative Evaluation of UNICEF Three Star Approach for WASH in Schools in the Pacific 87
Final Report
ecnerehoC
Sub-evaluation questions Sub-evaluation questions Justification for change
Nr Question/s Nr Question/s
OR 1.1 What evidence is there RR1.1 To what extent are the The question deals with one
to demonstrate that the objectives and design of of the elements of OR 2.
WASH in Schools approach the Three Star Approach for Dimensions of vulnerability in
is relevant to the SDGs, WASH in Schools aligned the context of relevant global
specifically to the aim of with changing global priorities are specified.
leaving no one behind? priorities, including those
related to gender equality,
inclusion, the environment
and climate change
(including preparing schools
to identify, assess, manage
and absorb risks and shocks
from natural disasters)?
How can this be
strengthened?
OR 1.2 To what extent is the WASH The question is about impact,
in Schools model having which is outside the scope of the
similar impact across the evaluation.
programme sites?
RR1.2 To what extent are the The question focuses specifically
objectives and design of on alignment with government
the Three Star Approach policies/plans, needs and goals
for WASH in Schools to (see OR 2), while alignment with
institutionalise WASH the SDGs have been incorporated
in Schools aligned with into other evaluation questions.
Governments’ (changing)
policies/plans, needs and
goals in Fiji, Kiribati, Solomon
Islands, Vanuatu and FSM?
How can this be
strengthened?
OR 1.3 Is WASH in Schools having This question relates to the
any unintended effects/ impact of the Three Star
impacts on participants’ Approach, which is outside
families and/or communities? the scope of the evaluation.
Nevertheless, the evaluation will
seek to identify any unplanned /
unanticipated changes (positive
and negative) that may be
happening in schools, families and
communities as a result of the
Three Star Approach (for girls and
boys, as well as men and women
of different ages and abilities,
including those at risk of being
left behind) - see REffe 4.3.
RR1.3 To what extent is the Three The question deals with one of
Star Approach for WASH in the elements of OR 2.
Schools aligned to UNICEF’s
Strategic Plan Goals for
WASH?
88 Formative Evaluation of UNICEF Three Star Approach for WASH in Schools in the Pacific
Final Report
ecnerehoC
OR 1.4 What evidence is there that See RR 1.5. Gender equality,
the Theory of Change and inclusiveness and leaving
its application is proactive no-one behind have also been
in engaging with excluded, mainstreamed in all relevant
vulnerable and marginalised revised evaluation questions.
groups at the outset of
programming (rather than
seeing them as a follow on
– taking a ‘low hanging fruit/
easy to achieve approach to
objectives.
RR1.4 To what extent is the design In line with the emphasis on
of the Three Star Approach relevance, the question focuses
for WASH in Schools likely on the conceptualisation and
to strengthen the enabling design of the Three Star Approach
environment, demand, for WASH in Schools, rather than
supply and quality of WASH its implementation (which is dealt
in Schools in each country with under effectiveness).
(i.e. policy, legislation Elements of the Three Star
and finance; human and Approach for WASH in Schools
physical resources in are specified to highlight the
schools, including facilities dimensions according to which
and training for teachers; relevance will be assessed.
demonstrated motivation
of the school community to
finance and manage WASH
in Schools resources; and
effectiveness of inputs
for changing hygiene
behaviour)?
What are the enablers/
conditions for change?
How can this be
strengthened?
OR 1.5 What evidence is there Inclusiveness and resilience have
that the WASH in Schools been incorporated in the revised
is relevant in assessing, Key Evaluation Question (RR 1).
confronting and engaging This will also be investigated as
with the challenges part of RR 1.5; REffe 4 and REffe
of climate change and 4.1.
vulnerability in supporting
improved and inclusive
WASH practices?
RR1.5 To what extent is the Three See OR 1.4
Star Approach for WASH
in Schools integrating
appropriate strategies to
advance WASH benefits for
boys and girls (and women
and men) of different ages
and abilities, including those
at risk of being left behind
(e.g. vulnerable, minority
and marginalised groups) in
Fiji, Kiribati, Solomon Island,
Vanuatu and FSM?
What are the enablers/
conditions for change?
How can this be
strengthened?
RR 1.6 How can the on-going See OR 4
relevance of the Three
Star Approach be assured
amidst a rapidly changing
implementing context in
participating countries
(economic, political, social,
natural, aid-related)?
Formative Evaluation of UNICEF Three Star Approach for WASH in Schools in the Pacific 89
Final Report
ecnerehoC
Original Evaluation Questions Revised Evaluation Questions
Key Evaluation Questions Key Evaluation Questions Justification for change
Nr Question/s Nr Question/s
None. RC1 Is the Three Star Approach Criterion was added.
for WASH in Schools
Questions pertaining to Relevance
compatible with other WASH
and Coherence were separated
in Schools interventions
out. See OR 2. Coherence
(government, schools and
questions focus on compatibility,
other actors, including other
while relevance focus more
development partners) in
on on-going alignment and
the participating countries,
harmonisation.
education sector, schools
and communities?
Sub-evaluation questions Sub-evaluation questions
Justification for change
Nr Question/s Nr Question/s
None ReC 2.1 What initiatives are Criterion was added, together
governments in the with key evaluation question and
participating countries sub- questions.
undertaking to institutionalise
WASH in Schools and is
the Three Star Approach for
WASH in Schools compatible
with this?
What can be done to
strengthen this?
None ReC 2.2 What initiatives are
schools and communities
undertaking to institutionalise
WASH in Schools and is
the Three Star Approach for
WASH in Schools compatible
with this?
What can be done to
strengthen this?
None ReC 2.3 What are other development
partners in the participating
countries doing to
institutionalise WASH in
Schools in the participating
countries and is the Three
Star Approach for WASH
in Schools compatible with
this?
What can be done to
strengthen this?
90 Formative Evaluation of UNICEF Three Star Approach for WASH in Schools in the Pacific
Final Report
ycneicfifE
Original Evaluation Questions Revised Evaluation Questions
Key Evaluation Questions Key Evaluation Questions Justification for change
Nr Question/s Nr Question/s
OEffi 1 Is WASH in Schools REffi 3 Is the Three Star Approach Dimensions of efficiency revised
implemented in the most for WASH in Schools in accordance OECD DAC
cost effective and efficient implemented in an economic definition.
manner (deliverables and timely manner?
The revised question emphasises
achieved on time and on
the evaluation’s focus on the
budget, adequate and well
Three Star Approach, rather than
spent resources)?
WASH in Schools in general.
Sub-evaluation questions Sub-evaluation questions Justification for change
Nr Question/s Nr Question/s
OEffi Are budgets available that REffi 3.1 To what extent is resourcing The revised question incorporates
1.1 are adequate/appropriate in for the implementation of different aspects of programme
terms of amount, available the Three Star Approach resourcing to enable a more
and delivered in timely, for WASH in Schools coherent assessment of the
effective and cost efficient? adequate (Finances, Human extent to which resourcing
Resources, Equipment and matches the needs and
Materials, Technical Capacity) requirements for implementing
to achieve and sustain its the Three Star Approach for
intended results, including WASH in Schools at regional,
benefits for girls and boys country and school / community
(and men and women), and levels.
those at risk of being left
behind?
Where are the gaps and
what are their implications
for institutionalising WASH in
Schools?
Are there any trade-
offs in terms of quality,
effectiveness, scalability,
equity and inclusiveness?
How can this be addressed?
OEffi Is there a clear linkage REffi 3.2 To what extent is The revised question articulates
1.2 between budget spend implementation of the a clearer focus on the Three Star
and quality/effectiveness/ Three Star Approach for Approach for WASH in Schools,
sustainability? WASH in Schools in each rather than WASH IN SCHOOLS
country based on a clear generally.
understanding and strategy
It also enables a more coherent
for achieving results in that
assessment of the extent to
context, including benefits
which programme resources
for girls and boys (and men
are allocated and utilised for the
and women), and those at
timely delivery of outputs that
risk of being left behind?
would enable the achievement of
How can this be outcomes.
strengthened?
OEffi Are programme staff See REffi 3.1
1.3 adequately resourced?
Formative Evaluation of UNICEF Three Star Approach for WASH in Schools in the Pacific 91
Final Report
ycneicfifE
OEffi At what rate schools In accordance with the OECD
1.4 progress towards 2 star and DAC definition, the assessment
3-star level? of efficiency will focus on the
What are the barriers to them extent to which programme
achieving those levels if they inputs are converted into outputs
remain a 1-star school? and outcomes. The progression
of schools from none to 3 stars
will be assessed as an indicator of
effectiveness (see REffe 4.1) and
efficiency (see REffi 3.3).
OEffi Is there the relevant technical See REffi 3.1
1.5 capacity at the WASH in
Schools programme sites?
OEffi Does the WASH in Schools See REffi 3.1.
1.6 programme have the
institutional capacity to
achieve its programme aims?
REffi 3.3 To what extent are outputs The essence of a programme’s
achieved on time and within efficiency lies in the conversion of
budget? inputs to output and outcomes.
The sub-question is included to
What are the main factors
assess this
influencing this?
How can this be
strengthened?
REffi 3.4 To what extent is Harmonisation is a key measure
harmonisation of to enhance efficiency. The sub-
programmes and question is included to assess
approaches used to leverage this.
efficiencies?
How can this be
strengthened?
92 Formative Evaluation of UNICEF Three Star Approach for WASH in Schools in the Pacific
Final Report
ssenevitceffE
Original Evaluation Questions Revised Evaluation Questions
Key Evaluation Questions Key Evaluation Questions Justification for change
Nr Question/s Nr Question/s
OEffe To what extent does the REffe 4 Is the Three Star Approach The evaluation question has
1 Three Star Approach for WASH in Schools been re-phrased to focus on the
contribute to building contributing to the enabling four key result areas targeted
sustainable and resilient environment, demand, by the Three- tar Approach for
schools and communities supply and quality for WASH WASH in Schools, with due
and in changing children’s in Schools in each country, consideration of gender equality
behaviour as agents of for the benefit of girls and and inclusiveness.
change? boys (and women and
men) of different ages and
abilities, including those at
risk of being left behind?
OEffe When, and under what See REffe 4.2
2 conditions, do water and
sanitation behaviours change
at community level?
OEffe When and to what extent is Open defecation is an indicator
3 WASH in Schools reducing of the effectiveness of the Three
open defecation (OD)? Star Approach. See REffe 4.2
and Evaluation Matrix 4.2. As
such, it is included in relevant
data collection tools, e.g. the
observation sheet that will
be used during school and
community visits and transect
walks.
OEffe To what extent are children See REffe 4.2. Children’s
4 effective at changing their influence on behaviour change at
parents’ behaviour? home and in communities is one
of the key results areas targeted
by the Three Star Approach for
WASH in Schools (quality) and
has been incorporated into the
two over-arching questions on
the approach’s effectiveness.
It will also be investigated as
a contributing factor to WASH
behaviour change in communities.
Formative Evaluation of UNICEF Three Star Approach for WASH in Schools in the Pacific 93
Final Report
ssenevitceffE
OEffe When and to what extent is Open defecation, improved
5 WASH in Schools: household water treatment and
improved hygiene practices are
- Reducing open defecation
indicators of the effectiveness
(OD)?
of the Three Star Approach for
- Improving household water WASH in Schools. See REffe
treatment? 4.2 and Evaluation Matrix 4.2.
As such, they are included in
- Improving hygiene practices relevant data collection tools,
(handwashing and MHM) e.g. the observation sheet that
- Driving institutional change will be used during school and
in government (national/ community visits and transect
local)? walks.
- Contributing to achieving See REffe 4 and REffe
equity (Leaving no-one 4.1. Institutional change in
behind)? government is one of the key
results areas targeted by the
Three Star Approach for WASH in
Schools (enabling environment)
and has been incorporated into
the over-arching question on the
Approach’s effectiveness., as
well as sub-question 4.1 under
effectiveness.
Gender equality and inclusion
have been mainstreamed across
all relevant evaluation questions
and sub-questions.
OEffe What kind of monitoring See REffe 4.5
6 framework should be
established to ensure validity
and comparability of data in
all countries where WASH in
Schools is being replicated
in (consider which function
well and which need to be
improved and how these are
better aligned)?
94 Formative Evaluation of UNICEF Three Star Approach for WASH in Schools in the Pacific
Final Report
ssenevitceffE
Sub-evaluation questions Sub-evaluation questions
Justification for change
Nr Question/s Nr Question/s
REffe 4.1 To what extent does the The evaluation question has been
Three Star Approach for re-phrased to focus on the four
WASH in Schools contribute key result areas targeted by the
to strengthening the Three Star Approach for WASH in
enabling environment, Schools, with due consideration
demand, supply and quality of gender equality, inclusion and
of WASH in Schools in each resilience, as well as the learning
country (i.e. policy, legislation purpose of the evaluation. The
and finance; human and question focuses on the effect
physical resources in that the implementation of the
schools, including facilities Approach has on the achievement
and training for teachers; of results.
demonstrated motivation
of the school community
to mainstream WASH into
day to day school activities,
planning, programming and
budgeting; and effectiveness
of inputs for changing WASH
behaviour)?
Does it benefit girls and
boys of different ages and
abilities, including those at
risk of being left behind?
What are the enablers/
conditions for change
(including affordable WASH
infrastructure, the star-rating
of schools and the capacity
of children as agents of
change)?
How can this be
strengthened?
REffe 4.2 To what extent does the The question has been added to
Three Star Approach separate out the effectiveness
encourage WASH behaviour of the quality dimension of the
change in students’ families Three Star Approach for WASH
and communities (e.g. in Schools and to investigate
eliminating open defecation, the role of children as agents of
handwashing after using change to strengthen demand for
the toilet and before eating, WASH in Schools in more detail.
MHM, etc.)?
What are the enablers/
conditions for change
(including capacity of children
as agents of change)?
How can this be
strengthened?
Formative Evaluation of UNICEF Three Star Approach for WASH in Schools in the Pacific 95
Final Report
REffe 4.3 Are any unplanned / See OR 1.3. The original question
unanticipated changes on unintended impact (under
(positive or negative) relevance) has been rephrased
happening in schools and to focus on unplanned and
communities as a result of unanticipated changes as part
the Three Star Approach for of evaluating the Approach’s
WASH in Schools (for girls effectiveness.
and boys, as well as men
and women of different ages
and abilities, including those
at risk of being left behind)?
What are the implications
of this?
How can it be addressed?
ssenevitceffE
REffe 4.4 What methods/measures See OEffe 6. Validity and
are in place to monitor the comparability of data are
implementation and results amongst the aspects that will be
of the Three Star Approach investigated as part of the M&E
for WASH in Schools in each arrangements for the Three Star
country, and to share lessons Approach in each country. The
and good practice between assessment will make the linkage
schools, communities, between M&E, learning and
development partners and improvement of the Three Star
countries (including on Approach for WASH in Schools,
achieving benefits for girls and how it can be strengthened.
and boys of different ages
and abilities, and those at
risk of being left behind)?
Are methods/measures
methodologically sound
and consistent with the
results framework, i.e. will it
generate the data required
to monitor implementation
and results? Do they allow
aggregation to monitor
progress and results against
the overall, MCP results
framework of which WASH
in Schools forms part?
How can it be strengthened?
96 Formative Evaluation of UNICEF Three Star Approach for WASH in Schools in the Pacific
Final Report
ytilibaniatsuS
Original Evaluation Questions Revised Evaluation Questions
Key Evaluation Questions Key Evaluation Questions Justification for change
Nr Question/s Nr Question/s
OS 1 How inclusive is the WASH in The extent to which inclusion
Schools programme? is addressed in the design and
implementation of the Three Star
Approach for WASH in Schools
is assessed under Efficiency and
Effectiveness.
OS2 What evidence is there of RS5 Do governments, schools, The two original questions have
building sustainability – students and communities been merged and re-phrased into
budgets for maintenance, have the requisite capacity a single Key Evaluation Question
evidence of improvement, to sustain and scale up the about sustainability. (see RS
upgrading? Three Star Approach for 5). The integrated question
WASH in schools? incorporates the key aspects
OS3 What evidence is there of underlying the sustainability
communities effectively of the Three Star Approach for
advocating for appropriate WASH in Schools.
WASH services and The availability of budgets for
appropriate and effective maintenance and evidence of
service provision/support? improvements and upgrading
of WASH infrastructure will be
assessed under the efficiency
of the Three Star Approach. See
REffi 3.1.
Also see RS 5.3. Advocacy by
communities will be assessed
alongside advocacy by schools
and students.
OS4 What evidence is there Improved household water
of sustainable changes in treatment and improved WASH
handwashing, improved practices are indicators of the
household water treatment? effectiveness of the Three Star
Approach. See REffe 4.2 and
Evaluation Matrix 4.2. As such,
they are included in relevant
data collection tools, e.g. the
observation sheet that will
be used during school and
community visits and transect
walks, KIIs with community
leaders, FGDs with parents,
teachers and students.
OS5 What evidence is there of See RS 5.4. Resilience of
the resilience of facilities and facilities and communities will be
also of communities? evaluated as part of government,
community and school capacity to
mitigate the impact of disasters,
emergencies and climate change
on WASH in Schools and WASH in
communities
Formative Evaluation of UNICEF Three Star Approach for WASH in Schools in the Pacific 97
Final Report
ytilibaniatsuS
OS6 Have there been occasions The effect of natural disasters and
where facilities were the response from government,
damaged by a natural communities and schools will
disaster? What happened? be investigated as part of RS
Were they repaired? 5.4. As such, it will be included
in relevant data collection tools,
OS7 How long was the gap e.g. the observation sheet that
between damage and repair? will be used during school and
community visits and transect
walks, KIIs with community
OS8 Did the repair take into
leaders, FGDs with parents,
account any vulnerabilities
teachers and students.
due to the disaster? – Build
Back Better
OS9 How effective are See RS 5.2.
government and local
institutions in supporting and
encouraging sustainable and
resilient WASH behaviours?
OS10 What monitoring systems are Monitoring systems of service
there from service providers/ providers/duty bearers will be
duty bearers? assessed as one of the indicators
of sustainability. See Evaluation
Matrix 5.3 and RS 5.3.
OS11 What monitoring systems See Evaluation Matrix 5.3 and
exist that support citizens RS 5.3.
voice?
OS12 At what rate schools The rate of schools’ progression
progress towards 2 star and from none to 1; 1 to 2; and 2 to 3
3-star level? stars has been incorporated as in
indicator of the effectiveness and
OS13 What are the barriers to them sustainability of the Three Star
achieving those levels if they Approach (see Evaluation Matrix
remain a 1-star school? 4.1 and 5.1.)
98 Formative Evaluation of UNICEF Three Star Approach for WASH in Schools in the Pacific
Final Report
ytilibaniatsuS
Sub-evaluation questions Sub-evaluation questions
Justification for change
Nr Question/s Nr Question/s
RS5.1 What are the sustainable The question has been
aspects of the Three incorporated to address the over-
Star Approach for WASH arching evaluation question more
in Schools that can be directly. A sub-question has been
scaled up and replicated added to emphasise the learning
to strengthen the WASH purpose of the evaluation.
in Schools enabling
environment, demand,
supply and quality, with due
consideration of boys and
girls (and women and men)
of all ages and abilities, and
those that are at risk of being
left behind?
What are the enablers/
conditions for change?
How can this be
strengthened?
RS5.2 To what extent does the The question focuses on
Three Star Approach for key stakeholders that can be
WASH in Schools involve influenced by the Three Star
and mobilise multiple Approach to support sustainability
stakeholders (including, of WASH in Schools. A sub-
students, their families, question has been added to
communities, school staff, emphasise the learning purpose
national, local and regional of the evaluation.
government, NGOs,
media, FBOs, PPPs, other
development partners) to
support WASH in Schools
programmes?
What are the enablers/
conditions for change?
How can this be
strengthened?
RS5.3 To what extent are the See OS 3 and OS 10. The question
experiences and evidence has been phrased to focus on the
from the implementation monitoring of schools’ progression
of the Three Star Approach from non to three stars and
for WASH in Schools used how this enables advocacy
by schools, students, their to strengthen the enabling
families and communities environment for WASH in Schools.
to advocate to governments This will be investigated from a
to prioritise WASH in rights-based perspective, i.e. from
Schools in policy-making the perspective of rights-holders
and resource allocation - and duty-bearers, and the role of
with due consideration of civil society in representing the
boys and girls of all ages voice of rights-holders and holding
and abilities, and reaching duty-bearers accountable.
those that are at risk of
A sub-question has been added to
being left behind? What
emphasise the learning purpose
are the enablers/conditions
of the evaluation.
for change (including
influencing capacity, political
space, and government
responsiveness)?
How can this be
strengthened?
Formative Evaluation of UNICEF Three Star Approach for WASH in Schools in the Pacific 99
Final Report
ytilibaniatsuS
RS5.4 To what extent does the See OS 5, 6, 7 and 8. The question
Three Star Approach for has been phrased to enable
WASH in Schools contribute comprehensive assessment of
to increased government, the extent to which the Three Star
community and school Approach contributes to resilience
capacity to mitigate the in schools and communities, with
impact of natural disasters due consideration of equity and
and climate change on inclusion.
WASH in Schools and WASH
A sub-question has been added to
in communities - including
emphasise the learning purpose
for girls and boys (and men
of the evaluation.
and women) of different
ages and abilities, including
those at risk of being left
behind?
What are the enablers/
conditions for change
(including influencing
capacity, political
space, and government
responsiveness)?
How can this be
strengthened?
100 Formative Evaluation of UNICEF Three Star Approach for WASH in Schools in the Pacific
Final Report
ytiuqE
Original Evaluation Questions Revised Evaluation Questions
Key Evaluation Questions Key Evaluation Questions Justification for change
Nr Question/s Nr Question/s
OEq 1 Is WASH in Schools project Gender equality and inclusiveness
integrating appropriate have been mainstreamed across
strategies to advance gender all evaluation criteria and relevant
equality, and promote the questions.
inclusion and participation
of minority and marginalised
groups (men, women, boys,
girls and differently abled
people)?
OEq2 To what extent does WASH
in Schools prepare schools to
identify, assess, manage and
absorb risks and shocks from
emergency situations?
OEq3 Did the project contribute to
equitable participation and
benefits to various groups
(men, women, boys, girls and
differently abled people)?
Original Evaluation Questions Revised Evaluation Questions
Key Evaluation Questions Key Evaluation Questions Justification for change
Nr Question/s Nr Question/s
OEq What evidence is there of Gender equality and inclusiveness
the inclusion of people with have been mainstreamed across
1.1
disabilities/special needs in all evaluation criteria and relevant
promoting WASH in Schools questions.
for all?
OEq What evidence is there of
citizens voice – specifically
1.2
for women/girls and
groups and individuals who
traditionally are excluded or
overlooked.
OEq Are standards of service
provision, sustainability and
1.3
resilience inclusive of people
with special needs?
OEq Are women girls specifically
included in developing
1.4
appropriate strategies and
approaches to effective
WASH provision?
Formative Evaluation of UNICEF Three Star Approach for WASH in Schools in the Pacific 101
Final Report
ANNEX VI: DATA COLLECTION TOOLS
(INCLUDING CONSENT SCRIPTS)
School Observation Checklist Ethical Standards in Research, Evaluation and Data
Collection and Analysis, and the Ethical Guidelines
Script for ethical clearance and informed consent: of the United Nations Evaluation Group (UNEG). The
Data collection at schools (Schools Principal) evaluation methodology, including data collection
tools and processes, have been designed with
Good morning / afternoon special consideration given to the confidentiality and
safety of respondents, especially students.
The UNICEF Pacific Multi-Country Offices’
Water, Sanitation and Hygiene (WASH) team has Only teachers and students aged 12 years and older
commissioned an independent evaluation of its will participate in data collection, as well as selected
support to strengthen WASH in schools in the region. parents of students – mainly members of the Parent-
The evaluation focuses on the Three Star Approach, Teacher Association. No individual will be involved in
which aims to incentivise and support schools to the evaluation without his or her informed consent,
provide a healthy and safe environment for students. and without a clear understanding of his/her rights
By conducting the evaluation, education authorities with regards to participation.
in your country and UNICEF wish to improve the
Three Star Approach, and to determine whether, All engagement with participants younger than 18
and how, current pilots should be scaled up. The years of age will be based on the principles outlined
evaluation includes five countries: Fiji, Federated in the International Charter for Ethical Research
States of Micronesia, Kiribati, Solomon Islands and Involving Children (ERIC), which are endorsed by
Vanuatu. UNICEF. Teachers, as responsible adults, will also
be required to provide additional informed consent
The Ministry of Education has authorised the after students have provided their consent. Should
evaluation team to involve selected schools in the teachers refuse to consent the participation of the
evaluation, and your school has been selected to students, this will be respected. The evaluation
participate. We are hereby seeking your permission team have also signed a Code of Conduct and
for an evaluation team comprising no more than two Child Protection policies. In addition, the evaluation
people, to visit your school to collect information as methodology and data collection tools were subject
part of this evaluation. To prevent it affecting teaching to an independent ethics review, and was adjusted
time, we proposed that data collection activities to accommodate its recommendations.
take place during break times, under supervision of
yourself or a delegated senior staff member. We would like to point out that, should we witness
or become aware of child abuse in the course of the
Data collection methods include confidential, evaluation, we have to report it to UNICEF. However,
individual interviews with teachers, and/or Focus we will in no way encourage or invite anybody to
Group Discussions with selected teachers. Focus disclose child abuse to us.
Group Discussions will also be held with selected
students aged 12 years and older. Boys and girls will We have also introduced the following safety
be in separate discussions and these discussions measures to minimise the risk of exposure to
will not involve any sensitive or taboo subjects. In Covid-19 for participants:
addition, boys and girls will take the evaluation team
on a guided ‘tour’ of their school to point out facilities • All researchers are from Fiji / Kiribati / Solomon
or achievements that they are proud of, and those Islands / Vanuatu (select as appropriate). No
that require improvement. With your permission – international researchers or consultants will
and with additional consent of participants, we would form part of the evaluation team, thereby
also like to take photos and short video clips of some preventing participants’ potential exposure to the
of the facilities and/or behaviours we observe. This virus from outside.
will be done strictly in accordance with UNICEF’s
guidance. We will not use any photographs or videos • Researchers will follow your country’s and/or the
where anybody can be recognised, except with World Health Organisation’s Covid-19 proTheory of
their written consent. For students, we will obtain Changeols in terms of frequent hand-washing or
consent from a parent or guardian. disinfection with an alcohol based hand sanitizer,
respiratory hygiene such as covering coughs,
Data collection will be done with the highest level of physical distancing of at least 1 meter or more
consideration for ethical standards and safeguards, (according to the national recommendations),
in accordance with the UNICEF Procedure for wearing of masks where distancing is not possible,
102 Formative Evaluation of UNICEF Three Star Approach for WASH in Schools in the Pacific
Final Report
as well as regular cleaning and disinfection of Do you have any questions for me now?
vehicles. We will be working with local transport Do you authorise the team’s permission to discuss
operators that are familiar with the requisite UNICEF’s programme with teachers and students?
proTheory of Changeols.
• Covid-19 prevention measures and proTheory of Signed by Principal:
Changeols will be included in researchers’ training
before evaluation activities commence.
If the principal DOES NOT AUTHORISE THE VISIT,
The evidence generated from this research will be thank him/her for his time and excuse yourself
used for this evaluation only. Individual responses politely.
will remain confidential and anonymous, unless an
individual has given permission for information to
attributed to them – even so, it will be handled with School background information and observation
utmost discretion. Participation in the evaluation checklist
will not incur any cost to your school, teachers or
students. The checklist will be used to capture background
information of schools visited. It will also be used to
If you have any questions or concerns about the capture information about WASH facilities, activities
evaluation, you can contact the UNICEF Chief of and behavior at schools, based on observation and/
WASH in Fiji: or information provided by students and staff. It
Chander Badloe cbadloe@unicef.org will supplement FGD and KII guides for teachers,
community leaders and students.
BACKGROUND INFORMATION
Date:
Name of school / community:
Urban ..……. Peri-urban ..…….
School /community location:
Rural ..……. Remote ..…….Maritime ..……
School GPS Coordinates:
Primary ……… Middle ………. Secondary …….
School level:
Mixed ……… Other (specify)………………………………..
School enrolment: ……… Boys ………. Girls
Students with disabilities: ………Boys ………..Girls ……… Total
Teachers: ………Male …………Female ……Total
Does the school have an active PTA? Yes ……. No …….
Does the school have any other formal institutional Yes ……. Describe …………………………………………..
link with the community, or other parent/
community engagement bodies? No …….
Does the school have Students’ Clubs? Do they play Yes ……. Describe role ………………………………………
any role in supporting WASH at the school? No …….
For how long has the school participated in the
Three Star Approach programme?
What is the schools’ current star rating? None ..……. One ..……. Two ..……. Three ..…….
Formative Evaluation of UNICEF Three Star Approach for WASH in Schools in the Pacific 103
Final Report
CHECKLIST
PART ONE: WATER
1. What is the school’s main water Piped water into school building…….. Piped water to schoolyard/plot……..
source? (If there is more than one Public/standpipe …….. Tube well/borehole…….. Protected dug well……..
source, check the source that is
Unprotected dug well …….. Protected spring…….. Unprotected spring……..
most commonly used.)
Rainwater collection…….. Bottled water…….. Cart with small tank/drum……..
Surface water (river, dam, lace, pond, stream, canal, irrigation, channels) ……..
No water available at or near school …….. (SKIP TO QUESTION 5)
Other (specify) ……………………………………………………….
2. What is this water source used for Drinking……. Hand washing……. Anal cleansing after defecation…….
(tick all that apply)? Flushing or pour-flushing toilets……. Cooking…….
Any other purpose (specify)……………………………………………………..
3. How often is the water source 5 to 7 days per week…….. 2 to 4 days per week…….. Fewer than 2 days per
functional? week……..
4. When the water source is functional, Yes ……. No ……. Water source is not functional…….
does it provide enough water for the
needs of the school, including water
for drinking, hand washing and food
preparation?
5. Is the water source functional at the Yes ……. (Skip to Question 5) No ……. Partially …….
time of the visit?
6. If the main water source is either Less than one day…….
not or partially functional now, how More than one day and less than one week…….
long has it been non-functional/
More than one week and less than one month…….
partially functional?
More than one month…….
7. When the water source is functional, Yes ……. No ……. Don’t know…….
does it provide enough water for the (If possible, make a rough estimate if the school meets WHO/UNICEF guideline
needs of the school, including water
standards of 5 liters per person per day for all students and staff in the school. If
for drinking and hand washing?
this is not possible, check “don’t know”.)
8. Is there an acceptable alternative Yes ……. No …….
school water supply available
when the mains supply is a non-
functional?
9. Is water from the source used at Always……. (Skip to Question 9) Sometimes……. Never…….
school treated in any way to make it
safer to drink?
10. If water is not always treated, why Water source is considered safe……..
not? (Tick all that apply) School does not have filters or sufficient purification chemicals……..
Nobody at the school knows how to treat water……..
The school principal does not know if it is necessary or not……..
School staff do not have the time to do it……..
Most students drink bottled water purchased and/or brought from home……..
Other (specify) ………………………………………………………….
104 Formative Evaluation of UNICEF Three Star Approach for WASH in Schools in the Pacific
Final Report
11. If water is always or sometimes Boiling……..
treated, how is water from the Chlorination (any kind, including the use of bleach)……..
school water source usually treated
Straining it through a cloth……..
before drinking? (Tick only one.
If more than one method is used, Using a water filter (ceramic, sand, composite, etc.) ……..
choose the one used by most Solar disinfection……..
students.)
Letting it stand and settle……..
Other (specify) ……………………………………………….
12. Are drinking water storage Yes ……. No ……. There are no storage containers…….
containers properly covered?
13. What vessel (cup, glass, etc.) do Their own reusable drinking vessel……..
children normally used to drink Are disposable drinking vessel (used one time only, e.g. a paper cup)……..
water? (check one)
A shared drinking vessel (e.g. a shared cup or ladle)……..
Directly from the faucet or hand pump spout……..
Other (specify) …………………………………………………….
14. Are drinking water facilities All facilities are accessible…….. Some are accessible…….. None are
accessible to children with physical accessible……..
disabilities?
15. Can the youngest children in the Yes ……. No …….
school there drinking water by
themselves?
16. Do children bring their own drinking Most children bring water from home……..
water from home Some children bring water from home……..
No children bring water from home……..
PART TWO: SANITATION
1. Does the school have any pit latrine/
toilet facilities? (Tick 1; the toilet
can be a pit latrine, an improved Yes ……. No ……. (If no, skip to Part 4)
pit latrine, a flush toilet, pour-flush
toilet, or a composting toilet.)
2. What type of toilet facilities are there Flash / pour flush…….
in the school? (Tick all that apply) Pit latrine…….
Ventilated improved Pit Latrine (VIP)…….
Pit latrine with slab…….
Pit latrine without slab/open pit…….
Composting toilet…….
Bucket…….
Hanging toilet/hanging latrine…….
No facility (open defecation)…….
Other (specify) ……………………………………………………………………….
Formative Evaluation of UNICEF Three Star Approach for WASH in Schools in the Pacific 105
Final Report
3. How many functional pit latrine ……. Exclusively for girls (insert number), of which ……. are functional;
stances/toilets are there in the
school? ……. are partially functional; and ……. are non-functional
Functional: The latrine facilities are ……. Exclusively for boys (insert number), of which ……. are functional; …….
not physically broken and can be are partially functional; and ……. are non-functional
used.
……. For boys or girls (communal) (insert number), of which ……. are
Partially functional: The latrines functional; ……. are partially functional; and ……. are non-functional
can be used, but there are at
least some problems with the ……. Exclusively for female teachers and female staff (insert number), of
physical infrastructure (e.g.
which ……. are functional; ……. are partially functional; and ……. are non-
some deterioration in concrete,
functional
doors/locks coming loose, roof
deteriorating, etc.) and some repair
……. Exclusively for male teachers and male staff (insert number), of which
is necessary
……. are functional; ……. are partially functional; and ……. are non-functional
Non-functional: The toilets exist,
but they are so badly damaged ……. For male or female teachers/staff (communal) (insert number), of which
or deteriorated it is no longer ……. are functional; ……. are partially functional; and ……. are non-functional
reasonably possible to use them
(e.g. squatting plate broken, door ……. Total pit latrines that are for the use of anyone in the school - students or
missing, roof has holes, etc.) teachers, male or female (insert number), of which ……. are functional; …….
are partially functional; and ……. are non-functional
4. In general, how clean are the pit
latrine/toilet facilities?
Clean: The toilet facilities are not Students’ latrines: Clean……. Somewhat clean……. Not clean…….
smelly, there is no visible faeces in
or around the facility, there are no Teachers’ latrines: Clean……. Somewhat clean……. Not clean…….
flies and there is no litter
Latrines that are for the use of anyone in the school: Clean…….
Somewhat clean: There is some smell Somewhat clean……. Not clean…….
and/or some sign of faecal matter
and/or some flies and/or some litter
Not clean: There is a strong smell
and/or presence of faecal matter
and/or a significant fly problem and/
or large amount of litter
5. Are girls’ latrine facilities separate
from boys’ latrine facilities?
(Separate means that the girls’ and
Yes ……. No ……. Partially…….
boys’ toilets are in different blocks
or designated areas are separated
from each other by distance and/or
physical barrier like a wall.)
6. Are girls’ individual latrine stances
lockable from the inside? Yes ……. No ……. Some…….
(Lockable means with a hasp, bolt or
similar arrangement.)
7. Does the school also have urinals? Yes ……. No …….
8. If there are individual urinal units,
Boys…….
how many are there? (Insert
Male teachers and staff…….
number)
9. If there are continuous urinal walls/
Boys: …….meters
gutters, what is the total length?
(Enter total length of all continuous Male teachers and staff: …….meters
urinals in the school, in meters) No continuous urinals……
106 Formative Evaluation of UNICEF Three Star Approach for WASH in Schools in the Pacific
Final Report
10. What facilities and programs are Menstrual hygiene education sessions for girls……..
there in the school for promoting Private washing facilities for cloth napkins (such as a tap and basin inside
safe and private menstrual hygiene
lockable toilet stall)……..
for older girls (tick all that apply)
Private disposal/incineration facilities for disposable napkins……..
Any kind of napkin distribution programme……..
Other (specify) ……………………………………………………….
None……..
Don’t know……..
Are pit latrines/toilets accessible to
Yes ……. No ……. Some…….
children with disabilities?
Are some pit latrines/toilets
available in the school designed for Yes ……. No …….
younger children?
Was there a de-worming programme
for children in the school sometime
during the current school year or the
previous school year? (Tick 1: De- Yes ……. No ……. (If no, skip to Part 3)
worming programs are sometimes
referred to as anti-helminth infection,
or anti-STH programs)
What was the frequency of the de- Children received de-worming medicine 2 or more times during the year……..
worming programme? (Tick one) Children received de-worming medicine once during the year……..
Other (specify) ………………………………………….
Don’t know……..
PART THREE: HYGIENE
1. Is hygiene taught at the school? Yes ……. No ……. (If no, skip to Question 6)
2. How is hygiene taught at the school? As a component of the core curriculum (e.g. in science classes)……..
(check all that apply) As an integral part of a special module on healthy living / life skills……..
As a stand-alone special module on hygiene exclusively……..
Through school-sponsored extracurricular programmes (e.g. Sanitation
Clubs)……..
Only sporadically/informally/occasionally…….
Other (specify) ………………………………………………….
3. Is hand washing with soap (or ash) a
prominent part of hygiene lessons? Yes ……. No ……. Partially……. Don’t know…….
(Check one)
4. It is the importance of the use of
soap (or ash) when washing hands
Yes ……. No ……. Partially……. Don’t know…….
stressed in the hygiene education
material?
5. Is there a designated time period
allotted for students to wash their Yes ……. No ……. Don’t know…….
hands before eating?
Formative Evaluation of UNICEF Three Star Approach for WASH in Schools in the Pacific 107
Final Report
6. Are students encouraged to transmit Yes, through the hygiene lessons and/or education material that encourages
hygiene knowledge to their families students to talk about or demonstrate good hygiene practices at home……..
and communities? (Tick all that
Yes, through regular school-sponsored outreach events (e.g. plays/songs on
apply)
hygiene by students for parents visiting the school, community sanitation
surveys conducted by students, etc.) ……..
Yes, but only sporadically/informally/occasionally……..
No……..
Don’t know…….
Other (specify) ………………………………………………….
7. Does the school have hand washing
Yes ……. No ……. (If no, skip to Part 5)
facilities?
8. What kind of hand washing facilities Running water from a pipe system or tank (such as a sink)……..
does the school have? (Tick one Hand-poured water system (such as from a bucket or ladle)……..
only; choose the system normally
Basin/bucket (hand washing is done in the water, i.e. water is not running or
used by most of the students
poured) ……..
Other (specify) ………………………………………………….
9. How many hand washing facilities ……. Inside toilet blocks or very close to toilets
are there? (Enter number of facilities) ……. In classrooms
……. Within the school grounds, but not close to toilets
……..Other (specify) ………………………………………….
10. Are there separate hand washing Yes …….
facilities for older and younger No …….
students?
There is no handwashing facilities at the school ……..
11. Does the location of hand washing No, the hand washing facilities are located in a place that can easily and safely
facilities at the school make it be accessed by male and female students of all ages, including those with
difficult for any particular students
disabilities……………..
to access easily and safely?
Yes, the location of hand washing facilities makes it difficult for some students
to access it easily and safely ……………
If yes, who cannot access the hand washing facilities easily and safely?
………………………………………………
12. At the time of the visit, was water Yes, in all facilities visited……..
available at the hand washing Yes, in more than 50% of the facilities visited……..
facilities?
Yes, but only in 50% or fewer of the facilities visited……..
No water was available………
13. At the time of the visit, was soap or Yes, in all facilities visited……..
ash available at the hand washing Yes, in more than 50% of the facilities visited……..
facilities?
Yes, but only in 50% or fewer of the facilities visited……..
No soap or ash was available………
14. Are the hand washing facilities
All facilities are accessible…….. Some are accessible……..
accessible to children with physical
None are accessible……..
disabilities?
15. Are the hand washing facilities
accessible to younger children?
All facilities are accessible…….. Some are accessible……..
(Can they access them, and can
None are accessible……..
they reach both the soap or ash and
water?)
108 Formative Evaluation of UNICEF Three Star Approach for WASH in Schools in the Pacific
Final Report
PART FOUR: WASTE DISPOSAL
1. How is solid waste (garbage, Thrown on a garbage dump within or near the school grounds……..
rubbish) disposed at the school? Buried within or near the school grounds……..
(Tick one)
Burned within or near the school grounds……..
Collected and taken away by a waste disposal service……..
Other (specify) ……………………………………………………….
Don’t know……..
2. How often is solid waste disposed of At least once a day……..
all collected? (Tick one) Between once every 2 days and once a week……..
Less frequently than once a week……..
Other (specify) ………………………………………….
Don’t know……..
3. If the school has an on-site
sanitation system (pit latrine,
composting toilet, septic tank), is Yes ……. No ……. Don’t know…….
there a schedule for emptying and
disposing of the sludge?
4. It is the sludge disposed of safely?
(Where is it dumped? If it is simply
dumped in an open garbage pit, in Yes ……. No ……. Partially……. Don’t know…….
a vacant lot, in a stream, etc., select
No.)
5. At the time of the visit, are the pits/ Yes, in all facilities visited……..
composting chambers/septic tanks Yes, in more than 50% of the facilities visited……..
obviously too full or over-flowing?
Yes, but only in 50% or fewer of the facilities visited……..
No, in none of the facilities visited……..
Unable to observe……..
6. Does the school have a drainage
system for removing waste water
from the school grounds? (Draining
Yes ……. No …….
should include provision for
Yes, but only a partial or incomplete system …….
removing stormwater, grey water
from hand washing stations, waste
drinking water, etc.)
7. If yes, is the drainage system
Yes ……. No ……. Partially…….
functional at the time of the visit
PART FIVE: OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE
1. To the best knowledge of the head Ministry of Water (or equivalent)……..
teacher, what entity has the primary Ministry of Education……..
responsibility for operation and
District government……..
maintenance/repair of the school’s
water system? (Tick one) Local government……..
The school itself…….. If so, who exactly at the school is responsible for this?
………........................................………
Another body (specify) …………………………………………….
Head teacher does not know who is responsible……..
2. In the opinion of the Head
Teacher, are the school water
Yes ……. No ……. Partially……. Don’t know…….
facilities successfully operated and
maintained/repaired? (Tick one)
Formative Evaluation of UNICEF Three Star Approach for WASH in Schools in the Pacific 109
Final Report
3. If the water supply system is not Unclear responsibilities for operation and/or maintenance……..
functional or partially functional at For operation and/or maintenance practices……..
the time of the visit, what are the
Lack of spare parts……..
main reasons? (Tick all that apply)
Lack of operation consumables (fuel, electricity, etc.)……..
Poor initial design of the system……..
Age of the system……..
Other (specify) ……………………………………………………….
Don’t know……..
4. To the best knowledge of the head Ministry of Water (or equivalent)……..
teacher, what entity has the primary Ministry of Education……..
responsibility for maintenance and
District government……..
repair of the school’s sanitation
facilities? (Tick one) Local government……..
The school itself……..
Another body (specify) ……………………………………………….
Head teacher does not know who is responsible……..
5. In the opinion of the Head
Teacher, are the school sanitation
Yes ……. No ……. Partially……. Don’t know…….
facilities successfully operated and
maintained/repaired? (Tick one)
6. Within the school, who is Custodial/cleaning staff……..
responsible for cleaning the toilet Teachers……..
facilities? (Tick all that apply)
Students……..
Someone else (specify) ………………………………………….
Don’t know……..
7. If students have some toilet cleaning Girls usually clean their own toilets……..
responsibilities, what are the Boys usually clean their own toilets……..
respective responsibilities of girls
Girls usually clean their own and boys’ toilets……..
and boys? Tick all that apply)
Boys usually clean their own and girls’ toilets……..
Girls usually clean teachers’ toilets……..
Boys usually clean teachers’ toilets……..
Goals and boys usually clean teachers’ toilets……..
Other specify) …………………………………………….
8. Are toilet cleaning duties assigned
to students as punishment for
Yes ……. No ……. Sometimes……. Don’t know…….
misbehaviour or poor school
performance?
110 Formative Evaluation of UNICEF Three Star Approach for WASH in Schools in the Pacific
Final Report
Schedule for semi-structured KIIs and FGDs with The interview / discussion is expected to last for no
adults more than one hour.
Informed Consent: Focus Group Discussions If you agree to participate in the evaluation, I can
assure you that:
Good morning / afternoon • There are no right or wrong answers to the
questions. You can answer each question in a way
My name is ……., and I am working for Talanoa that you believe is appropriate.
Consulting, Fiji. We have been commissioned by • Nobody will know that it was you who answered
UNICEF to conduct and evaluation of an initiative they these questions. Your names will not be written
are implementing – the Three Star Approach. This down next to your answers, and nobody will be
approach aims to help schools become healthier and able to identify that you were the person who
safer through handwashing and improved hygiene. provided these answers.
• The information you provide will be kept
We would like to hear your views and thoughts about confidential. We will not share it with anybody in a
the way in which the Three Star Approach has been way that they would be able to identify you.
implemented in your school and what difference, if • Your answers will be mixed with those of all the
any, it is making to hygiene practices and behaviour. other people participating in the evaluation and a
This will help us to understand what is working computer will help us to summarise this.
well and what is not working well, which will help • You can end your participation in the interview /
UNICEF to improve their programme. This evaluation discussion at any time, and you can ask to skip any
will not benefit you directly. It is designed to learn questions that you do not want to answer.
about Three Star Approach so that more schools can
become a healthier and safer learning environment. If you have any questions or concerns about the
evaluation, you can contact the UNICEF Chief of
Your participation in this interview / discussion is WASH in Fiji:
voluntary. It will be much appreciated if you agree to
participate, but should you not want to participate, Chander Badloe: cbadloe@unicef.org
there will be no negative consequences for you. It will
not affect your position at the school, or your current Do you have any questions before we start the
or future dealings with UNICEF or the organisations interview/discussion?
it works with to implement the Three Star Approach.
We would like to point out that, should we witness Do you agree to take part in this interview /
or become aware of child abuse in the course of the discussion?
evaluation, we have to report it to UNICEF.
For FGDs
Signed by participants:
1. 6.
2. 7.
3. 8.
4. 9.
5. 10.
OR
Formative Evaluation of UNICEF Three Star Approach for WASH in Schools in the Pacific 111
Final Report
For KIIs
Signed by informant: _________________________
If any person DOES NOT AGREE TO BE INTERVIEWED, thank him/her for his time and allow him/her to be
excused from the discussion (or excuse yourself politely).
Administrative Information (FGDs)
Date: _________________________
Name of School / Community: _________________________
Participant Gender (mark one):
MALE FEMALE
Participant details:
Period employed at
Nr Position at school DISABILITY(IES) - Describe
school
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
For KIIs: Informant title / position: _________________________
112 Formative Evaluation of UNICEF Three Star Approach for WASH in Schools in the Pacific
Final Report
Schedule for FGDs with Students
Key Evaluation
Criteria Interview questions
Questions
ECNAVELER
Do the objectives • How would you describe the Three Star Approach for WASH in Schools?
and design of the • Do you believe the Three Star Approach is in line with what the government /
Three Star Approach organisation / community / school want to achieve with regard to WASH in Schools (in
for WASH in the region / country / school)?
Schools address and - Why, or why not? How can this be improved?
respond to changing
• Were you involved in decision making about which priorities implementation of the
global, country and
Three Star Approach should focus on in your country / school (enabling environment,
schools’ WASH
demand, supply, quality equity, inclusiveness)?
needs, policies
- Do you think the right priorities are being addressed? Why or why not?
and priorities, as
- What can be done to ensure that the right priorities are addressed?
well as those of
girls and boys (and • What are the new challenges and future priorities for your government/ organisation
men and women), / community / school with regard to WASH in Schools?
including those with - What needs to be done differently to ensure that the Three Star Approach help you
disabilities? to address those challenges and priorities?
• Boys and girls of different ages have different needs and requirements when it comes
to WASH. Is the Three Star Approach encouraging you to think about how to meet the
needs and requirements of younger and older boys, as well as younger and older girls?
FOR FEMALE INFORMANTS AND FGDs WITH WOMEN – PROBE SPECIFICALLY
AROUND MENSTRUAL HYGIENE MANAGEMENT.
- How?
• Students with disabilities have specific challenges to accessing WASH facilities and
their needs would be different from those of most other students. Is the Three Star
Approach encouraging you to focus on the challenges and needs of such students?
- How?
• Is the Three-Star Approach helping to strengthen WASH in Schools in ways that easy
to implement? Are the requirements set out in the Three Star Approach achievable?
FOR FEMALE INFORMANTS AND FGDs WITH WOMEN – PROBE SPECIFICALLY
AROUND MENSTRUAL HYGIENE MANAGEMENT.
- Why, or why not?
- Can you provide examples of ways that are easy to implement, and those the
Approach propose that are difficult or impossible to implement?
ECNEREHOC
Is the Three Star • What initiatives are the Government of Fiji/FSM/Kiribati/Solomon Islands/Vanuatu
Approach for undertaking to strengthen and institutionalise WASH in Schools? Is the Three Star
WASH in Schools Approach for WASH in Schools compatible with this?
compatible with • What are other development partners in the participating countries doing to strengthen
other WASH in and institutionalise WASH in Schools in the participating countries? Is the Three Star
Schools interventions Approach for WASH in Schools compatible with this?
(government,
• What initiatives are schools and communities undertaking to strengthen and
schools and other
institutionalise WASH in Schools? Is the Three Star Approach for WASH in Schools
actors, including
compatible with this?
those supported by
other development • Can you provide examples where the Three Star Approach for WASH in Schools
partners) in the supported and reinforced what Government / other development partners / schools /
participating communities were doing to strengthen WASH in Schools?
countries, education • Can you provide examples where the Three Star Approach for WASH in Schools
sector, schools and contradicted or disrupted what Government / other development partners / schools /
communities? communities were doing to strengthen WASH in Schools?
Formative Evaluation of UNICEF Three Star Approach for WASH in Schools in the Pacific 113
Final Report
YCNEICIFFE
Is the Three Star • Do you think the way in which the Three Star Approach is being implemented is the
Approach for best for this country / organisation / community / school?
WASH in Schools - Why or why not? (In what sense is it good and in what sense is it not good?)
implemented in an - How is this affecting implementation of the Approach?
economic and timely - Are there any negative implications for girls or boys, or for students with disabilities?
manner? - How can this be improved?
• Do you believe enough funding is being allocated to implement the Three Star Approach
successfully?
- Why, or why not?
- How is this affecting implementation of the Approach?
- Are there any negative implications for girls or boys, or for students with disabilities?
• How could existing funding for the implementation of the Three Star Approach be used
more efficiently?
• Is the UNICEF team supporting implementation of the Three Star Approach big
enough?
- Why, or why not?
- How is this affecting implementation of the Approach?
- Are there any negative implications for girls or boys, or for students with disabilities?
• Do you believe UNICEF staff who are supporting implementation of the Three Star
Approach have the requisite knowledge and expertise?
- Why or why not? (In which areas is this adequate and in which areas is it lacking?)
- How is this affecting implementation of the Approach?
- Are there any negative implications for girls or boys, or for students with disabilities?
• Do you believe government / your organization, communities and schools have the
requisite equipment and material to implement the Three Star Approach successfully?
FOR FEMALE INFORMANTS AND FGDs WITH WOMEN – PROBE SPECIFICALLY
AROUND MENSTRUAL HYGIENE MANAGEMENT.
- Why, or why not? (In which areas is this adequate and in which areas is it lacking?) -
- How is this affecting implementation of the Approach?
- Are there any negative implications for girls or boys, or for students with disabilities?
• Is WASH infrastructure in schools built quickly and is it of good quality?
- Why or why not?
- What are the factors that influence this?
- How can it be improved?
• Is the Three Star Approach well aligned with what other development partners are
doing around WASH in Schools?
- Why or why not? (In which areas/aspects is it aligned and in which areas/aspects
not?)
- How is this affecting implementation of the Approach?
- Who is responsible for making sure that development programmes in WASH in
Schools are coordinated?
- How can this be strengthened?
• Do you believe the resources being committed to the implementation of the Three Star
Approach is money and time well spent?
- Why or why not?
- How should resources be used differently?
SSENEVITCEFFE
Is the Three Star • What are the key developments and changes in WASH and WASH in Schools policies,
Approach for strategies and plans in your country/school/community since implementation of the
WASH in Schools Three Star Approach for WASH in Schools started? FOR FEMALE INFORMANTS AND
contributing to FGDs WITH WOMEN – PROBE SPECIFICALLY AROUND MENSTRUAL HYGIENE
the enabling MANAGEMENT.
environment, - Do you believe UNICEF’s support for WASH and WASH in Schools has influenced
demand, supply and this? How and why, or why not?
quality for WASH - Could you provide examples where UNICEF’s support has influenced WASH and
in Schools in each WASH in Schools policies, strategies, and plans in your country?
country, for the - Do these WASH and WASH in Schools policies, strategies, and plans make provision
benefit of girls and for the needs and requirements of girls and boys, as well as children with
boys (and women disabilities? Could you provide examples of this? To what extent has this been
and men) of different influenced by UNICEF?
ages and abilities? - Do these WASH and WASH in Schools policies, strategies and plans make provision
for schools and students in remote and hard-to-reach areas of the country? Could
you provide examples of this? To what extent has this been influenced by UNICEF?
- Do these WASH and WASH in Schools policies, strategies and plans deal with the
impact of disasters, climate change and pandemics? Could you provide examples of
this? To what extent has this been influenced by UNICEF?
- What are the main challenges that prevent UNICEF’s support for WASH and WASH
in Schools from influencing WASH and WASH in Schools policies, strategies and
plans in your country/school/community, and how can they be overcome?
114 Formative Evaluation of UNICEF Three Star Approach for WASH in Schools in the Pacific
Final Report
SSENEVITCEFFE
- What are the main enablers that help UNICEF’s support for WASH and WASH in
Schools to influence WASH and WASH in Schools policies, strategies and plans in
your country/school/community, and how can they be strengthened?
• How has government funding for WASH in Schools in this country changed since
implementation of the Three Star Approach started? How has the Covid-19 pandemic
affected this, if at all?
- Do you believe UNICEF has influenced this?
- Why or why not? (It will be important to explore potential fungibility, i.e. where
government funding for WASH in Schools decreases as support from development
partners increases.)
• What has been the change in your school’s funding for WASH facilities and
consumables since implementation of the Three Star Approach started? How has the
Covid-19 pandemic affected this, if at all?
- Do you believe implementation of the Three Star Approach has influenced this?
- Why or why not?
• Have you received any training on the Three Star Approach?
- Who provided this training?
- Did the training meet your expectations? Why, or why not?
- What are they key things that you learned from this training?
- How have you applied this in your work and everyday life? Could you provide
examples of this (e.g. teachers could explain how they use it to teach students about
hygiene)?
- How can the training be improved?
- Have you changed your WASH practices as a result of this training? Could you
provide examples of this?
• How have WASH facilities in schools / your school changed since implementation of the
Three Star Approach started? How has the Covid-19 pandemic affected this, if at all?
- How are the needs of boys and girls of different ages addressed?
- How are the needs for students with disabilities addressed?
- How has the Three Star Approach contributed to this (if anything)?
- What can be done to strengthen this?
• How have students’ hygiene practices changed since implementation of the Three Star
Approach started? How has the Covid-19 pandemic affected this, if at all?
- Could you provide examples of this?
- How has the Three Star Approach contributed to this (if anything)?
- What can be done to strengthen this?
• What are the current star ratings of participating schools in your country/region/district/
island/community? / What is the current star rating of your school?
- How has this changed since implementation of the Three Star Approach started?
- What are the challenges that prevent schools / your school from increasing its star
rating?
- What can the government do to help address these challenges?
- What can CSOs do to help address these challenges?
- What can communities to do help address these challenges?
- What can UNICEF do to help address these challenges?
- What can other development partners to do address these challenges?
• Have students been able to influence WASH practices in their homes? How has the
Covid-19 pandemic affected this, if at all?
- Has the Three Star Approach contributed to this?
- Why and how, or why not?
- What are the main challenges that prevent students from influencing WASH
practices in their homes and communities?
- What can the Three Star Approach do to address these challenges?
• What about children who do not attend school, including children with disabilities?
- Has the Three Star Approach enabled or encouraged schools to reach out to these
children?
- Could you provide any examples of this?
- What can be done to strengthen this?
Formative Evaluation of UNICEF Three Star Approach for WASH in Schools in the Pacific 115
Final Report
SSENEVITCEFFE
• Access to WASH facilities is a big challenge during disasters.
- Has the Three Star Approach helped to improve communities’ access to WASH
facilities during disasters?
- Could you provide examples where participating schools have provided communities
access to WASH facilities during a disaster?
- Are these facilities adequate to address the needs and requirements for boys and
girls, and women and men?
- Are they adequate to address the needs and requirements of people with
disabilities?
- What can be done to strengthen this?
- Are there examples where schools that participate in the Three Star Approach have
improved, or could improve, access to WASH facilities for hard-to-reach communities
during disasters?
- What can be done to strengthen this?
• Has anything changed in the school or surrounding community since implementation
of the Three Star approach started that you were not expecting (both good and bad
changes)?
- How is this affecting girls and boys (and women and men) of different ages, as well
as people with disabilities?
- How can good changes be encouraged further?
- How can bad changes be prevented and addressed?
• How are you keeping track of changes that are happening in schools / your school and
communities as a result of the Three Star Approach?
- Have some schools found ways of doing that others could benefit from? How can
UNICEF facilitate this?
- How can UNICEF support you to strengthen your monitoring of the Three Star
Approach?
- Are you sharing your knowledge and experience of the Three Star Approach with
other schools / communities?
- What are the biggest lessons and changes that you would like to share with others?
- What can be done to strengthen this?
• What, in your view, are the most important things that need to be in place (a) in
government and (b) in schools for the Three Star Approach to be implemented
successfully?
• What, in your view, are the most important challenges and obstacles (a) in government
and (b) in schools that prevent successful implementation of the Three Star Approach?
YTILIBANIATSUS
Do governments, • Do you believe that you will continue to implement the Three Star Approach when it is
schools, students no longer supported by UNICEF or other development partners?
and communities - Do you think it will be rolled out to other schools and areas, and nationally?
have the requisite - Why and how, or why not?
capacity to sustain - What are the components or aspects of the Three Star Approach that would be easy
and scale up the to continue implementing or sustaining without external support?
Three Star Approach • Do you believe the Three Star Approach is encouraging government, schools,
for WASH in community leaders, communities, CSOs and development partners to continue
schools? prioritising and supporting WASH in Schools?
- To what extent are they committed to making a difference for girls and boys of
different ages, as well as for students with disabilities?
- And for schools and students in hard-to-reach areas?
- What can be done to strengthen this?
• Is the Three Star Approach helping to mobilise CSOs (for example NGOs, the media
or churches) to represent the voice of students (boys and girls or different ages and
abilities) and communities (including those in remote, hard-to-reach areas) to advocate
for improved WASH in Schools, and holding school governing bodies and government
accountable to meet the WASH needs of students and communities?
- Could you provide examples where this is happening successfully?
- How can it be strengthened?
• Is the Three Star Approach encouraging governments, schools and communities to do
more to mitigate the impact of disasters and climate change on WASH in Schools and
WASH in communities?
- Is special consideration given to the needs and requirements for girls and boys (and
women and men), people with disabilities, and remote, hard-to reach communities
in such circumstances? I
- If not, what is preventing this from happening?
- What can be done to strengthen it?
116 Formative Evaluation of UNICEF Three Star Approach for WASH in Schools in the Pacific
Final Report
Stakeholder Interest in the WASH in Involvement in the Evaluation Who (specifically
Schools Evaluation and likely use for the evaluation)
Internal UNICEF stakeholders
UNICEF Multi- Responsible for the overall Development of the ToR and selection of the Chander Badloe (lead),
country Office planning and coordination of evaluation team. Ali Safarnejad (co-lead),
(MCO) (Suva) WASH in Schools at a regional Isefo Volau (Education)
The MCO WASH Programme Specialist will
and Fiji level. The MCO has a
be the evaluation manager (EM) and the
direct stake in the evaluation
primary form of contact. Relevant MCO staff
and an interest in learning from
take part in briefing, provision of documents
experience to inform decision-
and overview of the WASH in Schools
making. It is also called upon
programme in the Pacific. EM will also be
to account internally as well as
link with UNICEF EAPRO office and relevant
to its programme participants
MEL connections.
and partners for performance
and results of its programmes.
The MCO is interested in the
lessons learnt, good practice
and areas for improvement
which will inform the planning,
design and programming
of future interventions. This
evaluation will also enhance
the UNICEF’s accountability
towards governments, regional
bodies and development
partners.
UNICEF Country As the managers of country- WASH Focal Points will be the primary Fiji:
Offices) (COs) based WASH in Schools contact in each country. WASH Focal Points
Chander Badloe
- (Solomon programmes, the COs have a will provide suitable dates for the fieldwork,
Islands, Kiribati, strong interest in understanding apply for the relevant ethical clearances with
Federated the strengths and room for the respective government bodies. They will
States of improvement in the WASH in also provide logistical support with regards Kiribati:
Micronesia, Schools at a country level, and to the selection of schools/communities and Waqairapoa Tikoisuva
Vanuatu) to learn from other countries arrange travel. (lead)
some potential improvements
or risks. The relevant CO staff will be interviewed as Beia Tim
key informants as part of the fieldwork.
Solomon Islands:
Relevant will participate in debriefings,
provide feedback on preliminary findings, Abigal Tavera (lead)
be involved in the sense-making session
Frederick Saeni
and also provide written comments on draft
inception and evaluation reports.
FSM:
Cromwell Bacareza
(CFO) or
Jeffrey Ing
Quennie Go (WASH
in Schools Consultant)
Helen Piana (WASH in
Schools Consultant)
Vanuatu:
James Ward
Emily Rand
Formative Evaluation of UNICEF Three Star Approach for WASH in Schools in the Pacific 117
Final Report
UNICEF EAPRO Relevant HQ units (e.g. WASH, Development of the ToR and selection of the TBC
Office (Bangkok) education) will be consulted evaluation team.
during the evaluation process,
Participate in the findings session. Relevant
as they have an interest
units will provide comments.
in knowing how well the
programme was designed and Will be responsible for reviewing both the
achieving results, and what inception and final evaluation reports and
lessons may be applied globally provide written comments.
for organisation-wide learning.
Liaise with the evaluation manager as
required and will be available to the
evaluation team to discuss the activities,
their performance and results.
UNICEF As contributors to the WASH in Source of planning documents, financial Australia:
Australia and Schools programme, UNICEF plans and results management information.
Aaron Moore, Alice Hall
UNICEF New Australia and UNICEF New
Zealand Zealand have a keen interest in MFAT:
the results of the programme
and the improvements made TBC
to the communities. They will
be interested in the human
interested stories that can be
elicited from the evaluation, in
order to bolster their marketing.
They will also be interested if
the resources provided were
utilized as planned, whether
the results in the planned
document have been achieved
and what lessons are emerging.
External UNICEF stakeholders
Programme As the ultimate recipients of Principal source of information on the Female, male, disabled/
participants the various forms of assistance relevance, effectiveness, impact and non-disabled, rural/
provided by the UNICEF sustainability of the programme. urban students,
WASH in Schools programme, teachers, school leaders,
Through key informant interviews (KII) and
participants have a stake in parents and community
focus group discussions (FDGs) which will
UNICEF determining whether members.
be planned in a way that is most sensitive
the programme is efficient
to the group (e.g. interview young women
and effective. As such, the
about MHM by a woman).
participation of different groups
– women/men, disabled/non- Involvement will provide programme
disabled, rural/urban – will be participants with an independent platform
critical to ensure all perspectives to give suggestions and recommendations
are heard. for country, regional and worldwide
learning.
118 Formative Evaluation of UNICEF Three Star Approach for WASH in Schools in the Pacific
Final Report
NGO NGOs are partners in Key informants in evaluation interviews Fiji:
Cooperating/ implementation and have and data sharing: interviews will either be
Elan (Fijian Teachers’
implementing additional interventions in the KIIs, either with individual or multiple staff,
Association)
Partners country/region related to WASH as appropriate.
and education. They will be Vanuatu:
Feedback on operational effectiveness
interested in this evaluation as
the results may affect future and appropriateness of activities, use Mamma’s Laef, Live
implementation, strategic focus of assistance provided showing level of and Learn Vanuatu, Wan
and partnership arrangements. usefulness and quality of training. Smolbag
Participate in debriefings and provide Solomon Islands:
feedback on preliminary findings and
conclusions. World Vision
International, Live and
Learn Environmental
Education
Kiribati:
NZ Institute for
Environmental Science
and Research (ESR)
Live and Learn
Environmental Education
Kiribati Women’s
Federation (AMAK)
KIRIWATSAN
FSM: German
Cooperation for
International Cooperation
(GIZ)
Technical Technical partners have an Key informants in evaluation interviews Fiji:
partners interest in the evaluation and data sharing. KIIs to provide insight
Beth Sprunt (CBM
because the results of the into UNICEF’s processes, capacity building
Nossall)
evaluation might affect technical and
design, future implementation,
Participate in debriefings and provide
strategic focus and partnership
feedback on preliminary findings and
agreements. CBM Nossall lead
conclusions.
on a study on MHM for girls
with a disability in Fiji.
Government The government ministries in Key informants on programme Fiji:
ministries and all countries have an interest performance and coordination. Information
Udre Serupepeli (Direct
departments learning whether UNICEF’s collected through KIIs and documents.
Asset Monitoring
involved in priorities are aligned, harmonized
Provide permission to speak to children Unit), Suliasi Batikawai
implementation with the other partners and
and monitor evaluation team whilst in (Environmental Health
(national and meet expected results. Areas of
schools and communities to ensure officer), Relenshni Karan
district levels) sustainability, particularly post-
highest level of child protection and ethical (Ministry of Education,
programme intervention, will be
behavior. Heritage and Arts)
of particular interest.
Feedback on how UNICEF’s work has Kiribati:
impacted national strategies, capacity
Reetina Katokita (Ministry
building, appropriateness of activities and
of Education)
targeting.
Participate in debriefings.
Development Development partners will also Source of information on planning, finance DFAT:
partners be interested if the resources and reporting
Patrick Harm
(Government provided were utilized as
of Australia, planned, whether the results
Government of in the planned document have
New Zealand) been achieved and what lessons
are emerging.
Formative Evaluation of UNICEF Three Star Approach for WASH in Schools in the Pacific 119
Final Report
ANNEX VI: DATA COLLECTION TOOLS
(INCLUDING CONSENT SCRIPTS)
Map 1: Fiji – Viti Levu island
(implementation areas indicated with )
120 Formative Evaluation of UNICEF Three Star Approach for WASH in Schools in the Pacific
Final Report
Map 2: Kiribati - Gilbert Island group
(implementation areas indicated with )
Map 3: Solomon Islands – Gaudalcanal
Formative Evaluation of UNICEF Three Star Approach for WASH in Schools in the Pacific 121
Final Report
Map 4: Vanuatu – Penama province
(implementation areas indicated with )
Map 4: Vanuatu – Penama province
(implementation areas indicated with )
122 Formative Evaluation of UNICEF Three Star Approach for WASH in Schools in the Pacific
Final Report
ANNEX VIII: SCRIPTS FOR
INSTITUTIONAL CLEARANCE/
AUTHORIZATION
At the highest level, Ministries of Education in each well as relevant data collection tools. At the time,
of the countries would need to authorise, writing, letters were not sent to authorities and Solomon
the evaluation team to visit schools and to interview Islands and FSM, since data collection there was to
teachers, students and officials. This will be facilitated be scheduled for a later time.
by the UNICEF Evaluation Management Team.
The outbreak of the Covid-19 pandemic necessitated
UNICEF initially sent letters requesting authorisation the postponement of data collection, and a revision
for the evaluation to education authorities in of the data collection methodology and proTheory
Fiji, Kiribati and Vanuatu, in anticipation of data of Changeols. Based on a revised timeline for data
collection commencing in March/April 2020. It was collection, letters requesting authorisation for the
accompanied by a description of the data collection evaluation will be sent out anew. The revised letters
proTheory of Changeol and ethical safeguards, as are below.
Letter to Education Authorities: Fiji, Kiribati and Vanuatu
The (draft) letter to request authorisation for evaluation activities to be undertaken in-country will
be addressed, on UNICEF letterhead, to the Principal Secretary of Education (or equivalent)
in Fiji, Kiribati, and Vanuatu. These are the countries where education authorities were
informed of the evaluation before it was deferred. Therefore, the letter is aimed at informing
them of the resumption of evaluation activities.
Date: XXX
RE: Resumption of the evaluation of UNICEF’s Three Star Approach for WASH in Schools
Dear Sir/Madam
Earlier this year, UNICEF Pacific Multi-Country Office’s Water, Sanitation and Hygiene (WASH)
manager kindly requested permission for a small team (two to three researchers, including a
UNICEF representative) to conduct an evaluation of the above-mentioned programme in selected
schools in Fiji / Kiribati / Vanuatu (select as appropriate). Travel restrictions introduced because of
the Covid-19 pandemic prevented us from completing the evaluation as originally planned. We
have since revised the evaluation methodology, with due consideration of measures required
to conduct the evaluation in a safe manner for everybody involved, and we are now ready
to resume evaluation activities. We hereby kindly request your permission to conduct data
collection in your country between (select as appropriate): 16th October and 13th November
2020 (Fiji); 18th January and 5th February 2021 (Kiribati & Vanuatu).
You have been leading, with UNICEF’s support, a significant pilot of the Three Star Approach
to incentivise schools to provide a healthy and safe environment for students. It is now a good
time to come together to see how this has worked, and whether and how these pilots should
be scaled up. While the Covid-19 pandemic is distressing, it is also a timely reminder of the
importance of WASH in schools. Therefore, the scope of the evaluation now includes an
assessment of schools’ readiness and resilience in the face of pandemics such as this.
Permission is hereby sought for the evaluating team to interview selected staff members of
your Ministry at the national and sub-national levels, and to visit up to eight schools where
further information will be collected from teachers and students to understand how the
Approach has been implemented, and to what effect. The timing of data collection activities will
be coordinated with school principals so that it does not affect teaching time. It is anticipated
that data collection will mainly take place during break times or after school, under supervision
of the principal or a senior staff member.
Formative Evaluation of UNICEF Three Star Approach for WASH in Schools in the Pacific 123
Final Report
Data collection will be done with the highest level of consideration for ethical practices and
safeguards, in accordance with the UNICEF Procedure for Ethical Standards in Research,
Evaluation and Data Collection and Analysis and the Ethical Guidelines of the United Nations
Evaluation Group (UNEG). All engagement with participants younger than 18 years of age will
be based on the principles outlined in the International Charter for Ethical Research Involving
Children (ERIC), which are endorsed by UNICEF.
The evaluation methodology, including data collection tools and processes, have been designed
with special consideration of respondents’ confidentiality and safety. Data collection methods
include confidential, individual interviews with teachers, and/or Focus Group Discussions with
selected teachers. Focus Group Discussions will also be held with selected students. Boys and
girls will be in separate discussions and these discussions will not involve any sensitive or taboo
subjects. In addition, boys and girls will also take the evaluation team on a guided ‘tour’ of their
school to point out facilities or achievements that they are proud of, and those that may require
improvement. No individual will be involved in the evaluation without his or her informed
consent, and without a clear understanding of his/her rights with regards to participation.
Teachers, as responsible adults, will also be required to provide additional informed consent
after students have provided their consent. Should teachers refuse to consent the participation
of the students all, this will be respected.
In addition, we have introduced the following safety measures to minimise risk for participants:
All researchers are from Fiji / Kiribati / Vanuatu (select as appropriate). No international
researchers or consultants will form part of the evaluation team in your country, thereby
preventing participants’ potential exposure to the virus from outside.
Researchers will follow your country’s and/or the World Health Organisation’s Covid-19 proTheory
of Changeols in terms of frequent hand-washing or disinfection with an alcohol based hand
sanitizer, respiratory hygiene such as covering coughs, physical distancing of at least 1 meter or
more (according to the national recommendations), wearing of masks where distancing is not
possible, as well as regular cleaning and disinfection of vehicles. We will be working with local
transport operators that are familiar with the requisite proTheory of Changeols.
Covid-19 prevention measures and proTheory of Changeols will be included in researchers’
training before evaluation activities commence.
Preliminary findings and lessons from the evaluation will be shared with your Ministry once the
collected data have been analysed, and you will be provided with an opportunity to discuss this
with the evaluation team and help them to further refine it.
The evidence generated from the research will be used for this evaluation only. Individual
responses will remain confidential and anonymous, unless an individual has given permission
for information to be attributed to him or her – even so, it will be done with utmost discretion.
Participation in the evaluation will not incur any cost to your Ministry, schools or individuals.
It would be much appreciated if a signed letter of permission on your institution’s letterhead
could be provided should you find this agreeable. Please do not hesitate to contact me should
any further information be required.
Sincerely,
Chander Badloe
Ali Safarnejad
124 Formative Evaluation of UNICEF Three Star Approach for WASH in Schools in the Pacific
Final Report
Letter to Education Authorities: Solomon Islands
The proposed letter to request authorisation for evaluation activities in-country will be addressed,
on UNICEF letterhead, to the Principal Secretary of Education (or equivalent) in Solomon
Islands. Education authorities in Solomon Islands have not been informed of the evaluation at
all. It is therefore the first notification that they will receive.
Date: XXX
RE: Permission to conduct evaluation of the Three Star Approach for WASH in Schools
Dear Sir/Madam
The UNICEF Pacific Multi-Country Office’s Water, Sanitation and Hygiene (WASH) team has
commissioned an independent evaluation of its support to strengthen WASH in schools in the
region. The evaluation includes five countries: Fiji, Federated States of Micronesia, Kiribati,
Solomon Islands and Vanuatu. We are hereby seeking your permission to conduct the evaluation
in your country between 16th November and 11th December 2020. Copies of the data collection
tools that will be used in schools are enclosed for your review and approval.
You have been leading, with UNICEF’s support, a significant pilot of the Three Star Approach
to incentivise schools to provide a healthy and safe environment for students. It is now a good
time to come together to see how this has worked, and whether and how these pilots should
be scaled up. While the Covid-19 pandemic is distressing, it is also a timely reminder of the
importance of WASH in schools. Therefore, the scope of the evaluation now includes an
assessment of schools’ readiness and resilience in the face of pandemics such as this.
Permission is hereby sought for the evaluating team to interview selected staff members of
your Ministry at the national and sub-national levels, and to visit three selected schools in each
of two wards in North and East Guadalcanal, where further information will be collected from
teachers and students to understand how the Approach has been implemented, and to what
effect. The timing of data collection activities will be coordinated with school principals so that it
does not affect teaching time. It is anticipated that data collection will mainly take place during
break times or after school, under supervision of the principal or a senior staff member.
Data collection will be done with the highest level of consideration for ethical practices and
safeguards, in accordance with the UNICEF Procedure for Ethical Standards in Research,
Evaluation and Data Collection and Analysis, and the Ethical Guidelines of the United Nations
Evaluation Group (UNEG). All engagement with participants younger than 18 years of age will
be based on the principles outlined in the International Charter for Ethical Research Involving
Children (ERIC), which are endorsed by UNICEF.
The evaluation methodology, including data collection tools and processes, have been designed
with special consideration of respondents’ confidentiality and safety. Data collection methods
include confidential, individual interviews with teachers, and/or Focus Group Discussions with
selected teachers. Focus Group Discussions will also be held with selected students. Boys
and girls will be in separate discussions and these discussions will not involve any sensitive
or taboo subjects. In addition, boys and girls will also take the evaluation team on a guided
‘tour’ of their school to point out facilities or achievements that they are proud of, and those
that may require improvement. No individual will be involved in the evaluation without his
or her informed consent, and without a clear understanding of his/her rights with regards to
participation. Teachers, as responsible adults, will also be required to provide additional informed
consent after all students have provided their consent. Should teachers refuse to consent the
participation of the students, this will be respected.
In addition, we have introduced the following safety measures to minimise risk for participants:
All researchers are from Solomon Islands. No international researchers or consultants will
form part of the evaluation team in your country, thereby preventing participants’ potential
exposure to the virus from outside.
Researchers will follow your country’s and/or the World Health Organisation’s Covid-19 proTheory
of Changeols in terms of frequent hand-washing or disinfection with an alcohol based hand
sanitizer, respiratory hygiene such as covering coughs, physical distancing of at least 1 meter or
Formative Evaluation of UNICEF Three Star Approach for WASH in Schools in the Pacific 125
Final Report
more (according to the national recommendations), wearing of masks where distancing is not
possible, as well as regular cleaning and disinfection of vehicles. We will be working with local
transport operators that are familiar with the requisite proTheory of Changeols.
Covid-19 prevention measures and proTheory of Changeols will be included in researchers’
training before evaluation activities commence.
Preliminary findings and lessons from the evaluation will be shared with your Ministry once the
collected data have been analysed, and you will be provided with an opportunity to discuss this
with the evaluation team and help them to further refine it.
The evidence generated from the research will be used for this evaluation only. Individual
responses will remain confidential and anonymous, unless an individual has given permission
for information to be attributed to him or her – even so, it will be done with utmost discretion.
Participation in the evaluation will not incur any cost to your Ministry, schools or individuals.
It would be much appreciated if a signed letter of permission on your institution’s letterhead
could be provided should you find this agreeable. Please do not hesitate to contact me should
any further information be required.
Sincerely,
Chander Badloe
Ali Safarnejad
126 Formative Evaluation of UNICEF Three Star Approach for WASH in Schools in the Pacific
Final Report
Letter to Education Authorities: FSM
The proposed letter to request authorisation for evaluation activities in-country will be addressed, on UNICEF
letterhead, to the Principal Secretary of Education (or equivalent) in FSM. They have not been informed of
the evaluation at all. It is therefore the first notification that they will receive.
Date: XXX
RE: Permission to conduct evaluation of the Three Star Approach for WASH in Schools
Dear Sir/Madam
The UNICEF Pacific Multi-Country office’s Water, Sanitation and Hygiene (WASH) team has commissioned an
independent evaluation of its support to strengthen WASH in schools in the region. The evaluation includes five
countries: Fiji, Federated States of Micronesia, Kiribati, Solomon Islands and Vanuatu. We are hereby seeking
your permission to conduct the evaluation in your country between 9th November and 20th November 2020.
You have been leading, with UNICEF’s support, a pilot of the Three Star Approach to incentivise schools to
provide a healthy and safe environment for students. It is now a good time to come together to see how
this has worked, and whether and how these pilots should be scaled up. While the Covid-19 pandemic is
distressing, it is also a timely reminder of the importance of WASH in schools. Therefore, the evaluation will
aim to also gain a better understanding of schools’ readiness and resilience in the face of pandemics such as
this.
Permission is hereby sought for the evaluating team to interview selected staff members of your Ministry at the
national and sub-national levels to understand how the Approach has been implemented, and to what effect.
Given that implementation of the Three Star Approach in FSM started relatively recently, schools (teachers and
students) will not be involved in data collection. Due to travel restrictions introduced because of the Covid-19
pandemic, all data collection will be done remotely by telephone, Skype, Zoom, etc.
Data collection will be done with the highest level of consideration for ethical practices and safeguards, in
accordance with the UNICEF Procedure for Ethical Standards in Research, Evaluation and Data Collection
and Analysis, and the Ethical Guidelines of the United Nations Evaluation Group (UNEG). The evaluation
methodology, including data collection tools and processes, have been designed with special consideration of
respondents’ confidentiality and safety. No individual will be involved in the evaluation without their informed
consent, and without a clear understanding of their rights with regards to participation. Should consent be
refused, this will be respected.
Preliminary findings and lessons from the evaluation will be shared with your Ministry once the collected data
have been analysed, and you will be provided with an opportunity to discuss this with the evaluation team and
help them to further refine it.
The evidence generated from the research will be used for this evaluation only. Individual responses will
remain confidential and anonymous, unless an individual has given permission for information to be attributed
to him or her – even so, it will be done with utmost discretion. Participation in the evaluation will not incur any
cost to your Ministry, or to any of the participating individuals.
It would be much appreciated if a signed letter of permission on your institution’s letterhead could be provided
should you find this agreeable. Please do not hesitate to contact me should any further information be required.
Sincerely,
Chander Badloe
Ali Safarnejad
Formative Evaluation of UNICEF Three Star Approach for WASH in Schools in the Pacific 127
Final Report
ANNEX IX: ETHICS REVIEW FEEDBACK
HML Ethics Review Board Justice or equity regarding distribution of the
burdens and benefits of research, and Beneficence
Research Ethics Review Feedback Template or the obligation to do good and avoid harm.
Review of UNICEF Research Project Materials for ERBs review research protocols that involve the
the Protection of Human Subjects collection and analysis of data from human subjects
to ensure that ethical standards are upheld. This is
to protect the rights and welfare of subjects and to
This template serves to meet UNICEF ethical
ensure that:
standards for research, evaluation, data collection
• subjects know the purpose of the study and are
and analysis, and is the record of an ethics review.
not placed at undue risk;
It is designed to ensure effective processes
• participation is voluntary and confidential;
and accountability for ethical oversight and to
• subjects are provided and agree to informed
ensure the protection of, and respect for, adult
consent prior to their participation;
and child rights within all research, evaluation,
• relevant protection protocols are in place to
and data collection processes undertaken or
assure subjects’ protection and safety, and;
commissioned by UNICEF. It conforms with
• data collection and analysis does not result in the
the UNICEF Procedure for Ethical Standards
violation of privacy or discrimination.
in Research, Evaluation, Data Collection and
Analysis; Document Number: CF/PD/DRP/2015-
Before issuing approval, the ERB must determine
001; Effective Date: 01 April 2015 Issued by:
that the following requirements are satisfied:
Director, Division of Data, Research and Policy.
• informed consent is sought from each subject or
This template serves as the official record of
the subject’s legally authorized representative;
the ethics review for the project named below.
• the proposed research design is scientifically
sound and that risks to subjects are minimized;
The Purpose of Research Ethics Review • any risks to subjects are reasonable in relation to
anticipated benefits;
• subject selection is equitable;
The purpose of an Ethics Review Board (ERB) or
• safeguards are included for subjects likely to be
Institutional Review Board (IRB) is the protection of
vulnerable to undue influence or coercion;
human research subjects’ rights. These rights include
• subjects’ safety, privacy, and confidentiality are
Respect for individuals to make free decisions,
maximized.
Materials Requested for Review: Also, please include:
1. Research Protocol / Inception Report, 4. Written protocols to ensure subjects’ safety.*
containing, e.g.,: specific aims or objectives, 5. Written protocols for the protection of human
research questions, study design, analysis & subjects’ identities.*
dissemination plan. 6. Written protocols for the protection of data.*
7. Other relevant documents.
2. Copies of all Informed Consent documents.
*These may be statements incorporated into research
3. Copies of all data collection instruments. plans and/or embedded in a single protection protocol.
HML IRB is an autonomous committee, authorized Please submit your materials for review to:
by the US Office for Human Research Protections D. Michael Anderson, PhD, MPH, Chair & Human
within the US Department of Health and Human Subjects Protections Director
Services (IRB 00001211) to review and approve unicef@hmlirb.com
research involving human subjects before the start
of research, and to conduct annual reviews of that
research independent of affiliation with the research HML IRB
organization submitting materials for 1101 Connecticut Avenue, NW
review. Suite 450
Washington, DC 20036 USA
+1.202.246.8504 www.hmlirb.com
128 Formative Evaluation of UNICEF Three Star Approach for WASH in Schools in the Pacific
Final Report
UNICEF Human Research Subjects’ Protections
Ethics Review
INVESTIGATORS: Please confirm your project information and any additional information requested below.
Project Title: Formative Evaluation of the UNICEF WASH in Schools
Three Star Approach in the Pacific (Federated States of
Micronesia, Fiji, Kiribati, Solomon Islands, and Vanuatu)
2015-2018
HML IRB Research Ethics Review ID#: 291EPAC20
Initiating UNICEF Official, CO, & RO Chander Badloe, Chief of WASH, UNICEF Pacific Multi
Country Office
Principal Investigator/Project Manager Annalize Struwig, M.Soc.Sc., Principal Consultant
name, degree(s), organization, & IOD PARC, Wellington, New Zealand
address:
Other key personnel: Stuart Kinsella
David Parker
Ali Safarnejad, UNICEF Multi-country Evaluation Specialist,
Fiji MCO and PNG, EAPRO
Contracting Firm IOD PARC
Omega Court, 362 Cemetery Road
Sheffield, S11 8FT UK
Primary study site(s): Fiji, Vanuatu, Kiribati, Solomon Islands, Federated States of
Micronesia
Project duration (dates from -- to): September 2020 – June 2021 (The Inception Phase of
the evaluation was completed at the beginning of 2020.
It was then decided to defer the subsequent two phases
until 2021, due to international travel restrictions relating to
Covid-19. The methodology and data collection protocols
have since been revised to allow the evaluation to re-
commence at the end of September 2020.)
Duration of human subjects’ End October 2020 to End February 2021
participation
(dates from -- to):
Thematic Area/Areas: Health Education Choose an item.
Target population: Early childhood, elementary, primary school students and
teachers, education authorities.
Date of ERB Request 22 September 2020
Date(s) ERB Comments Returned 28 September 2020
Date Final Documents Received
DATE OF ERB APPROVAL
Formative Evaluation of UNICEF Three Star Approach for WASH in Schools in the Pacific 129
Final Report
PROCESS: HML Ethics Review Board will conduct a research ethics review of submitted materials and
make comments in red below under Additional Information Needed. We will then return this template
for responses from investigators.
Please respond reply to our comments on this form, in another colour, directly under each comment.
Please provide any revised documents and please note where any revisions to your documents may be
found by page or paragraph number.
Once we have agreed on the safely of your research subjects, we will issue a letter of approval. This
document and approval letter will be retained by UNICEF and HML ERB as a record of this review.
Additional Information Needed X or NA
Investigators: equal
Ethics Review Board
Please respond to ERB info requests in PASS
Criteria of Interest
another color below the request (for IRB
in the same box as the request use)
Section ERB Submission: Are all requested project information,
1 materials, and final documents provided separately or
incorporated in text? This includes:
1.1 Research Protocol or Inception Report, containing, e.g.,: Please keep us informed of any subject
specific aims or objectives, research questions, study protection protocol or research design
design, analysis & dissemination plan changes that need to occur in adaptation
to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Noted.
1.2 Informed Consent documents Please provide the IC for KIIs and the
Observation Checklist. See Section 6,
below.
Agreed – done.
1.3 Surveys and data collection instruments
1.4 Written protocols to ensure subjects’ safety
1.5 Written protocols for protection of subjects’ identities
1.6 Written protocols for protection of data
1.7 Other relevant documents
1.8 Have informed consent and data collection instruments Please respond
been pre-tested? Informed Consent scripts and data
collection instruments will be tested
during a session with the Pacific Adviser
prior to the commencement of data
collection in Fiji. As noted in the Inception
Report, data collection (process, tools)
will be piloted in Fiji, followed by a
collaborative reflection session. It will be
revised/refined before being rolled out in
other countries.
1.9 Are all submitted documents final versions? Please respond
No. IC scripts, data collection tools and
data collection plans will be revised and
refined in consultation with education
authorities, and to reflect feedback from
piloting.
Revised IC scripts, data collection tools
and a detailed data collection plan is a
formal deliverable that will be signed
off by UNICEF before data collection
commences.
1.10 Additional comments or suggestions
130 Formative Evaluation of UNICEF Three Star Approach for WASH in Schools in the Pacific
Final Report
Section Research Design: Do submitted materials describe the
2 proposed research? This includes:
2.1 Background and rationale
2.2 Description of methodology
2.3 Does study involve an intervention or treatment group?
2.4 Does study involve a comparison or control group?
2.5 Type of data collection: Correct.
a. survey questionnaire ….………….………….………….…
b. subject interview ….………….………….………….… X
c. key informant interview (KII) ….………….………….… X
d. focus group discussion (FGD) ….………….…………… X
e. document (desk) review ….………….………….…….… X
f. on-site observation ….………….………….………….… X
g. case study ….………….………….………….….…………
h. physical measurements ….………….………….………
i. biological specimen ….………….…………….………….
j. other ….………….………….……….….… participatory
methods – walks/story telling ….………….……………… X
2.6 Number of Data Collections: No follow up, correct?
one-time (no follow-up) …………………………… Correct.
two or more (follow-up) ………………………...…
2.7 Sample size: Total n or approximate n = Please estimate total sample size.
Across four countries (Fiji, Kiribati,
Solomon Islands and Vanuatu), a total of
40 schools will be visited; around 950
students will participate in data collection
(School Transect Walks and FGDs); around
400 teachers will participate in FGDs;
around 400 parents will participate in
FGDs; and 40 teachers will be interviewed
individually.
Across five countries (FSM, Fiji,
Kiribati, Solomon Islands and Vanuatu)
approximately 50 KIIs will be conducted
(mostly remotely) with UNICEF staff,
Three Star Approach implementing
partners, government officials, staff of
other UN agencies, and other donor
agencies supporting WASH and WinS.
2.8 Are any subjects children (<18 years old)? Please provide ages of child subjects.
Only children aged 12 years and older
will participate in data collection. This
has been included in the report, and
data collectors will select participants
accordingly.
2.9 Additional comments or suggestions
Section Subject Risks: Are risks reasonable in relation to
3 any benefits to subjects and to the importance of
knowledge that may be expected to result from the
research?
3.1 Is the project Minimal Risk Only?: This means the probability
and magnitude of anticipated harm or discomfort is not
greater than ordinarily encountered in daily life or during
performance of routine physical or psychological exams or
tests.
Formative Evaluation of UNICEF Three Star Approach for WASH in Schools in the Pacific 131
Final Report
3.2 By their participation, are subjects vulnerable to any of the Do you foresee any of these risks?
following?:
a. physical risk …….……………….…………….…………… The only risk that could apply is
b. psychological risk …….………………….……………….… employment risk, where key informants
c. social risk …….……………….………………….………… or FGD participants could get into trouble
d. economic risk …….……………….………………….…… with employers for participating in the
e. legal risk …….………………….……………….…………… evaluation. This is dealt with sufficiently
f. political risk …….………………….……………….……… through various informed consent
g. employment risk …….……………….……….…………… processes and voluntary participation.
h. academic risk …….…………………………………….…… Confidentiality is ensured, so no employer
i. religious risk …….………………….……………….……… will be able to sanction participants based
j. other …….………………….……………….……………… on their responses.
3.3 Does the study request information or opinions where
public disclosure may result in danger, limitations to future
freedoms and access to services?
3.4 In event of any of the above risks, do protocols describe and Please describe COVID-19 protection
outline clear strategies to mitigate risks? protocols for both subjects and staff
involved in in-person data collection.
These are described in Section 6.1 of
the Inception Report, and in relevant IC
scripts.
3.5 Do study objectives show that risk is reasonable in
relationship to expected gains? Are benefits clearly
articulated?
3.6 Do gender, ethnicity, or other pertinent demographic Please clarify the composition of
characteristics, -- or grouping of subjects by any of these participants leading transect walks at
characteristics -- increase subject risk? schools. It is not clear if walks will be
divided by gender or engage students and
teachers together.
FDGs are divided by gender – will any
different questions be used in male
versus female groups, perhaps on
menstrual hygiene. Will the FDG facilitator
be the same gender as the participants?
Transect walks at schools will be gender-
divided, and led by the head girl and
head boy, respectively. Teachers will not
be involved. A female data collector will
accompany girls’ transect walks, and
the girls’ Transect Walk guide includes
questions around Menstrual Hygiene
Management (MHM).
FGDs for women will be facilitated by a
woman. Except for Fiji, FGDs for men
will be facilitated by men. In Fiji, FGDs
for men will be facilitated by a senior,
trained data collector. The guide for FGDs
involving male participants has been
amended to remove discussion points
around MHM.
The revised data collection protocols and
tools have been included in a Detailed
Data Collection Plan, which has been
signed off by UNICEF.
132 Formative Evaluation of UNICEF Three Star Approach for WASH in Schools in the Pacific
Final Report
3.7 If a subject discloses or is suspected to be at risk outside of On p.49 you state, “If a disclosure
the study, are procedures in place to address or report risk of harm or harassment were to be
and appropriately refer subject for relevant support? made to the evaluation team, then the
learner would be required to share
this information with the appropriate
authorities in accordance with our
safeguarding policy and procedures.”
Please describe those procedures.
Data collectors will under no
circumstances invite or encourage any
informant or participant to disclose or
discuss child abuse.
Should a data collector witness child
abuse, or become aware that a child may
be abused, details of the incident will be
reported immediately to the Chief - Water,
Sanitation & Hygiene (WASH), UNICEF
Pacific Multi Country Office, who will
submit a Significant Incident Report (SIR).
The template of the SIR has been shared
with the evaluation team so that they
know what the information requirements
are.
Informed consent forms and the training
of data collectors have been aligned with
the above.
3.8 Is reporting abuse of minors mandatory? If yes, has Please describe
consideration been given to the impacts and consequences
of mandatory reporting? See response to 3.7 above.
3.9 If future contact with subjects is planned, does it provide for
confidentiality and data security through the research period
and beyond?
3.10 Additional comments or suggestions
Section High Risk: When subjects are vulnerable to heightened
4 risk have additional safeguards been included to protect
their rights and welfare?
4.1 Can subjects be perceived as vulnerable, including: children,
especially unaccompanied or separated (UASC); lacking
WASH, food, shelter, or medical care; refugees in conflict
or post conflict; those in natural, ecological, or disaster
settings; mothers & pregnant women; forced migrants and
illegal or undocumented immigrants; prisoners or persons
in institutions including orphanages or juvenile justice
systems; gang members; those with mental or physical
illness or disability; those with HIV/AIDS; those at economic
or educational disadvantage; persecuted minority groups,
or under high familial, peer, or social pressure? If yes, are
study-specific protection protocols provided?
4.2 Does the sampling strategy target people at risk for issues
such as: violence, torture, or abuse; sexual exploitation,
harassment, violence or abuse; prostitution or pornography,
female genital mutilation, reproductive or sexual issues;
sexual orientation; child, early or forced marriage; suicide?
If yes, are study-specific protection protocols provided?
4.3 Are subjects involved in any of the following: slavery,
including the sale and trafficking of children; forced labour,
forced recruitment to armed groups; war or armed conflict;
illegal activities, production or trafficking of drugs; economic
exploitation; work that could damage health or safety? If
yes, are study-specific protection protocols provided?
Formative Evaluation of UNICEF Three Star Approach for WASH in Schools in the Pacific 133
Final Report
4.4 Does the study request information relating to illegal
activities? If yes, is an MOU in place with government to
ensure that no participant is prosecuted? Have participants
been notified of this agreement?
4.5 Additional comments or suggestions
Section Recruitment: Do submitted materials describe subjects
5 and the recruitment process?
5.1 Are subject recruitment procedures & sampling strategy How will parents and students be
adequately described? selected and recruited? Will it be through
the local consultant or by the school?
Students will be selected in consultation
with the teacher responsible for WASH at
selected schools, or the school principal/
head teacher.
The principals of selected schools will be
requested to assist with the selection of
parents, mainly members of the Teacher
Parent Association. Principals will be
assisted by teacher responsible for WASH
at their schools.
This has been described in the Detailed
Data Collection Plan.
5.2 Do recruitment procedures clearly describe ways and
means to ensure privacy of potential subjects throughout
the recruitment process?
5.3 If subjects are children, do materials adequately describe Please describe.
ages and why these ages are appropriate?
The Inception Report and Detailed Data
Collection Plan now specify that only
children aged 12 years and older, and who
have been attending a selected school
for a period of at least 3 years, will be
included in data collection. Data collectors
are trained accordingly.
5.4 If subjects are children, are materials (e.g.: survey Please briefly discuss.
instruments, focus group topics, etc.) age appropriate?
Special consideration has been given from
the outset to the wording of informed
consent scripts and data collection tools
where children are involved. These scripts
and tools have been included in a Detailed
Data Collection Plan, which has been
signed off by UNICEF.
5.5 If children or other vulnerable groups are subjects, or if On p.42 you state “Special attention will
subject matter is sensitive, is recruitment done in a manner be given to children with disabilities and
sensitive to subjects’ potential vulnerabilities or weaknesses children who are not in school.” How will
(real or perceived) and does it ensure privacy throughout that be done?
recruitment? When teachers/principals are requested
to assist with the selection of students
to participate in data collection, they will
be requested to include students with
disabilities, provided these students can
participate safely in the data collection
activities.
Children who are not in school will not
be involved directly in data collection.
The perspectives of teachers, community
leaders, government officials and NGOs
will serve as a proxy.
134 Formative Evaluation of UNICEF Three Star Approach for WASH in Schools in the Pacific
Final Report
5.6 To what degree are subjects identified: Subjects’ names will not be recorded.
a. subjects’ names are recorded with their responses Informed consent scripts have been
……………………………………………………………… revised to ensure additional consent is
b. names recorded on separate informed consent only requested where KIIs or FGDs will be
……………………………………………………………… recorded.
c. no names are recorded ………………………………… X The revised informed consent scripts
d. other personally identifiable information (PII) is recorded have been included in a Detailed Data
…………………………………………………………… Collection Plan, which has been signed off
e. no PII is recorded ……………………………………… X by UNICEF.
f. subjects are given a unique identifier ……………………
g. other …………………………………………………………
5.7 If subject name or any other PII is recorded, are procedures
included for how this info will be kept separate from
responses?
5.8 Do recruitment procedures show any indication of bribery,
coercion, intimidation, compulsion, pressure, or force?
5.9 Is recruitment of some members of the population and not Could this be an issue for children in
others likely to result in resentment for either inclusion or schools or community members?
exclusion? Have strategies to address this been adequately Should there by any issues or queries in
described? this regard, the data collectors, teachers/
principals and community leaders will be
able to explain the selection criteria.
5.10 Are potential subjects likely to conflate evidence generation
with potential or actual goods or service provision? Have
strategies to address this been adequately described?
5.11 If subjects are paid, compensated, provided a gift for Any compensation planned?
participation, or provided other benefits or services, is the The Pacific Adviser advised that
incentive described and justified as being non-coercive? compensation or gifts for participation is
not culturally required. Where FGDs with
teachers take place during the lunch hour,
refreshments will be provided.
5.12 Additional comments or suggestions
Section Informed Consent: IC is a negotiation whereby subjects
6 are informed about the study and their rights, and they
agree to participate voluntarily. IC must be sought from
each subject or the subject’s authorized representative
confirming this process.
6.1 Type of Informed Consent: Please provide the IC for KIIs and the
a. written & signed ………………………...…….…………… Observation Checklist
b. written not signed ……………………………..…….......... Agreed - Done
c. written & signed by authorized representative.…………
d. verbal & signed or recorded……………….……….......... On p.152 you provide an IC for FGDs with
e. verbal & signed by authorized representative….………. teachers. Will you use the same IC for
f. verbal not signed or recorded…………………….………. the FGDs with stakeholders and parents
g. other ………………………………………………………… mentioned on pgs.35-36? If so, it will
need to be customized for those groups.
Consent appears to be verbal only –
please confirm.
Written consent will be obtained from
informants and participants. The Consent
Forms have been revised accordingly.
6.2 Are the processes for obtaining IC adequately described?
6.3 For child subjects, is IC being obtained from parent, Please provide the IC to be used with
guardian, caregiver, or authorized representative? If not, is schools to obtain consent to interview
an explanation provided as to why this is unnecessary? children.
Done.
Formative Evaluation of UNICEF Three Star Approach for WASH in Schools in the Pacific 135
Final Report
6.4 For child subjects, is their role in the study described
adequately and in an age and culturally appropriate manner
for them to provide written or verbal assent?
6.5 Does the IC include a clear and simple invitation to
participate, an explanation of what the subject will be
expected to do, and why they are being recruited?
6.6 Does IC state that participation is voluntary, and subject
may choose to not respond to any or all questions, or may
withdraw without consequences?
6.7 Does IC include the expected duration of the subject’s Please include on IC for Community
participation (hours/minutes)? leaders, Students, and School transect
walks
Done
6.8 Does IC include the purpose of the research presented
in simple, age, education, and culturally appropriate local
language?
6.9 Are subjects given a clear indication of who will have access
to their responses and in what form?
6.10 Does IC include a description of any risks or benefits to
subjects?
6.11 Does IC include a statement describing how confidentiality Please include duty to report suspected
(or anonymity) will be maintained, and if there are any abuse on ICs for children.
limitations to confidentiality? Done. This has been done in language
that is suitable for students.
6.12 Does IC provide identity and contact info of investigators? Please include contact information on
Is the form of contact useful and appropriate given power each IC.
dynamics and access to resources like phones and/ or Done – the informed consent scripts have
transport? been revised to include this.
6.13 Do IC materials advise subjects to keep focus group Please include in ICs for FGDs.
discussions (FGD) confidential from anyone outside the Done.
group?
6.14 Where subjects differ by type (e.g.: age, sex, risk, status,
etc.), are IC documents specific for each type?
6.15 Where data collection differs by method (e.g.: survey, FGD,
interview), do ICs cover each method?
6.16 If IC is written, is a copy left with subjects or there is Will you provide a copy to each subject or
explanation for not doing so? parent? If not, why not?
Key informants will read and sigh hard
copies of the IC scripts.
Participants in adult FGDs will all sign a
hard copy of the IC script after they have
read it, or it has been read to them.
Participant in student FGDs will all sign a
hard copy of the IC script after they have
read it, or it has been read to them. It will
then be signed by a teacher, as well.
Data collectors are being trained to follow
this protocol, and arrangements have
been made to ensure they have enough
hard copies of the relevant IC scripts with
them.
6.17 Additional comments or suggestions
136 Formative Evaluation of UNICEF Three Star Approach for WASH in Schools in the Pacific
Final Report
Section Subject Protections: Do submitted materials clearly
7 identify protection against risk?
7.1 Are all data collected necessary for the purposes of
evidence generation?
7.2 Do data analysis and reporting procedures ensure subject
confidentiality (or anonymity) and security?
7.3 If children or other vulnerable groups are subjects, do
materials clearly describe special considerations or
accommodations for their safety or protection throughout
the evidence generation including the dissemination and
communication processes?
7.4 If children or other vulnerable groups are subjects, have Please describe the training that local
personnel had experience working with these groups? If consultants will receive and their
not, what specialized instruction will they receive? experience working with children.
Mature data collectors have been
selected based on their knowledge
and experience of WASH in schools
in their respective countries. One is a
former UNICEF staff member; one is a
former teacher; two are former senior
government officials with extensive
research experience (one of them also
have previous work experience with
WHO, while the other previously worked
for the International Finance Corporation).
7.5 Have personnel collecting data from subjects had ethical Please describe
training specific to the target group?
Data collectors’ training includes ethical
safeguards pertaining to children. They are
also required to familiarise themselves
in detail with the Code of Conduct they
signed.
7.6 Are personnel collecting data aware of ethical issues that
may arise and provided mitigation strategies?
7.7 Additional comments or suggestions
Section Data Protection: Do data collection and storage
8 protocols adequately ensure subject & data safety?
8.1 Are data collection tools appropriate and constructed to
assure subject confidentiality or anonymity?
8.2 Do data collection procedures and environment ensure Where will in-person KIIs and FGDs take
subject safety and data security? place? If they are at the school, how will
you make sure they are conducted in
private?
Data collectors have been trained to ask
key informants to select a place where
they will feel safe and private to conduct
an interview.
FGDs will take place at schools, where
teachers will assist data collectors to
identify safe, quiet rooms (e.g. unused
classroom or staff room) or areas (e.g. a
safe, quiet spot on the school premises)
where discussions can take place in
private.
Formative Evaluation of UNICEF Three Star Approach for WASH in Schools in the Pacific 137
Final Report
8.3 Do procedures cover all data types (e.g., written, audio, Will interviews and FGDs be recorded by
video, observation), & are protections described for each audio or video?
type?
Where possible, KIIs and FGDs will be
audio-recorded. IC scripts have been
amended to obtain specific consent
where audio-recording will be used. The
revised IC scripts have been included in a
Detailed Data Collection Plan, which has
been signed off by UNICEF.
8.4 Do protocols describe chain of custody of data and Please describe data destruction (we
protections for data transfer or transmission, storage, de- recommend three years or less).
identification, and destruction?
The Inception Report (section on safe-
keeping of documents and data security)
has been amended as follows:
Data related to this evaluation will be kept
on IOD PARC’s central electronic server
for a period of three years, whereafter it
will be destroyed.
8.5 Additional comments or suggestions
138 Formative Evaluation of UNICEF Three Star Approach for WASH in Schools in the Pacific
Final Report
ANNEX X: DOCUMENTS CONSULTED
Akvo. (n.d.). Tracking WASH infrastructure in the schools of Solomon Islands with UNICEF. https://akvo.org/
stories/south-east-asia-pacific/tracking-water-sanitation-and-hygiene-wash-infrastructure-in-solomon-
islands-schools-with-unicef/
Australian Aid. (2019). Strengthening Pacific Health Systems: Evaluating ten years of Australia’s support.
Australian Aid. (n.d.). WASH in Schools - Learning Brief from the Pacific Regional Learning Event.
Center for Strategic & International Studies. (2020). The Economic Costs of the Pandemic for the Pacific
Islands. https://www.csis.org/blogs/new-perspectives-asia/economic-costs-pandemic-pacific-islands
Coulon, D.-H. (2020). WASH in Schools Visit to Penama Oct/Nov 20.
ESR. (n.d.). WASH in Schools.
Ethical Research Involving Children. (2015). International Charter for Ethical Research Involving Children. https://
childethics.com/charter/
Fifteenth Chuuk State Legislature. (2019). Joint House Resolution - First Regular Session April 2019.
Fiji Ministry of Education. (2012). Education in Emergencies.
Fiji Ministry of Education. (2012). Minimum Standards on WASH in Schools Infrastructure.
Fiji Ministry of Education. (2016). WASH in Schools in Emergencies - Standards.
Francois, M. C., Lauff, A., & Yamakoshi, B. (2017). WASH in Schools Empower Girls’ Education in Fiji. UNICEF
Pacific.
FSM Association of Chief State School Officers (FACSSO). (2020). Resolution Endorsing WASH in Schools.
International Water Association. (2017). Asia and the Pacific most at risk from future flooding. The Source
Magazine. https://www.thesourcemagazine.org/asia-pacific-risk-future-flooding/
International Water Centre. (2018). UNICEF Kiribati WASH in Schools Review.
IOD PARC. (2020). UNICEF Pacific Formative Evaluation of the Three Star Approach - Inception Report.
Johnson, K. (2019). Climate change could drown Kiribati, but the nation looks for Noah’s Ark. ABC News.
https://www.abc.net.au/news/2019-07-21/kiribati-hopefull-in-face-of-climate-change-rising-sea-
levels/11228658?nw=0
Keen, M., & Barbara, J. (2015). Pacific Urbanisation: Changing Times. State, Society and Governance in
Melanesia. http://ssgm.bellschool.anu.edu.au/sites/default/files/publications/attachments/2016-07/
ib2015.64_keen_and_barbara.pdf
Live & Learn Environmental Education for UNICEF. (2019). Catalogue: Resilient WASH in Schools Technologies
and approaches to Operations and Maintenance.
Live & Learn Environmental Education for UNICEF. (2019). Effective Approaches to Engage and Empower
Children as Agents of Change in WASH in Schools.
Live & Learn Environmental Education for UNICEF. (2019). WASH in Schools Programs in Pacific Island
Countries.
Mattson, K. (2017). Final Evaluation - Improving WASH in Solomon Islands Project. https://evaluationreports.
unicef.org/GetDocument?fileID=10166
Ministry of Education and Human Development Solomon Islands. (2017). Baseline Survey Report SIBLE.
Ministry of Education and Human Development Solomon Islands. (2019). Three Star Framework to WASH in
Schools.
Formative Evaluation of UNICEF Three Star Approach for WASH in Schools in the Pacific 139
Final Report
Ministry of Education Kiribati. (2017). Communication for Development 2017 - 2022.
Ministry of Education Kiribati. (2018). Breaking Down Barriers - Coming of Age, Being the Change.
Monash University. (2016). Pacific Indicators for Disability-Inclusive Education - The Guidelines Manual. https://
www.monash.edu/education/research/projects/pacific-indie/outcomes/docs/pacific-indie-guidelines-
final-tagged-web.pdf
Multilateral Organisation Performance Assessment Network. (2021). Is this time different? UNDS Reform:
Progress, challenges and opportunities. http://www.mopanonline.org/analysis/items/MOPAN_MLE_
UNDSR_Progress_challenges_opportunities_June2021_web.pdf
Naafs, A. (2019). Why hygiene matters in the climate change discourse. International Red Cross. https://www.
ircwash.org/blog/why-hygiene-matters-climate-change-discourse
National Water and Sanitation Coordination Commitee. (2018). The National Water and Sanitation Coordination
Committee.
National WASH in Schools Steering Committee. (2020). Vanuatu WASH in Schools Steering Committee Meeting
December 2020.
New Zealand Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade Aid Programme. (2020). UNICEF NZ Van WASH in Schools
Year 3 Costed Workplan and Reforecast Submitted.
New Zealand Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade Aid Programme. (2014). Kiribati Risk Table.
New Zealand Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade Aid Programme. (2014). Kiribati Results Framework 2014.
New Zealand Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade Aid Programme. (2018). Kiribati WASH in Schools Final
Activity Completion Report.
New Zealand Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade Aid Programme. (2014). Activity Design Document for
Kiribati WASH in Schools.
New Zealand Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade Aid Programme. (2016). SIBLE Results Framework.
New Zealand Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade Aid Programme. (2015). Activity Design Document for
Solomon Islands Better Learning Environments.
New Zealand Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade Aid Programme. (2016). New Zealand Partnerships for
International Development Fund Funding Arrangement - Solomon Islands Better Learning Envronments.
New Zealand Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade. (2012). New Zealand Partnerships for International
Development Fund Funding Arrangement.
Overmars, M. (2007). Good Practices in Water, Sanitation and Hygiene. Pacific Heads of Health.
Pacific Consulting Limited. (2020). WASH in Schools Improvement Planning (WIP).
Plan. (2016). Testing CLTS Approaches for Scalability. https://waterinstitute.unc.edu/lessons-clts-
implementation-seven-countries/
Redman-MacLauren, M., Barrington, D. J., Harrington, H., Cram, D., Selep, J., & MacLaren, D. (2018). WASH
systems in Pacific Island schools to promote the health and education of girls and children with disability:
a systematic scoping review. Journal of Water, Sanitation and Hygiene for Development.
Save the Children. (2020). Global Partnership for Education in Vanuatu.
Sphere. (2021). Sphere Standards. https://spherestandards.org/
Sprunt, B., Burke, L., & Loloma, T. (2019). Disability-inclusive WASH and menstrual hygiene management for
students with disabilities in Fijian schools. CBM.
UNICEF (Internal). (2016). Fiji WASH in Schools Reach for the Stars Proposal.
UNICEF (Internal). (2016). Fiji WASH in Schools SDG Summary.
140 Formative Evaluation of UNICEF Three Star Approach for WASH in Schools in the Pacific
Final Report
UNICEF (Internal). (2017). Fiji Results Framework.
UNICEF (Internal). (2017). Fiji Risk Table.
UNICEF (Internal). (2017). Kiribati WASH in Schools - Summary of Progress and other Updates August 2017.
UNICEF (Internal). (2017). Solomon Islands Learning Environment Update June - August 2017.
UNICEF (Internal). (2018). Baseline Report: Assesesing Water, Sanitation and Hygiene (WASH) in 24 schools in
Chuuk State, Micronesia.
UNICEF (Internal). (2018). Kiribati WASH in Schools Proposal for remainder of Matched Funding.
UNICEF (Internal). (2018). Kiribati WASH in Schools Baseline.
UNICEF (Internal). (2018). Revised Budget Narrative.
UNICEF (Internal). (2019). Field Visit/Monitoring Template.
UNICEF (Internal). (2019). Fiji EMIS WASH in Schools 3 Star Rating June 2018 to June 2019.
UNICEF (Internal). (2019). Kiribati List of Schools.
UNICEF (Internal). (2019). Reach for the Stars - WASH in Schools Programme in Fiji.
UNICEF (Internal). (2019). Response to Appraisal of the Activity Design Document “Marurung Ataei: A Healthy
Star, A Thriving Child in Kiribati” for consideration under the New Zealand Partnerships for International
Development Fund.
UNICEF (Internal). (2020). SIBLE Tracking School List with Progress.
UNICEF (Internal). (2020). Solomon Islands Better Learning Environment Year 4 Activity Progress Report.
UNICEF (Internal). (2020). Vanuatu WASH in Schools Workplan May 2020 - December 2021.
UNICEF (Internal). (n.d.). Fiji WASH in Schools Supplemental Proposal.
UNICEF (Internal). (n.d.). WASH in Schools Fiji Theory of Change.
UNICEF Australia. (2019). Monitoring Trip Report July 2019.
UNICEF EAPRO, Plan, & WaterAid. (2015). Second Review of Community-Led Total Sanitation in East Asia and
Pacific Region. https://www.communityledtotalsanitation.org/sites/communityledtotalsanitation.org/
files/Second_Review_of_Community_Led_Total_Sanitation_in_East_Asia_and_Pacific.pdf
UNICEF New Zealand. (2020). Vanuatu WASH in Schools Year 3 Activity Progress Report.
UNICEF New Zealand. (n.d.). A Celebration of Change in Tropical Kiribati. https://www.unicef.org.nz/stories/a-
celebration-of-change-in-tropical-kiribati
UNICEF Pacific. (2017). Situation Analysis of Children in Fiji.
UNICEF Pacific. (2017). Situation Analysis of Children in the Federated States of Micronesia.
UNICEF Pacific. (2017). Situation Analysis of Children in the Solomon Islands.
UNICEF Pacific. (2017). Situation Analysis of Children in Vanuatu.
UNICEF Pacific. (2017). WASH Strategy Note Pacific Multi Country Programme (2018-2022).
UNICEF Pacific. (2018). Pacific WASH Resilience Guidelines.
UNICEF Pacific. (2018). Results Assessment Module 2018.
UNICEF Pacific. (2018). Water, water everywhere, not a drop to drink.
UNICEF Pacific. (2019). Results Assessment Module 2019.
UNICEF Pacific. (2020). Results Assessment Module 2020.
Formative Evaluation of UNICEF Three Star Approach for WASH in Schools in the Pacific 141
Final Report
UNICEF Pacific. (n.d.). Water, Sanitation and Hygiene. https://www.unicef.org/pacificislands/what-we-do/
water-sanitation-hygiene
UNICEF. (2015). Incorporating MHM into WASH in Schoopls National Policies and Guidelines.
UNICEF. (2016). The UNICEF Health Systems Strengthening Appraoch. https://www.unicef.org/media/60296/
file
UNICEF. (2017). Multi-country Programme Document Pacific Island Countries.
UNICEF. (2018). Revised Evaluation Policy of UNICEF. https://www.unicef.org/evaluation/media/1411/file/
Revised Policy 2018 (Interactive).pdf
UNICEF. (2019). Formative Evaluation of the UNICEF WASH regional and country programming strategies in
the East Asia and the Pacific Region 2014 - 2017/2018.
UNICEF. (2019). WASH in Schools Technical Manual Toolkit.
UNICEF. (2020). Global Evaluation of UNICEF’s WASH Programming in Protracted Crises, 2014 - 2019.
UNICEF. (2021). Procedure on Ethical Standards in Research, Evaluation, Data Collection and Analysis.
United Nations Evaluation Group. (2016). Norms and Standards for Evaluation. http://www.unevaluation.org/
document/detail/1914
Vanuatu Ministry of Education and Training. (2016). WASH in Schools - Call to Action. https://education.gov.vu/
docs/policies/WASH in Schools - Call to Action_2016.pdf
Vanuatu Red Cross. (2020). Promoting WASH in School North Ambae Penama Province.
Welle, K., Mackinnon, E., Reddick, M., Harris, B., & Thompson, J. (2020). Recovering better from COVID-19:
Lessons from WASH and protracted crises. ITAD. https://www.itad.com/article/recovering-better-covid-
lessons-wash-protracted-crises/
WHO & UNICEF. (2017). Progress on Drinking Water, Sanitation and Hygiene: 2017 Update and SDG Baselines.
http://www.who.int/water_sanitation_health/publications/jmp-2017/en/
World Health Organisation. (2015). Human Health and Climate Changes in the Pacific. https://iris.wpro.who.int/
bitstream/ handle/10665.1/12399/9789290617303_eng.pdf
142 Formative Evaluation of UNICEF Three Star Approach for WASH in Schools in the Pacific
Final Report
ANNEX XI: LIST OF INTERVIEWEES
List of Fiji Interviewees
Maria Carmelita Francois – WASH Advisor, USAID
Kitione Radrodro – Fijian Teachers Association, WASH Unit
Serupepeli Udre – Ministry of Education
Jeffery Ing – WASH Specialist, UNICEF
Selina Matumoka – Live & Learn
John Bryan Mausio – Save the Children
List of Solomon Islands Interviewees
Elmah Panisi Sese – Country Director, Live & Learn
Mamita Bora Thakkar – WASH Specialist, previously Solomon Islands
Paul Amao – National WASH Coordinator, Ministry of Education
Franco Rodie – Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Health and R
Piter Visser – Team Leader at Rural WASH Programme, Ministry of Health and Medical Services
Zelalem Taffesse – Chief of Field Office, UNICEF Solomon Islands
List of Vanuatu Interviewees
Jake Ward – UNICEF WASH Specialist
Christine-Anne Garoleo – Provincial SIO Coordinator, Ministry of Education and Training Penama Province
Esther Jens – Second Secretary, Development MFAT
Stephanie Hamel – Vanuatu Country Manager, Engineers without Borders
List of Kiribati Interviewees
Waqairapoa Tikoisuva – UNICEF WASH lead for Kiribati
Ross Craven – MFAT Tarawa
Reetina Katokita - Director, Policy, Planning and Development Unit, Ministry of Education
Arboro Henry - Senior Health Promotion Officer, Ministry of Health and Medical Services
George Quifada - Sector Coordination TA, UNICEF
Brucetta Toatu - WASH in Schools TA, UNICEF Kiribati
List of FSM Interviewees
Quennie Amor – UNICEF Rep for FSM
Deanne Aizawa – Chief, Planning and Development Division, Dept of Education
MJ Martin – Mental Health Specialist, Department of Health
Francy Haregaichig – Micronesia Red Cross
Julie Simina – Lab Technician, Environmental Protection Agency
Kuliano Raymond – Bridging Gap Specialist, Department of Education
Jeffrey Ing and Cromwell (21/10/2020) – UNICEF
Formative Evaluation of UNICEF Three Star Approach for WASH in Schools in the Pacific 143
Final Report
ANNEX XII: EXTENDED
STAKEHOLDER LIST
This information was developed at the inception stage.
Interest in the WinS Involvement in the Evaluation Who (specifically
Stakeholder
Evaluation and likely use for the evaluation)
Internal UNICEF stakeholders
UNICEF Multi- Responsible for the overall Development of the ToR and Chander Badloe
country Office planning and coordination selection of the evaluation team. (lead), Ali
(MCO) (Suva) of WinS at a regional and Safarnejad (co-
Fiji level. The MCO has a The MCO WASH Programme lead), Isefo Volau
direct stake in the evaluation Specialist will be the evaluation (Education)
and an interest in learning manager (EM) and the primary
from experience to inform form of contact. Relevant
decision-making. It is also MCO staff take part in briefing,
called upon to account provision of documents
internally as well as to its and overview of the WinS
programme participants and programme in the Pacific. EM
partners for performance and will also be link with UNICEF
results of its programmes. EAPRO office and relevant MEL
The MCO is interested connections.
in the lessons learnt,
good practice and areas
for improvement which
will inform the planning,
design and programming
of future interventions. This
evaluation will also enhance
the UNICEF’s accountability
towards governments,
regional bodies and
development partners.
UNICEF Country As the managers of country- WASH Focal Points will be the Fiji:
Offices) (COs) based WinS programmes, primary contact in each country. Chander Badloe
- (Solomon the COs have a strong WASH Focal Points will provide
Islands, Kiribati, interest in understanding suitable dates for the fieldwork, Kiribati:
Federated States the strengths and room for apply for the relevant ethical Waqairapoa
of Micronesia, improvement in the WinS at clearances with the respective Tikoisuva (lead)
Vanuatu) a country level, and to learn government bodies. They will Beia Tim
from other countries some also provide logistical support Solomon Islands:
potential improvements or with regards to the selection Abigal Tavera (lead)
risks. of schools/communities and Frederick Saeni
arrange travel.
FSM:
The relevant CO staff will be Cromwell Bacareza
interviewed as key informants as (CFO) or
part of the fieldwork. Jeffrey Ing
Quennie Go (WinS
Relevant will participate in Consultant) Helen
debriefings, provide feedback on Piana (WinS
preliminary findings, be involved Consultant)
in the sense-making session and
also provide written comments Vanuatu:
on draft inception and evaluation James Ward
reports. Emily Rand
144 Formative Evaluation of UNICEF Three Star Approach for WASH in Schools in the Pacific
Final Report
UNICEF EAPRO Relevant HQ units (e.g. Development of the ToR and TBC
Office (Bangkok) WASH, education) will selection of the evaluation team.
be consulted during the Participate in the findings
evaluation process, as they session. Relevant units will
have an interest in knowing provide comments.
how well the programme Will be responsible for reviewing
was designed and achieving both the inception and final
results, and what lessons evaluation reports and provide
may be applied globally for written comments.
organisation-wide learning. Liaise with the evaluation
manager as required and will be
available to the evaluation team
to discuss the activities, their
performance and results.
UNICEF Australia As contributors to the Source of planning documents, Australia:
and UNICEF WinS programme, UNICEF financial plans and results Aaron Moore, Alice
New Zealand Australia and UNICEF management information. Hall
New Zealand have a keen MFAT:
interest in the results of TBC
the programme and the
improvements made to the
communities. They will be
interested in the human
interested stories that can be
elicited from the evaluation,
in order to bolster their
marketing. They will also be
interested if the resources
provided were utilized as
planned, whether the results
in the planned document
have been achieved and what
lessons are emerging.
External UNICEF stakeholders
Programme As the ultimate recipients Principal source of information
participants of the various forms of on the relevance, effectiveness,
assistance provided by the impact and sustainability of the
UNICEF WinS programme, programme.
participants have a stake Through key informant
in UNICEF determining interviews (KII) and focus group
whether the programme is discussions (FDGs) which will
efficient and effective. As be planned in a way that is most
such, the participation of sensitive to the group (e.g.
different groups – women/ interview young women about
men, disabled/non-disabled, MHM by a woman).
rural/urban – will be critical to Involvement will provide
ensure all perspectives are programme participants with
heard. an independent platform
to give suggestions and
recommendations for country,
regional and worldwide learning.
Formative Evaluation of UNICEF Three Star Approach for WASH in Schools in the Pacific 145
Final Report
NGO NGOs are partners in Key informants in evaluation
Cooperating/ implementation and have interviews and data sharing:
implementing additional interventions in interviews will either be KIIs,
Partners the country/region related to either with individual or multiple
WASH and education. They staff, as appropriate.
will be interested in this Feedback on operational
evaluation as the results may effectiveness and
affect future implementation, appropriateness of activities, use
strategic focus and of assistance provided showing
partnership arrangements. level of usefulness and quality of
training.
Participate in debriefings and
provide feedback on preliminary
findings and conclusions.
Technical Technical partners have an Key informants in evaluation
partners interest in the evaluation interviews and data sharing. KIIs
because the results of the to provide insight into UNICEF’s
evaluation might affect processes, capacity building and
technical design, future Participate in debriefings and
implementation, strategic provide feedback on preliminary
focus and partnership findings and conclusions.
agreements. CBM Nossall
lead on a study on MHM for
girls with a disability in Fiji.
Government The government ministries Key informants on programme
ministries and in all countries have an performance and coordination.
departments interest learning whether Information collected through
involved in UNICEF’s priorities are KIIs and documents.
implementation aligned, harmonized with Provide permission to speak to
(national and the other partners and children and monitor evaluation
district levels) meet expected results. team whilst in schools and
Areas of sustainability, communities to ensure highest
particularly post- programme level of child protection and
intervention, will be of ethical behavior.
particular interest. Feedback on how UNICEF’s
work has impacted national
strategies, capacity building,
appropriateness of activities and
targeting.
Participate in debriefings.
Development Development partners will Source of information on
partners also be interested if the planning, finance and reporting
(Government resources provided were
of Australia, utilized as planned, whether
Government of the results in the planned
New Zealand) document have been
achieved and what lessons
are emerging.
For further information, please contact:
Pacific Multi Country Office
United Nations Children’s Fund
3rd Floor, FDB Building
360 Victoria Parade
Suva, Fiji
suva@unicef.org
© United Nations Children’s Fund, New York, 2021