FINAL REPORT
Evaluation of UNICEF, UNFPA, UNDP project
“Promoting Kyrgyzstan’s youth cohesion
and interaction towards Uzbekistan”
(2019-2020)
natszygryK/APFNU
©
Final report
March 2021
The purpose of publishing evaluation reports produced by the UNICEF is to fulfil
a corporate commitment to transparency through the publication of all completed
evaluations. The reports are designed to stimulate a free exchange of ideas among
those interested in the topic and to assure those supporting the work of UNICEF that it
rigorously examines its strategies, results, and overall effectiveness.
The contents of the report do not necessarily reflect the policies or views of UNICEF.
The text has not been edited to official publication standards and UNICEF accepts no
responsibility for error.
The designations in this publication do not imply an opinion on the legal status of any
country or territory, or of its authorities, or the delimitation of frontiers.
The copyright for this report is held by the United Nations Children’s Fund.
Attribution: Please cite the work as follows: UNICEF (2021) “Evaluation of UNICEF /
UNFPA / UNDP project ‘Promoting Kyrgyzstan’s youth cohesion and interaction towards
Uzbekistan’ (2019-2020)”.
For further information, please contact:
United Nations Children’s Fund
Chui Avenue 160, 720040
Bishkek, Kyrgyzstan
bishkek@unicef.org
PROMOTING KYRGYZSTAN’S YOUTH COHESION AND INTERACTION TOWARDS UZBEKISTAN
CONTENTS
CONTENTS 3
TABLES AND FIGURES 4
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 5
ACRONYMS 6
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 7
1. INTRODUCTION 13
2. BACKGROUND 16
2.1 Context and Conflict Analysis 16
2.2 The Youth-Promotion Initiative Project in Support of Peacebuilding on the
Kyrgyz-Uzbek Border 18
2.3 Theory of Change 20
2.4 Stakeholders 24
3. EVALUATION PURPOSE, OBJECTIVES AND SCOPE 25
3.1 Purpose and Use of the Evaluation 26
3.2 Objectives of Evaluation 26
3.3 Scope of the Evaluation 27
4. EVALUATION METHODOLOGY 28
4.1 Evaluation Criteria 29
4.2 Methods for Data Collection, Analysis, and Sampling 31
4.3 Ethical Issues and Considerations 35
5. EVALUATION FINDINGS 38
5.1 Relevance and Coherence 39
5.2 Effectiveness 55
5.3 Efficiency 71
5.4 Impact 79
5.5 Sustainability 86
PROMOTING KYRGYZSTAN’S YOUTH COHESION AND INTERACTION TOWARDS UZBEKISTAN 3
6. EVALUATION CONCLUSIONS & LESSONS LEARNED 92
6.1 Conclusions 93
6.2 Lessons Learned 95
7. RECOMMENDATIONS 97
8. REFERENCES 105
9. ANNEXES 109
ANNEX 1: Evaluation Matrix 109
ANNEX 2: Stakeholder Analysis 115
ANNEX 3: Social Media Analysis 122
ANNEX 4: Sampling 124
ANNEX 5: List of Interviewee categories 125
ANNEX 6: Inception Report 126
ANNEX 7: List of Project Documents 127
ANNEX 8: Information about the Evaluators 137
TABLES AND FIGURES
Figure 1: Visual reconstruction of the theory of change 21
Table 1: Observance of the UNEG ethical standards by the evaluation team 35
4 EVALUATION OF THE UNICEF / UNFPA / UNDP PROJECT PROMOTING KYRGYZSTAN’S YOUTH COHESION AND INTERACTION TOWARDS UZBEKISTAN
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This report was written by Camille Massey (team leader), Gulnara Asilbekova and Aiganysh
Isaeva.
The authors would like to thank UNICEF, UNDP and UNFPA in Kyrgyzstan, both management
and programme team, as well as Mr. Ozonnia Ojielo, United Nations Resident Coordinator
in Kyrgyzstan, for their guidance, support and contribution to this evaluation.T he evaluation
team extends its heartfelt thanks to Tolgonai Berdikeyeva for her contributions and for the
coordination of the evaluation process.
The authors would further like to thank the State Agency for Youth and Sports of
Kyrgyzstan, the Municipalities of Kashkar-Kyshtak, Aidarken, Kok-Serek and Kerben, and
the implementing partners of the project, for their assistance in the evaluation, as well as
all those who participated in interviews and focus groups.
Special gratitude goes to the members of the evaluation’s reference group: Mirlan Parkhanov,
Ulan Shabynov, Aigul Mambetakunova, Christine Jaulmes, Tolgonai Berdikeyeva, Gulnara
Zhenishbekova, Erkina Urazbaeva, Artur Bukalaev, NargizaT ashtemirova, Azamat Baialinov,
Sanzhar Alimzhanov, Akmaral Satinbaeva, Beksultan Rustamov, Nargiza Jenisheva and
Zhanyshbek kyzy Takhmina, who accompanied the entire process of evaluation.
PROMOTING KYRGYZSTAN’S YOUTH COHESION AND INTERACTION TOWARDS UZBEKISTAN 5
ACRONYMS
CRM Child Rights Monitoring
CSO Civil Society Organisation
ERG Evaluation Reference Group
EQ Evaluation question
EU European Union
GoK Government of Kyrgyzstan
HIS Human interest stories
IP Implementing Partner
JSC Joint Steering Committee
KII Key Informant Interview
KR Kyrgyz Republic
LIA Leadership and Innovation Academy
LSG Local Self-Government
MDG United Nations Millennium Development Goals
MoF Ministry of Finance
MoJ Ministry of Justice
MOU Memorandum of Understanding
NGO Non-Governmental Organisation
NHRI National Human Rights Institution
PBF UN Peacebuilding Fund
PBSO United Nations Peacebuilding Support Office
PDA Peace and Development Advisor (UNDP)
PPP UN Peacebuilding Priority Plans 2017-2020 (or 2013-2016 if specified)
PSG Project Steering Group
PVE Prevention of violent extremism
RUNOs Recipient UN Organizations
SDGs Sustainable Development Goals
SMEs Small and medium-sized enterprises
ToC Theory of Change
ToR Terms of Reference
UN United Nations
UNDP United Nations Development Programme
UNFPA United Nations Population Fund
UNICEF United Nations Children’s Fund
UNICEF ECARO United Nations Children’s Fund, Europe and Central Asia Regional
Office
YoO Association “Youth of Osh”
YPI Youth Promotion Initiative
6 EVALUATION OF THE UNICEF / UNFPA / UNDP PROJECT PROMOTING KYRGYZSTAN’S YOUTH COHESION AND INTERACTION TOWARDS UZBEKISTAN
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
This report presents the evaluation of the project “Promoting Kyrgyzstan’s Youth Cohesion
and Interaction towards Uzbekistan”. The report outlines the evaluation’s background and
approach, its findings, conclusions, lessons learned and recommendations. The evaluation
was conducted from October 2020 to March 2021.
OVERVIEW OF INTERVENTION
The fertile Ferghana valley, now split between Kyrgyzstan, Uzbekistan and Tajikistan, has
long crystallized tensions over access to, and share of, natural resources. After the fall of
the Soviet Union, the unresolved border delineation has plagued inter-State relations. The
areas of Kyrgyzstan which border with Uzbekistan feature communities of varied cultural
background, which rely on resources that are spread across disputed borders. They are
economically deprived, remote from the country’s capital, and marred by unemployment
and labour migration. In these areas, cross-border and domestic conflicts among
communities have erupted regularly since the 1990s.
The United Nations Country Office in Kyrgyzstan and the United Nations Peacebuilding
Support Office have conducted conflict analysis, materialized in the Peacebuilding Priority
Plans 2013-2016 and 2017-2020. This analysis acknowledges the importance of social
cohesion, economic opportunities, civic participation, and the inclusion of all categories
especially the youth, towards sustainable peacebuilding in these regions. The analysis
further highlights the mutually reinforcing role of inter-State relations on the one hand,
and interactions among people on the other hand.
The project “Promoting Kyrgyzstan’s Youth Cohesion and Interaction towards Uzbekistan”
echoed this analysis and aimed to support social cohesion in the border areas of Kyrgyzstan,
and beyond, nationally.T o this end, the project built on the NationalY outh Agency’s strategic
documents, the existing national strategic documents for rapprochement with Uzbekistan,
and a favourable diplomatic context, to foster positive interaction of Kyrgyz youth, their
communities and relevant public authorities, both within multi-cultural communities in
the country, and towards their counterparts in Uzbekistan. This was done through outputs:
1. Young people have improved critical/design thinking and demonstrate support for
diversity and equal rights by initiating projects that contribute to the implementation of
plans for local development and positive cooperation of youth between Kyrgyzstan and
Uzbekistan.
2. Parents of young people, community members improve their understanding of
diversity, have enhanced knowledge and tools to support and participate in youth-led
initiatives.
3. Government representatives have strengthened capacity to provide services in
cross-border communities and commit to support youth-driven initiatives aiming at
improving the cross-border cooperation.
The project was implemented jointly by UNICEF, UNFPA and UNDP in Kyrgyzstan, from
January 2019 to November 2020 for a total budget of 1.5 million USD. The Peacebuilding
Fund financed this entire budget, as the project was closely based on the conflict analysis
conducted by the United Nations Country Office and the Peacebuilding Fund and
corresponded to the Fund’s guidance and Peacebuilding Priorities.
PROMOTING KYRGYZSTAN’S YOUTH COHESION AND INTERACTION TOWARDS UZBEKISTAN 7
The project consisted of a series of small-scale local initiatives mobilizing tried and
tested youth empowerment tools such as the UPSHIFT and LIA programmes, focused
respectively on youth participation and on youth leadership through capacity building,
mentoring and engagement; legal aid initiatives involving youth in local communities;
mini-grants supporting local projects led by the youth; support to access to local services
including one-stop-shop in local administration; capacity building for a variety of duty
bearers in the border areas; and a series of cross-border events involving the youth and
the representatives of national and local administration.
With these activities, the project engaged the youth (from 14 to 28 years old) in the border
areas of Kyrgyzstan, their parents and teachers, local communities, as well as local and
national duty bearers at central, province and municipal levels. The project selected seven
implementing partners, including six civil society organisations and one company, who
conducted the bulk of these activities. Due to the COVID-19 pandemic, from early 2020, the
project activities moved online. All activities took place on the territory of Kyrgyzstan, with
a focus on the provinces of Osh, Batken and Jalal-Abad, which border with Uzbekistan.
EVALUATION PURPOSE, OBJECTIVES AND INTENDED AUDIENCE
The purpose of the evaluation is to inform the evaluation users for evidence-based decision
making on peacebuilding interventions in Kyrgyzstan, based on the learnings from the
project “Promoting Kyrgyzstan Youth’s Cohesion and Interaction towards Uzbekistan”.
The evaluation objectives are as follows:
• Understand the effects of the project on the immediate, and when possible, final
beneficiaries;
• Ensure accountability towards the donor, the UN governance bodies, strategic goals and
UN system values, and towards the beneficiaries (rights holders and duty bearers) in light
of the project’s objectives, indicators and targets, and with regard to invested assets;
• Provide opportunities for organizational learning;
• Inform decision-making about the project’s follow-up with regards to youth and
peacebuilding.
The primary intended users of the evaluation results are:
• the decision-makers from the government,
• implementing partners,
• implementing agencies UNICEF, UNDP, UNFPA, and the Peacebuilding Fund.
The secondary intended users are:
• local self-government staff in project communities, and
• project beneficiaries.
Finally, the evaluation report may be of interest to the public at large, including inhabitants
of Kyrgyzstan, academics worldwide, and any actor interested in peacebuilding
intervention designs.
EVALUATION METHODOLOGY
The evaluation is mostly summative (as relates to understanding the effects of the
projects and ensuring accountability), but also to some extent formative (as relates to
8 EVALUATION OF THE UNICEF / UNFPA / UNDP PROJECT PROMOTING KYRGYZSTAN’S YOUTH COHESION AND INTERACTION TOWARDS UZBEKISTAN
organisational learning and informed decision making). The evaluation followed a theory
of change-based methodology:
• The evaluation first examines the chain of changes which the project intended to elicit,
and the assumptions which the project relied upon for the realization of these changes:
this constitutes the theory of change of the project;
• Then, the evaluation determines what changes actually happened for the project
beneficiaries and stakeholders. It compares these with the initial theory of change,
and checks whether the assumptions of the project were realized;
• Finally, the evaluation analyses the actual contribution of the project to these changes,
with the understanding that other factors have likely played a role in these changes.
In order to draw findings on these three points, the evaluation team collected data from
complementary sources, including:
• A broad range of documents, both internal (such as project reports, proceeds of project
events, strategic documents and standards of the United Nations) to the project and
online (such as academic research, as well as reports and strategic documents of
public authorities and civil society organisations);
• Over 100 semi-structured interviews with project stakeholders representing varied
points of view, including United Nations officials, implementing partners, duty bearers
at national, province and local level, young participants and their mentors, parents,
teachers and other community members;
• Focus groups with implementing partners and United Nations officials;
• Social media analysis on the project itself as well as on cross-border and interethnic
relations in the targeted regions.
The evaluation was conducted by a team of three independent consultants – one international
and two national, supported by UNICEF Kyrgyzstan Child Rights Monitoring Specialist.
An Evaluation Reference Group including representatives of implementing partners, of
UNICEF, UNFPA and UNDP in Kyrgyzstan, and of the Peacebuilding Support Office of the
Peacebuilding Fund, oversaw the evaluation process and provided comments and advice
at all stages.
KEY FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS
The project approach chose the empowerment of the youth and their communities as the
key vehicle to elicit positive interactions at grassroot level, leading to improved social
cohesion. It assumed that social cohesion, along with improved inter-State relations, were
essential to peacebuilding. The project design corresponded to the priorities of the United
Nations Peacebuilding Priority Plan and its in-depth and agreed-upon conflict analysis.
The project further sought to match this robust conceptual framework to the local
realities, particularly the local drivers of conflict. To this end, the project implementers
analysed the needs and aspirations of its beneficiaries in a participative manner, which
enabled to adequately capture the needs and expectations of the targeted communities:
empowerment of the youth through novel interactions and capacity building, participation
in local decision making, employability, and creation of social and economic avenues
locally. Gender equality and empowerment of women were an integral part of the project
approach, because the theory of change, with social cohesion among its core intended
impacts, was equity-focused. However, the project did not fully integrate the prominent
phenomenon of labour migration, especially among the youth beyond school age. During
PROMOTING KYRGYZSTAN’S YOUTH COHESION AND INTERACTION TOWARDS UZBEKISTAN 9
implementation, the project adequately retargeted some activities towards the younger
share of its intended beneficiaries, who were more present in the selected provinces.
During the project design phase, and throughout implementation, UNICEF, UNFPA
and UNDP, along with their implementing partners, analysed the nexus between three
phenomena: interethnic relations as the pivotal aspect of the conflict; unresolved border
issues as a key factor fuelling tensions; and the most urgent and unfulfilled needs expressed
by the beneficiaries, which acts as a catalyst of these tensions. Although the beneficiaries
themselves did not clearly perceive this nexus, this analysis proved particularly relevant
and instrumental to the coherence of the project and its theory of change.
The project further engaged the national authorities, particularly the Youth Agency of
Kyrgyzstan who actively contributed to the project’s strategic approach. This effort secured
commitment and enabled the activities to dovetail on political will. At the same time, the
position of Kyrgyzstan’s Executive somewhat disregards the prominence of interethnic
relations within the country, and the project documents had to find a diplomatic compromise:
the documents defined the project as a cross-border initiative complemented with local
community support, but concrete activities mostly aimed at interethnic and social cohesion
within Kyrgyzstan. Therefore, while the theory of change behind the project was internally
coherent, its formal expression in the project documents was incomplete. This situation
demanded adjustments throughout implementation, which materialized in the adaptation
of the activities and of the project’s monitoring framework.
The United Nations agencies made the most of their assets within the country, particularly
local offices and their network of CSOs, to reach out to underserved regions with a large
panel of activities, within a modest budget. There was a good alignment of strategic objectives
between the project and implementing partners. While the conceptual frameworks of the
United Nations agencies and the Government were not perfectly aligned, their strategy
in terms of target groups and actions to be taken were fully compatible. Federated by a
common peacebuilding approach, UNICEF, UNFPA and UNDP in Kyrgyzstan achieved deep
cooperation. They pioneered genuine joint implementation, from procurement to monitoring.
They translated the “delivering as one” approach into concrete processes and procedures.
While these took lengthy negotiations and slowed down the first phase of the project,
they constitute worthy precedents that now need to be perfected and reproduced. The
COVID-19 crisis amplified these delays and created obstacles to the implementation of
key activities, leading to a final rush, but UNICEF, UNFPA, UNDP and their implementing
partners proved particularly flexible, committed and creative, and successfully completed
the project within a reasonable timeframe and with limited resources. Cross-border
activities proved particularly challenging to organise administratively. The project design
overlooked valuable synergies with sister projects across the borders of Kyrgyzstan, which
could have alleviated these difficulties.
The integration of the local needs and expectation, the robustness of the theory of change,
and the ability to adapt project design to the circumstances resulted in a relevant and
efficient project met by the overwhelmingly positive perception of stakeholders. What
is more, the shift to online activities due to COVID-19-related prevention measures was
handled swiftly, presenting constraints but also unexpected opportunities.
There is conclusive evidence that the project effectively resulted in increased youth
empowerment. The share of girls who participated is high, and the transformative results
of the activities are particularly visible for them. Many participants perceived this project
as a passage to adulthood, or a self-revealing experience. This happened because the
project activities created unexpected and new experiences for the participants: travel
and exposure to high quality training products and venues, new forms of interactions,
recognition of the leadership role that the youth can play within their community, as well
10 EVALUATION OF THE UNICEF / UNFPA / UNDP PROJECT PROMOTING KYRGYZSTAN’S YOUTH COHESION AND INTERACTION TOWARDS UZBEKISTAN
as mutually respectful relations among peers and with local self-governance bodies. The
results of the project are therefore very apparent among the direct participants in terms
of personal and professional development within their community. Beside teachers and
other coaches, the project remarkably engaged the parents of the participants, which
proved instrumental to success: they acted as facilitators for the project results to expand
beyond the youth and to the rest of the community.
The individual and community-level empowerment efforts of the project were particularly
effective, and the youth proved a good catalyst for impact. Youth interaction and initiatives
have outlasted the closure of the project, even though their frequency and intensity have
diminished. However, there is no guarantee that their broader effects will be sustainable:
the most significant changes happened at individual level. This is particularly true of
interethnic relations. There is anecdotal evidence of progress: many participants reported
new perceptions of their peers across the border or in culturally different communities.
Social media and interviews showed that the attitudes of the youth and their immediate
social circles towards cultural diversity may have evolved. However, self-censorship is
still very prevalent among rights holders and duty bearers alike, which is symptomatic of
a latent conflict. To overcome these barriers and address the root causes of the conflict,
the United Nations will need to continue addressing both interethnic and cross-border
relations – from the national to the community levels.
With its legal aid component and capacity building for local duty bearers, the project
further created new local venues for peaceful and effective pressing of claims for
access to services, settlement of disputes and recourse mechanisms. Enhanced service
delivery in municipalities, as well as enhanced consultation and cooperation with the
youth, were well received. Success stories emerged from the project activities where
municipalities supported youth initiatives. National level duty bearers and their province-
level representations became better connected with the final beneficiaries’ aspirations
and realities. Youth agencies on both sides of the border increased their cooperation.
However, these components of the project still qualify as pilots: their systematisation
would require broader reform strategies. Local self-governance units are supportive of
youth-led initiatives and ready to carry on, but they will require continued support from
national authorities and from international cooperation partners to sustainably reap the
benefits of these experiments. With a wide variety of fields and methods, the project was
exploratory: it will require follow up and prioritization.
KEY RECOMMENDATIONS
1. In order to capitalize on the opportunities created by this project, the peacebuilding fund
should continue supporting youth empowerment projects as vehicles for peacebuilding
in Kyrgyzstan along with neighbouring countries.
2. The peacebuilding fund should consider setting up an online community of practice
on peacebuilding projects accessible to its recipients.
3. The United Nations Country Team in Kyrgyzstan (UNICEF, UNFPA, UNDP and any other
relevant agency such as UN Women) should initiate a regional, modular follow up youth
empowerment and peacebuilding programme with its peers in Uzbekistan and Tajikistan.
4. The United Nations Country Team in Kyrgyzstan should streamline pilot initiatives into
systemic, peacebuilding partnerships with key duty bearers.
5. The United Nations CountryT eam in Kyrgyzstan should introduce gender transformative
results to the successor project, based on gender analysis and in consultation or
cooperation with UN Women.
PROMOTING KYRGYZSTAN’S YOUTH COHESION AND INTERACTION TOWARDS UZBEKISTAN 11
6. The United Nations Country Team in Kyrgyzstan should re-define target age groups
of youth empowerment programmes in border areas towards adolescents and very
young adults (up to 20 years) in addition to the original target group (up to 28 years),
with emphasis on women/girls and vulnerable groups, and tailor activities accordingly.
7. The United Nations Country Team in Kyrgyzstan should maintain selected activities online
beyond the COVID-19 crisis.
8. The United Nations Country Team in Kyrgyzstan should anticipate and accelerate joint
procurement and other administrative processes linked to joint implementation.
9. The Government of the Kyrgyz Republic, in particular the State Agency for Regional
Development should support the decentralisation efforts of the State Registry Service
of Kyrgyzstan and Ombudsperson’s office.
10. The Government of Kyrgyzstan, the Presidential Office, and Ministry of Education
should facilitate and support systematic involvement of educational institutions in
peacebuilding initiatives and youth empowerment, especially in border areas.
11. The Government of Kyrgyzstan should consider the creation of a peacebuilding
national platform.
12. Implementing partners should continue to develop their capacity to reach out to
remote, vulnerable groups in border areas.
12 EEVVAALLUUAATTIIOONN OOFF TTHHEE UUNNIICCEEFF // UUNNFFPPAA // UUNNDDPP PPRROOJJEECCTT
EVALUATION OF THE UNICEF / UNFPA / UNDP PROJECT PROMOTING KYRGYZSTAN’S YOUTH COHESION AND INTERACTION TOWARDS UZBEKISTAN 13
NOITCUDORTNI
natszygryK/FECINU
©
1. INTRODUCTION
This report presents the results of the evaluation of the project “Promoting Kyrgyzstan’s
youth cohesion and interaction towards Uzbekistan’” implemented by the United Nations
Children’s Fund (UNICEF), United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA) and United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP) between 14 November 2018 and 14 November 2020
(hereinafter “the project”). The total budget of the project amounted to 1,500,000 USD,
which was provided by the United Nations Peacebuilding Fund (PBF).
The purpose of this report is to communicate the finding, conclusions and recommendations
based on the theory-of-change-based evaluation of the project. The evaluation was both
summative, presenting how the theory of change has operated towards results through
the reference period, and formative, demonstrating what dynamics prepare the results
to ultimately contribute to long term impact, and how future follow-up activities could be
framed. The report delivers lessons learned and recommendations to implementing United
Nations agencies, civil society implementing partners, the PBF as well as local and national
duty bearers.
The evaluation was commissioned by UNICEF Kyrgyzstan, supervised by the UNICEF
Kyrgyzstan Child Rights Monitoring Specialist and entrusted to the following evaluation team:
• Ms. Camille Massey, International Consultant/Team Leader
• Ms. Gulnara Asilbekova, National Consultant
• Ms. Aiganysh Isaeva, National Expert
• The evaluation process was accompanied by an Evaluation Reference Group (Annex 14:
Terms of Reference of the Evaluation Reference Group) composed of representatives
including the various stakeholders.
This report was prepared by the evaluation team composed of one International Consultant,
one National Consultant, one National Expert, and reviewed by the National Expert and
Child Rights Monitoring Specialist, the Evaluation Reference Group members, UNICEF
ECARO Evaluation Specialist, and a representative of the United Nations Peacebuilding
Support Office.
The evaluation process followed three phases:
• Inception: review of documentation, elaboration of the methodology, identification of
stakeholders, interviews with key resource persons, consultation with the Reference
Group, Inception Report.
• Data collection and field work: remote data collection through interviews (over 100
interviewees), focus groups (14 participants), social media review, consultation with
the Reference Group in respect to preliminary findings;
• Data analysis and reporting: analysis of interview and focus group notes, analysis of
social media data, analysis of documentation, report drafting, remote consultation with
Reference Group and UNICEF Kyrgyzstan, as well as UNICEF Europe and Central Asia
Regional Office and United Nations Peacebuilding Support Office (PBSO) Headquarters,
and finalisation of the Evaluation Report.
The evaluation process started on 16 October 2020. It should end 15 March 2021 as per
timeline.
The evaluation process had to adjust to the aftermath of the parliamentary elections of 4
October 2020, which elicited high turnaround among national and province stakeholders, and
to the COVID-19. However, the timing of remote field research was held; the interviews, focus
groups, consultations with the Evaluation Reference Group and the implementing United
Nations organisations in Kyrgyzstan as well as the validation of recommendations were done
remotely, as per standard COVID-19 prevention measures.
14 EEVVAALLUUAATTIIOONN OOFF TTHHEE UUNNIICCEEFF // UUNNFFPPAA // UUNNDDPP PPRROOJJEECCTT PROMOTING KYRGYZSTAN’S YOUTH COHESION AND INTERACTION TOWARDS UZBEKISTAN
EEVVAALLUUAATTIIOONN OOFF TTHHEE UUNNIICCEEFF // UUNNFFPPAA // UUNNDDPP PPRROOJJEECCTT PROMOTING KYRGYZSTAN’S YOUTH COHESION AND INTERACTION TOWARDS UZBEKISTAN 15
DNUORGKCAB
natszygryK/FECINU
©
2. BACKGROUND
2.1 Context and Conflict Analysis
2.2.1. The Kyrgyz-Uzbek Border
The border contradictions in post-Soviet Central Asian countries remain complex and
unsettled. The Fergana Valley is in the centre of tensions involving three neighbouring
countries: Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan and Uzbekistan.
The Kyrgyz-Uzbek border disputes date back to the 1920s when the first boundaries were
drawn by the Soviet Union. Kyrgyzstan and Uzbekistan were separated through internal
administrative boundaries within a single country. Both republics had access to shared
natural resources such as water and pastures. They ran economic links and shared a
network of roads with free movement of people and goods. These boundaries were altered
on numerous occasions based on the economic necessities of local economic entities.
The republics were permitted to secure long-term leases of territory from other republics,
which created enclaves – isolated islands of territories within another republic.
In 1991, with the independence of the former Soviet republics, the borders became
international, and an unsettled dispute between the two countries remained. Enclaves
persisted, but they were not properly documented, which became the subject of political
manipulation and public discussions both at internal political and foreign policy levels
of both countries. As of 2019, about 92 percent of the 1,378-kilometer-long Kyrgyz-Uzbek
border has been delineated, leaving disputed territories and 110 km of unresolved border.
The enclaved communities, who depend on economic and social ties outside their
enclaves, have suffered from existing border regimes and disputes.
For many years there had been a lack of constructive dialogue and diplomacy to address
the border disputes. As a result, tensions had become an every-day routine between
the neighbours. There was a major breakthrough after the new President of Uzbekistan
Shavkat Mirziyoyev came to office in September 2016, and bilateral relations began to
improve. Yet, border-related conflicts between Kyrgyzstan and Uzbekistan have kept
erupting on a regular basis at local level over the natural resources, such as access to
water and arable land. The most recent conflict flared up on 31 May 2020 at the Kyrgyz-
Uzbek border between the inhabitants of the Uzbek enclave Sokh and of nearby Chechme
village of Kadamjay region (Kyrgyzstan).1 25 people from the Kyrgyz side were injured, 1
person died later in hospital. From the Uzbek side, 187 people were injured.
Conflict is the result of a disagreement between actors based perceived incompatible goals.2
Conflict is characterized as a natural component of societal interactions, where differences
in interests and opinions between groups are to be expected. Disagreements often occur
between individuals or groups in relation to the distribution of scarce resources, dissimilar
perception of values and access to power. Disagreements can turn into violent conflict
when “there are inadequate channels for dialogue and disagreement”; when “dissenting
voices and deeply held grievances cannot be heard and addressed”; and in environments
1 Part of the Kyrgyz territories bordering Uzbekistan are irrigated with water from canals in Sokh. There are tensions about water allocation of
the Chechme spring, which supplies water to the Kyrgyz village of Chechme (population of approx. 1,000 people) and Uzbek Chashma (of more
than 17,000 people). The conflict arose around a water spring which inhabitants from both sides had been cleaning. See: Larionov, Konstantin,
Why Kyrgyzstan Won’t Gain from the Protracted Border Dispute with Tajikistan and Uzbekistan?, Central Asian Bureau for Analytical Reporting,
<https://cabar.asia/en/why-kyrgyzstan-won-t-gain-from-the-protracted-border-dispute-with-tajikistan-and-uzbekistan>, 17.11.2020 [27/01/2021]
2 Conflict Sensitivity Consortium, How to Guide to Conflict Sensitivity, London: The Conflict Sensitivity Consortium, 2012, p. 2.
16 EVALUATION OF THE UNICEF / UNFPA / UNDP PROJECT PROMOTING KYRGYZSTAN’S YOUTH COHESION AND INTERACTION TOWARDS UZBEKISTAN
of “instability, injustice and fear”.3 In Kyrgyzstan, interethnic tensions are not the main fault
line at the national level: they arise as a result (rather than as a driver) of local conflicts.
The sources of local conflict are often identified as weak governance, high unemployment
especially among young people, and criminalization of the economy.4 Academic research
refers to the lack of justice as a frequent implicit or explicit issue when dwellers of border
villages discuss their problems.5 Criminalisation of the economy and unemployment
of young people are especially characteristic of the South of Kyrgyzstan, especially Osh
province,6 in context of the incomplete processes of demarcation and delimitation of the
state boundaries which significantly affects economic stakes.7
Inter-State confrontation over borders then exacerbates conflict at the local level on both
sides of the border. It intensifies disputes over natural resources, hinders the free flow of
people and goods, thus negatively impacting economic growth. Conflicts bring disruption
to communities, while destabilizing relationships and impeding access to resources.
Conflicts disrupt livelihoods, placing even greater burden on the most vulnerable.
In addition, conflicts at the local level contribute to a sense of insecurity and weaken
the legitimacy of institutions that have failed to fairly resolve conflicts and to protect
the people. This process becomes a vicious circle of declining trust in government and
escalating insecurity.
2.2.2. Young people in peacebuilding
The role of youth in the 2010 clashes is widely recognised, both as actors and victims. Conflict
analysis identifies peacebuilding, human development, democratisation, governance and
institution-building as building blocks in the development and transformation of the Kyrgyz
society, necessary for the stabilisation of the peace process in a post-conflict situation.
Youth vulnerability to violent radicalisation is addressed by national and international
stakeholders alike, and so is their potential to contribute to peacebuilding. Search for
Common Ground identifies four key drivers of radicalization.8 These are 1) challenges of
identity and belonging, 2) a weakening of the social fabric, 3) the absence of platforms
where youth can voice and address their grievances, and 4) exclusion from decision-
making processes. In Southern Kyrgyzstan, interethnic tensions must be addressed on
top of the issues relevant to youth in Kyrgyzstan in general, as events have shown that the
security situation along the Kyrgyz-Uzbek border can be volatile.
Targeting youth as peacebuilding actors in southern Kyrgyzstan has therefore been a
wide-spread approach in the past few years, as well as addressing their grievances and
supporting their participation in democratic processes. This rationale which links both
approaches (youth as actors of peace on the one hand, and needs and aspirations of youth
3 Herbert, S. Conflict analysis: Topic guide. Birmingham, UK: GSDRC, University of Birmingham, 2017 <www.un.org/peacebuilding/fund/docu-
ments/investments> [10/10/2020].
4 See conflict analysis in the UN Peacebuilding Priority Plan Kyrgyzstan (2017-2020), <https://kyrgyzstan.un.org/en/31253-peacebuilding-priori-
ty-plan-ppp> [13/10/2020].
5 Murzakulova, Asel, Contextual Factors of conflict in Border Communities in Batken Province, Kyrgyzstan, Technical Report, DOI: 10.13140/
RG.2.2.24353.024, September 2017 <https://www.researchgate.net/publication/320014772_Contextual_Factors_of_
conflict_in_Border_Communities_in_Batken_Province_Kyrgyzstan> [12/12/2020]; also mentioned in
Murzakulova, Asel, Gulbara Omorova and Evgenii Shibkov, Reconsidering the meaning of neighbourship: the transformation of Uzbekistan-Kyr-
gyzstan border areas after 2016, MSRI Brief, DOI: 10.13140/RG.2.2.19225.98406, May 2019 <https://www.researchgate.net/publication/335161251_
Reconsidering_the_meaning_of_neighbourship_the_transformation_of_Uzbekistan-Kyrgyzstan_border_areas_after_2016> [12/12/2020].
6 Murzakulova, Asel, Rural Migration in Kyrgyzstan: Drivers, Impact and Governance, University of Central Asia, MSRI Research paper # 7, DOI:
10.13140/RG.2.2.35258.21442, June 2020, <https://www.researchgate.net/publication/344362648_Rural_
Migration_in_Kyrgyzstan_Drivers_Impact_and_Governance> [12/12/2020].
7 Larionov, Konstantin, Why Kyrgyzstan Won’t Gain from the Protracted Border Dispute with Tajikistan and Uzbekistan?, Central Asian Bureau for
Analytical Reporting, <https://cabar.asia/en/why-kyrgyzstan-won-t-gain-from-the-protracted-border-dispute-with-tajikistan-and-uzbekistan>,
17.11.2020 [27/01/2021].
8 Dhungana, Shiva K, Rahat Ismanbaeva and Aizharkyn Aisakhunova / Search for Common Ground Kyrgyzstan, ReducingViolent Religious
Extremism and Preventing Conflict in Kyrgyzstan and Central Asia 2013-2016, April 2016, <www.sfcg.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/02/CSSF_
KGZ501-Review_Final_Report_13052016.pdf>; See also Search for Common Ground, #JashStan: Youth as agents of peace and stability in Kyrgyz-
stan, <www.sfcg.org/jashstan-youth-as-agents-of-peace-and-stability-in-kyrgyzstan/> [27/01/2021].
EVALUATION OF THE UNICEF / UNFPA / UNDP PROJECT PROMOTING KYRGYZSTAN’S YOUTH COHESION AND INTERACTION TOWARDS UZBEKISTAN 17
regarding their agency and educational, social, economic perspectives on the other),
underlies the theory of change of the project.9
2.2.3. National Policies and Legislation in Kyrgyzstan
The project document identified the following key national strategic documents that
commit to creating positive peaceful experiences with the Uzbek counterparts and among
communities.
The National Development Strategy of the Kyrgyz Republic 2018-2040, endorsed in
November 2018, frames the vision for the development of the country. This Strategy
focuses on four areas: Human being - family - society, Economic well-being and quality
of environment for development, Public administration, and Development management.
The National Development Programme 2018-2022 “Unity, Trust, Creation” serves as its
medium-term implementation plan. It incorporates the Sustainable Development Goals
(SDGs) and aims to improve the quality of citizens’ life through sustainable economic
growth.
A joint action plan with the Uzbek government for 2017-2019 (signed by the Government
of the Kyrgyz Republic on 5 September 2017) frames economic, cultural and humanitarian
cooperation between the two governments, including local self-governments and local
state administrations. Each of the three southern provinces of Kyrgyzstan bordering with
Uzbekistan developed their own action plans of cooperation with their peer province
on the other side, e.g. for 2016-2018 between Batken province and Fergana provinces in
Uzbekistan. These plans capture the following spheres: trade and economy, agro-industry,
education, sports, youth policy healthcare, tourism and culture. The plans are very broad:
for example, on youth policy, the envisaged action is “to carry out cooperation in the
priority areas of the youth policy”.
The State Agency for Youth and Sports of Kyrgyzstan signed a Memorandum of
Understanding with its counterpart in Uzbekistan, which foresees cooperation for youth
activities and events in cultural and educational areas
2.2 The Youth-Promotion Initiative Project in Support of Peacebuilding on
the Kyrgyz-Uzbek Border
The project “Promoting Kyrgyzstan’s youth cohesion and interaction towards Uzbekistan’”
was initiated in 2018 by UNICEF, UNDP, and UNFPA in response to the call for proposals
for the United Nations’ Peacebuilding Fund (PBF) Gender and Youth Promotion Initiative,10
which supports the empowerment of women11 and young people to ensure their inclusion
and participation in peacebuilding and decision-making processes at all levels. The
intervention was planned for 18 months, starting on 14 November 2018, and was extended
for five months until November 14, 2020. The total budget of the project was $ 1,500,000.12
The overall purpose of the project is to improve social cohesion in border areas, and
beyond across the entire country.13 Based on this purpose, the project included one
outcome: “Kyrgyz youth and relevant government agencies collaborate and further
9 See for example: Tricot O’Farrell, Kloé, Kanat Abdiev and Alastair Carr / Saferworld / Foundation for Tolerance International, Young people’s
voices on peace and security in Kyrgyzstan, August 2019, <https://www.saferworld.org.uk/
resources/publications/1219-young-peopleas-voices-on-peace-and-security-in-kyrgyzstan> [12/12/2020].
10 <www.pbfgypi.org> [27/01/2021].
11 Project document: “As noted by the peacebuilding priority plan and supporting researches the representation gap and marginalization of youth
and in particular women is one of the most critical elements creating triggers for unrest especially if exacerbated by ethnic divisions.”
12 Project document, p. 1.
13 Project document, p. 2.
18 EVALUATION OF THE UNICEF / UNFPA / UNDP PROJECT PROMOTING KYRGYZSTAN’S YOUTH COHESION AND INTERACTION TOWARDS UZBEKISTAN
develop cooperation plans to improve positive interactions with their Uzbek counterparts,”
served by three outputs as formulated in the project documents:
1. Young people have improved critical/design thinking and demonstrate support for
diversity and equal rights by initiating projects that contribute to the implementation of
plans for local development and positive cooperation of youth between Kyrgyzstan and
Uzbekistan.
2. Parents of young people, community members improve their understanding of
diversity, have enhanced knowledge and tools to support and participate in youth-led
initiatives.
3. Government representatives have strengthened capacity to provide services in
cross-border communities and commit to support youth-driven initiatives aiming at
improving the cross-border cooperation.
All project activities took place on the territory of Kyrgyzstan with some activities involving
youth and authorities from Uzbekistan. Activities were conducted at central government
level, and locally along the Southern Kyrgyz-Uzbek border, in the provinces of Osh (Kara-
Suu, Kashkar-Kyshtak, Tepe-Korgon), Jalalabad (Kerben, Kashka-Suu, Kok-Serek) and
Batken (Aidarken, Birlik, Suu-Bashy).
The project assumes that youth empowerment and peacebuilding are mutually reinforcing,
in line with UN Security Council Resolutions 2250 (2015) and 2419 (2018). The focus on
youth also acknowledges that youth is at risk of being both perpetrators and victims of
conflict,14 as observed during the events of 2010.
Conflict is also a recurrent concern for UNICEF, UNFPA and UNDP in terms of children’s,
youth’s and vulnerable populations’ equitable access to their rights. The project
therefore targeted immediate (youth, central and local self-governance authorities and
service providers) and final beneficiaries (communities in border areas of Kyrgyzstan
to Uzbekistan).15 It became the first and the only Youth Promotion Initiative project in
Kyrgyzstan which was implemented by Recipient United Nations Organizations (RUNOs),
while other Youth Promotion Initiative projects in the country have been implemented by
Civil Society Organizations (CSOs).16
UNICEF Kyrgyzstan was the lead agency for the coordination of the project and organized
the process of joint planning of the project as well as joint monitoring and reporting.
UNICEF organized systematic coordination meetings with participation of the RUNOs as
well as Implementing Partners (IPs) of the project. Together with UNDP, UNICEF brought
the experience of a similar and recent PBF-funded project at the Kyrgyz-Tajik border. UNFPA
mobilised expertise on inclusion, with particular attention to women and young people.
The division of activities between the implementing UN agencies was set in the project
document, with UNICEF as the lead Agency. Both UNICEF and UNFPA implemented Small
Grant Facilities, UNICEF through UPSHIFT (including mentorship), UNFPA through the
Leadership Innovation Academy, both with a mentorship component. UNFPA conducted
informational activities on social allowances with right holders. UNDP supported activities
empowering youth and supporting youth-to-youth legal aid solutions, initiatives on the
critical/design thinking, research storytelling, Consensus case – debate tournament, peace
Media Lab contributing to youth interaction. UNDP worked in the field of legal aid, in
particular with the Association of Legal Clinics, and capacity building for local service
providers (one-stop-shop approach), justice, rule of law and ombudsman institutions
(Osh, Jalal-Abad and Batken branches), State Registry Service under the Government
14 Ali Altiok / Irena Grizelj, We Are Here: An Integrated Approach to Youth-Inclusive Peace Processes, UN Global Policy Paper on Youth Participa-
tion in Peace Processes, April 2019, p. 9, 21, and key messages 3 and 5, p. 35 and 36.
15 See further below in the Stakeholders section of this report and in Annex 2, Stakeholder Analysis.
16 Terms of Reference, p. 2.
EVALUATION OF THE UNICEF / UNFPA / UNDP PROJECT PROMOTING KYRGYZSTAN’S YOUTH COHESION AND INTERACTION TOWARDS UZBEKISTAN 19
of the Kyrgyz Republic and strengthened the complaint mechanism to enhance young
women’s and men’s access to services, justice and to increase trust.
The project delegated the output on youth empowerment to six implementing CSOs and
one private company selected through a competitive process:
• Public Association “Youth of Osh”
• Accelerate Prosperity
• PF “International Debate Education Association in Central Asia” (IDEA CA)
• Association of legal clinics of Kyrgyzstan
• Public Fund “Tvoe pravo”
• “Women’s Peace Bank” PF
• John Galt Venture Capital & Private Equity (private company)
2.3 Theory of Change
Theory of change-based evaluation
A theory of change-based evaluation tests the validity of the theory of change of the
intervention against implementation. At each level of the theory of change, the evaluation
first determines whether the envisaged change took place and whether assumptions
were realized. Then, it analyses the plausibility and, wherever possible, the extent of the
project’s contribution to these changes (contribution analysis).
To answer key evaluation questions, the evaluation therefore examined the input and
result and level of the intervention: how the theory of change has operated towards results
during the implementation of the project (summative). It also examined the impact and
purpose levels of the theory of change: what dynamics are likely to contribute to long
term impact, and how follow-up activities could support this impact (formative).
Theory of change of the project’s action in support of peace building on the Kyrgyz-Uzbek
border
In the project document, the theory of change of the project is formulated as such: If
Kyrgyzstani young women and men and the local governance institutions build inclusive
dialogue and cooperation with their counterparts across the Uzbek border and if grass-
roots positive cross-border interactions amass, supporting and expanding the on-going
inter-governmental collaboration efforts, then interethnic cohesion improves within the
border areas and beyond, because the more positive interactions there will be the less
the perception of “the other” among the different groups will exist. For the evaluation,
the theory of change was further elaborated to distinguish the various levels of change,
associate internal and external assumptions to each level of change, and link the key
project components to this chain of changes. The theory of change was then visualised,
discussed and validated with the project team during the inception phase.
20 EVALUATION OF THE UNICEF / UNFPA / UNDP PROJECT PROMOTING KYRGYZSTAN’S YOUTH COHESION AND INTERACTION TOWARDS UZBEKISTAN
EVALUATION
OF
THE
UNICEF
/
UNFPA
/
UNDP
PROJECT
PROMOTING
KYRGYZSTAN’S
YOUTH
COHESION
AND
INTERACTION
TOWARDS
UZBEKISTAN
21
Figure 1: Visual reconstruction of the theory of change
Interethnic
and cross-
border youth
interaction
Other UNDP,
PBF projects
(CSO support,
GYPI)
tcapmI noiretirc
Regional/intl
security/eco
stability
ssenevitceffE noiretirc
Internal External
assumptions assumptions
Purpose level
Impact level
Political will
(strategic Outcome docs)
level
Input level
Outputs
Activities
ytilibaniatsuS
noiretirc Social peace in
border areas
Ky/Uz
government
collaboration
Youth as LSG/Gvnt
peace-making enhance
influencers / equitable
Youth
civic activists / access to
influence entrepreneurs rights + redress
community
Youth
want
peace
noiretirc
ycneiciffE
Progress
towards
conflict
settlement
Eco/soc
Ky and UzLSG stability, and state actors
equity, increase
prosperity in
cooperation and Ky border
dialogue
areas
noiretirc
ecnaveleR
inter-ethnic
cohesion
Ky and Uz
women/men inclusive
dialoguewithin
KY and across
the KY-UZ
border
)8102(
9142
RCSNU
dna
)5102(
0522
RCSNU
Prosperity,
interstate and
interethnic
relations
mutually
reinforce
Dialogue and
fulfilment of rights encourage
reconciliation
Stability and
prosperity deter
conflict
Parents/ Cooperation
teachers as
accelerators New cross- border
cooperation
experiences
Duty
for State bearers
actors
cooperative
Civic
Encounters, Transfer of Capacity building for Capacity building and cross-border
capacity/ common knowledge, tools for State Agency on exchanges with law enforcement (incl
activism
experiences parents, teachers, Youth, Physical border management), LSGs, other Central
(youth) youth-led initiatives Culture and Sports authorities
Youth
instrument Camps, community events, Social Impact/Design Thinking Workshops, municipal events Police training
al in conflict
dynamics Grants, advice, advocacy (all) + UPSHIFT (UNICEF) + LIA (UNFPA) + Legal Clinics (UNDP)
UNICEF UNFPA UNDP
At input level (what the project did, which was directly within its control), the project
implemented a set of activities: Camps, community events, Social Impact/Design Thinking
Workshops, activities carried out at local level in partnership with local government. These
activities come from the assumption that youth are best empowered with the support and
responses from qualified counterparts. They were designed to create new experiences,
tools, knowledge and skills among direct beneficiaries, particularly the youth themselves,
as well as their immediate circle (parents, teachers, community members). They were
complemented by capacity-building activities with the Youth State Agency at national and
local levels, municipal administration (e.g. “youth specialists” in each municipality, social
workers). The activities are grouped by the project documents under the three outputs,
which the theory of change encapsulates as common experiences, transfer of knowledge
and tools and capacity building for national and local duty bearers respectively.
For this, the project mobilised the financial resources, political and social capital, knowledge
and skills of the three UN agencies and their implementing partners, channelled into a
set of mechanisms: Grants, advice, advocacy, the UPSHIFT programme, Leadership
and Innovation Academy, Consensus Youth Case – Debate tournament, Creative contest
“Janyration Chakyrygy”, Peace MediaLab, Youth-to-Youth Legal Aid.
The direct beneficiaries were identified according to the assumptions that (a) youth are
often instrumentalised in conflict, particularly its interethnic aspects, but conversely can be
instrumental in resolving and preventing ethnic conflict if they are empowered, because
(b) they essentially aspire to peace; (c) other projects contributed to a sufficient level of
civic activism in the regions concerned, backed by a willingness to cooperate from the
part of the duty bearers (local self-governance bodies, law enforcement agencies, justice
system), all providing a conducive environment to the empowerment of the youth and a
fluid transition towards the result level.
At outcome level (the intermediary level between input and impact, describing the
changes happening as a direct result of the project but not within the control of the project
implementers) these actions were supposed to elicit changes in the interaction, capacities,
attitudes and actions of the direct beneficiaries (provided the assumptions of the input level
were realized).
These changes encompass both the outputs and outcomes in the taxonomy of the project
document. The project document describes the outputs of the project as follows: “Young
people have improved critical/design thinking and demonstrate support for diversity and
equal rights by initiating projects that contribute to the implementation of plans for local
development and positive cooperation of youth between Kyrgyzstan and Uzbekistan”,
“parents of young people, community members improve their understanding of diversity,
have enhanced knowledge and tools to support and participate in youth-led initiatives”, and
“Government representatives have strengthened capacity to provide services in cross-
border communities and commit to support youth-driven initiatives aiming at improving
the cross-border cooperation”.17
An online workshop with the project team enabled the evaluation team to unpack these
outputs and identify key assumptions at this level. The outputs (or immediate results) of
the project can be formulated and linked to assumptions as follows:
• If youth essentially aspire to peace (assumption (b) above), then the experiences
accumulated through the project should lead them to initiate positive interethnic and
cross-border interactions;
• If the youth can be instrumental to positive dynamics in the conflict (assumption
(a) above), then they should become influencers, activists and entrepreneurs who
contribute to peaceful relationships between communities;
17 PBF project document, pp. 24, 25 and 26.
22 EVALUATION OF THE UNICEF / UNFPA / UNDP PROJECT PROMOTING KYRGYZSTAN’S YOUTH COHESION AND INTERACTION TOWARDS UZBEKISTAN
• If there is a strong level of civic activism supported by other complementary projects
(assumption (c) above), then the capacity-building activities and the involvement of
the youth should lead to enhanced access to rights by the rights holders (including
through redress mechanisms) in the targeted communities, and to more equitable
access to these rights;
• If, in addition, these assumptions are fulfilled, the facilitation and capacity-building
activities carried out by the project should also cause them to experiment with new
cross-border cooperation initiatives, because they would be encouraged by positive
dynamics observed.
These four outcomes were expected to culminate into self-generated, cross-cutting
cooperative initiatives between the youth of both ethnicities, the duty bearers at local
and national level, and the duty bearers across the border with Uzbekistan: the project
document defines the intended project outcome as follows: “Kyrgyz youth and relevant
government agencies collaborate and further develop cooperation plans to improve
positive interactions with their Uzbek counterparts.” This transformation from grass-root
experiments to lasting and cross-cutting cooperation supposes that the duty bearers at
local and national level are ready, willing and able to cooperate (assumption (d)).
At impact level (broader changes to which the project contributes, through the changes
that occur at the result level), the project document expects that “interethnic cohesion
improves within the border areas and beyond”. The online workshop with the project team
decomposed this idea into three expected impacts:
• Kyrgyz and Uzbek women and men engage in an inclusive dialogue, both between
ethnic groups within Kyrgyzstan, and across the Kyrgyz-Uzbek border. This supposes
a transition from youth-centred and youth-led dialogue initiatives to community-wide
dialogue, in which the transmission belt lays with the parents and teachers who are the
interface between the youth and the rest of the community. In particular, parents are
assumed to be accelerators of their children’s new capacities and attitudes, provided
they feel consulted and included (assumption (e));
• Economic and social stability, equity and prosperity in Kyrgyz border areas will be
strengthened as a direct effect of better access to rights and entrepreneurial initiatives
led by the youth;
• Cooperation and dialogue between Kyrgyz and Uzbek local self-government and central
level actors increases. This supposes that the cross-border cooperation experiments
transform into more systemic patterns, because they are supported by political will at
all levels (embodied by strategic policy documents) (assumption (f)).
These impacts should in turn contribute to the bigger purpose of peacebuilding in
Kyrgyzstan and in the region, broken down into three main categories:
• Interethnic cohesion, because people who are engaged in a peaceful dialogue and who can
access and claim their rights have no reason to cultivate rejection and conflict (assumption
(g)), otherwise formulated by the project document as a reduction of “the perception of ‘the
other’ among the different groups”18 through the catalytic effect of positive interactions;
• Social peace in border areas, based on the assumption that a stable, prosperous
society is not prone to internal conflicts or to seeking external enemies to conflict with
(assumption (h));
• Progress towards interstate conflict settlement at a diplomatic level. The idea is that the
changes at impact level are likely to reinforce the recent and dynamic Kyrgyz-Uzbek
government collaboration (assumption (i)), as seen in the Joint action plan 2017-2019,
the Memorandum of Understanding between the State Agency for Youth and Sport and
its Uzbek counterpart, and the respective province action plan of cooperation.
18 PBF project document, ToC p. 11.
EVALUATION OF THE UNICEF / UNFPA / UNDP PROJECT PROMOTING KYRGYZSTAN’S YOUTH COHESION AND INTERACTION TOWARDS UZBEKISTAN 23
The changes at impact level are further supposed to create a virtuous circle of peacebuilding,
thanks to the converging actions of empowered communities, State, local governance bodies
and civic actors. The project’s vision of peacebuilding as a virtuous circle supposes that the
aspirations of these stakeholders are indeed convergent, in other words, that prosperity,
(positive) interstate and (positive) interethnic relations mutually reinforce for an enduring
peace. This virtuous circle also relies on the absence of disruptive factors at international
and regional level: international and regional security and economic stability constitute the
last assumption (assumption (j)).
2.4 Stakeholders
The present project evaluation recognised the different groups of stakeholders and plac-
es specific attention to (a) the benefits received by the stakeholder groups (b) the level
of participation by the different stakeholders and (c) the communication between the
project and its stakeholders (cf. Annex 2, Stakeholder Analysis).
The project was funded by the Peacebuilding Fund and implemented by three Recipient UN
Organizations in Kyrgyzstan: UNICEF as a leading agency, together with UNDP and UNFPA.
At the national level, the main project partner was the State Agency for Youth and Sports
of Kyrgyzstan. It worked with its Uzbek counterpart, the State Agency for Youth of Uzbeki-
stan19 (officially established in August 2020), and the “Youth Unity of Uzbekistan” , who
were project partners. The National State Registry Service and the Ombudsperson’s institu-
tion were actively involved in the project: central offices and in each target rayon (district)
and in Osh city. The Prosecutor’s Office, the Ministry of Justice and the Ministry of Foreign
Affairs were regularly informed about the project development process and consulted, as
was the relevant office of the Presidential Administration. In addition, the State Agency for
Local Self Governance and interethnic relations, provincial authorities of Osh, Batken and
Jalalabad, as well youth representatives were consulted for the project design.
On municipal and district level, representatives involved with youth issues were main proj-
ect partners, as well as village councils and mayors’ offices were beneficiaries and central
actors within the project. Law enforcement bodies, community service centres/LSGs (for free
consultative legal aid) and the State Agency for Youth and Sports (Provincial Departments)
received capacity building within the framework of the project.
Implementing partners were the following CSOs: Public Association “Youth of Osh”, Acceler-
ate Prosperity, “International Debate Education Association in Central Asia” (IDEA CA), Asso-
ciation of legal clinics of Kyrgyzstan, Public Fund “Tvoe pravo” and “Women’s Peace Bank”
PF. The private company John Galt VC was also an implementing partner. Law students
participated in the internships based on the tripartite memorandums between LSGs, Univer-
sities and the Association of legal clinics, supported by the UNPD. Young students provided
primary free legal aid and information about public services in the target communities.
Final beneficiaries were young people who have participated in project activities, but
also their parents, teachers, mentors, community members in the municipalities tar-
geted by the project, und ultimately all community members of the targeted locations.
In total 2785 young people took part in the project activities (capacity development and
practical works) with more that 70% of girls. 110 youth specialists of the State Agency
and government (national, local and province level specialists) were trained on youth
centred planning and budgeting. 470 parents, teachers and community members were
involved in the regular project activities. 142 legal service providers and 57 prosecutor
office staff were trained within the project. Additionally, other activities that were con-
ducted by the young people at local level involved many other people.
19 <https://nspi.uz/?portfolio=ozbekiston-yoshlar-ittifoqi-boshlangich-tashkiloti-kengashi&lang=en> [27/01/2021].
24 EEVVAALLUUAATTIIOONN OOFF TTHHEE UUNNIICCEEFF // UUNNFFPPAA // UUNNDDPP PPRROOJJEECCTT PPRROOMMOOTTIINNGG KKYYRRGGYYZZSSTTAANN’’SS YYOOUUTTHH CCOOHHEESSIIOONN AANNDD IINNTTEERRAACCTTIIOONN TTOOWWAARRDDSS UUZZBBEEKKIISSTTAANN
EEVVAALLUUAATTIIOONN OOFF TTHHEE UUNNIICCEEFF // UUNNFFPPAA // UUNNDDPP PPRROOJJEECCTT PPRROOMMOOTTIINNGG KKYYRRGGYYZZSSTTAANN’’SS YYOOUUTTHH CCOOHHEESSIIOONN AANNDD IINNTTEERRAACCTTIIOONN TTOOWWAARRDDSS UUZZBBEEKKIISSTTAANN 25
EPOCS
DNA
SEVITCEJBO
,ESOPRUP
NOITAULAVE
natszygryK/FECINU
©
3. EVALUATION PURPOSE, OBJECTIVES AND SCOPE
3.1 Purpose and Use of the Evaluation
The purpose of the evaluation is to inform the evaluation users for evidence-based
decision making.
The primary intended users of the evaluation results are:
• the decision-makers from the government,
• implementing partners,
• implementing agencies UNICEF, UNDP, UNFPA, and the Peacebuilding Fund.
The secondary intended users are:
• local self-government staff in project communities, and
• project beneficiaries.
The evaluation therefore aims to:
• Understand the effects of the project on the immediate, and when possible, final
beneficiaries;
• Ensure accountability towards the donor, the UN governance bodies, strategic goals
and UN system values, and towards the beneficiaries (rights holders and duty bearers)
in light of the project’s objectives, indicators and targets, and with regard to invested
assets;
• Provide opportunities for organizational learning;
• Inform decision-making about the project’s follow-up with regards to youth and
peacebuilding.
The evaluation is therefore mostly summative (as relates to understanding the effects
of the projects and ensuring accountability), but also to some extent formative (as
relates to organisational learning and informed decision making). The evaluation report
and management response will be public, thus fulfilling UNICEF’s commitment to
transparency and accountability.
3.2 Objectives of Evaluation
The evaluation objectives, in line with the ToR, and complemented by the evaluation
team, are as follows:
1. To assess whether the project has met its objectives, and whether its objectives were
relevant to the context.
2. To assess the circumstances influencing the project’s achievements and the
challenges that hindered it, and generates findings, lessons learned and
recommendations regarding the relevance, effectiveness, efficiency, impact and
sustainability of the project results.
3. To measure the result of the project in terms of outcome and outputs it has delivered
to target groups and beneficiaries.
26 EVALUATION OF THE UNICEF / UNFPA / UNDP PROJECT PROMOTING KYRGYZSTAN’S YOUTH COHESION AND INTERACTION TOWARDS UZBEKISTAN
4. To assess the contribution of the project to UN peacebuilding efforts, and conversely
the value of peacebuilding as a driving conceptual framework federating the efforts
of the UN agencies involved in programming and implementation.
3.3 Scope of the Evaluation
Programmatic scope: the evaluation covered all project activities of UNICEF, UNFPA and
UNDP during the period from January 1, 2019 to November 15, 2020. The evaluation
covered the input and results levels of the intervention: all implemented activities
grouped under “outputs” in the project document, and the expected results from
these activities. The evaluation team only ventured to identify plausible impact and
sustainability aspects of the project, due to the short timeframe covered.
Geographic scope: the evaluation covered activities conducted within the territory of
Kyrgyzstan, at central government level, at local self-governance level, and at grassroot
level. Owing to the restrictions linked to the COVID-19 pandemic, evaluation activities
were carried out remotely (online, by phone or in writing).
Unit of analysis: in addition to the general project planning and implementation, the
evaluation analysed sampled initiatives in four sampled target municipalities in Osh
(Kashkar-Kyshtak), Jalalabad (Kok-Serek and Kerben) and Batken (Aidarken) provinces.
Thematic scope: the evaluation focused on peacebuilding and youth empowerment as
central elements of the project’s theory of change. This thematic scope relates to SDG 16
(Peace, Justice and Strong Institutions), SDG 10 (Reduced Inequalities) in that it relates
to the situation of ethnic minorities often impeded to fully access their rights, and to
SDG 5 (Gender Equality) as a cross-cutting issue.
Population group covered: the evaluation analysed the effects of the project on both
immediate beneficiaries and final beneficiaries. Immediate beneficiaries included:
• As rights holders: youth20 and their parents, teachers and mentors21 involved in the
activities of the project;
• As duty bearers: local self-governance authorities/services and law enforcement
officials at local level, and central government representatives from specialized
ministries and agencies.
Final beneficiaries include all community members in the municipalities covered by the
project.
20 Based on the Law of the Kyrgyz Republic “On the foundations of state youth policy” (dated 31 July 2009, № 256), youth are citizens of the
Kyrgyz Republic and stateless persons aged 14 to 28 years old. The project used this definition when defining the project beneficiaries. Due to
migration demographics, the target group’s age range was adapted at the project’s early stages, covering mostly 15-18 year olds.
21 The mentors interviewed for the evaluation were all teachers at participating schools, except for one who had extensive experience of work-
ing with young people and children through local CSOs.
EVALUATION OF THE UNICEF / UNFPA / UNDP PROJECT PROMOTING KYRGYZSTAN’S YOUTH COHESION AND INTERACTION TOWARDS UZBEKISTAN 27
28 EVALUATION OF THE UNICEF / UNFPA / UNDP PROJECT PROMOTING KYRGYZSTAN’S YOUTH COHESION AND INTERACTION TOWARDS UZBEKISTAN
YGOLODOHTEM
NOITAULAVE
natszygryK/FECINU
©
4. EVALUATION METHODOLOGY
4.1 Evaluation Criteria
Based on the OECD/DAC criteria and the list of evaluation questions suggested in the Terms
of Reference, the evaluation team streamlined and reformulated the evaluation questions.
The evaluation matrix (annex 1) presents the correspondence between evaluation criteria,
evaluation questions and sub-questions, indicators, data collection methods and data
sources.
Relevance
The evaluation examined relevance through the lens of the basic key assumptions of
the project: the mutual reinforcement of the various stakeholders’ actions in the conflict
dynamics backing up the project’s theory of change.
Evaluation question 1: To what extent were the project results relevant to the needs and
priorities of the beneficiaries, especially of young women and men?
The evaluation first assessed how the project integrated conflict analysis and the
understanding of needs and aspirations of stakeholders especially including final
beneficiaries (communities of rights holders in particular the youth, duty bearer at local
and national level, decision makers in inter-state relations).
Evaluation question 2: To what extent is the project based on a logical Theory of Change
and how coherent was it in practice?
The evaluation tested the internal coherence of the project, and its coherence with
the strategic goals of the UN in Kyrgyzstan in terms of peacebuilding, and the existing
peacebuilding framework of the UN as applied to Kyrgyzstan, defined by key documents
by the PBF.22 It further checked how the project handled the evolutions occurring at national
and local level, and whether it was adapted over the course of the intervention.
Effectiveness
The effectiveness criterion aimed to determine whether and to what extent intervention
achieved its objectives.
Evaluation question 3: To what extent have the expected results of the project been
achieved at the output level?
The evaluation examined to what extent the expected results of the project at output and
at outcome levels have been achieved (results level of the theory of change). It checked the
validity of the internal assumptions, which supposedly make it possible to transition from
implementing activities, to creating changes for the direct (output) and indirect (outcome)
beneficiaries.
Efficiency
Under efficiency, the evaluation team assessed the use of resources and assets. The
evaluation particularly analysed the extent to which peacebuilding worked as an operative
conceptual framework to federate the action of several UN agencies. This aspect is
particularly important for organisational learning, for three reasons:
• It relates directly to the choice of the funding instrument (the PBF),
• It is paramount for the implementation of the UNDAF and Delivering as One approach,
22 Peacebuilding Priority Plans for Kyrgyzstan 2013-2016 and 2017-2020 and UN Peacebuilding Support Office Guidance note “What does “sus-
taining peace” mean?”, United Nations, New York, 17 January 2017.
EVALUATION OF THE UNICEF / UNFPA / UNDP PROJECT PROMOTING KYRGYZSTAN’S YOUTH COHESION AND INTERACTION TOWARDS UZBEKISTAN 29
natszygryK/FECINU
©
• It is directly connected to the UN reform, which encourages the entire “UN family” to
deliver results closest to the rights holders by making the most of the complementary
approaches and abilities of all UN entities.
Beyond the accountability towards the donor regarding the management of human and
financial resources, the efficiency criterion gave indications as to specific potentials of
UNICEF, UNFPA and UNDP in this context and how they were put to use.
Evaluation question 4: To what extent have the project implementers optimized their
assets and comparative advantages?
The project was operating within a dynamic context and has endeavoured to create mutual
synergies with existing processes. Beyond the mere aspect of coherence, the evaluation
team assessed how these synergies contributed to the efficiency of the project.
Evaluation question 5: To what extent were interventions under this project complementary,
harmonized, coordinated with the government’s and other peacebuilding actors’
interventions?
Impact
At the close of an 18 months project, its indirect, intended and unintended impacts can
hardly be observed, especially at the level of ambition of peacebuilding. The evaluation
team therefore looked at whether the project strategies and approaches are plausibly
contributing to peace and stability in border areas (likelihood of impact), so as to identify
emerging trends.
The evaluation endeavoured to derive organisational learning regarding the likelihood of
impact generated by the interface between peacebuilding and youth empowerment.
Evaluation question 6: How effective have the project strategies and approaches been
in contributing to peace and stability in border areas?
Sustainability
While it is essential to assess if the expected benefits of the intervention have lasted
beyond the end of the implementation, at this point in time, this is too early to establish:
the evaluation therefore focussed on whether the conditions for such benefits are in place
and how likely is it that the project’s contribution to peacebuilding will last in the long run.
Evaluation question 7: How likely is it that the project’s contribution to peacebuilding at
the Kyrgyz/Uzbek borders will last in the long run?
Gender, Human Rights and Equity
These aspects were not treated separately, but rather mainstreamed throughout the
evaluation criteria.
Under the relevance criterion, the evaluation team tested to what extent the project design
was based on a human rights analysis, gender analysis, and whether it has led to gender
transformative results within the theory of change.23 Under effectiveness and impact, the
team assessed the level of inclusiveness of the project in terms of equity and leaving no
one behind, and whether the project contributed to access to human rights by the rights
holders, in particular as it is a part of the theory of change itself. This in turn enabled to test
the plausibility of the contribution to equity at the impact level.
23 United Nations Country Team, UN Common Country Analysis Update Kyrgyz Republic, Bishkek, December 2019.
30 EVALUATION OF THE UNICEF / UNFPA / UNDP PROJECT PROMOTING KYRGYZSTAN’S YOUTH COHESION AND INTERACTION TOWARDS UZBEKISTAN
4.2 Methods for Data Collection, Analysis, and Sampling
Sampling
The evaluation sampled four municipalities for in-depth data collection with direct and final
beneficiaries (which would not have been feasible in all locations covered by the project),
as per the ToR. The sample was discussed and approved by the Evaluation Reference
Group.24 The sampled municipalities were Kashkar-Kyshtak (Osh), Aidarken (Batken) and
Kok-Serek and Kerben (Jalalabad).
The rich, in-depth qualitative data collected in the sampled locations served to analyse the
results and impact of the project on local communities, exploring especially the realisation
of the theory of change’s assumptions. Particular focus was placed on the youth’s ability to
influence their community, the way the community and the local duty bearers reacted to
the empowerment of the youth, and whether and how parents and teachers have played
a positive role as transmission belts between the youth and their community. The team
examined how the youth and their communities managed to inflect municipal decision
making, in particular through municipal plans and budgetary decisions. Data in these
municipalities illustrated the interethnic dialogue as well as dialogue between rights
holders and duty bearers, and how these influenced attitudes towards diversity.
The ToR further envisaged three human interest stories. For these, the team selected
individual stories from interviewees. The selection was based on the interviewees’
communication on their involvement in depth, their ability to describe their own context,
and readiness to explore new or unexpected insights into the subject. There also had to
be two human interest stories from among the rights holders (1 female, 1 male), and one
human interest story from among duty bearers, located in different districts. As a human-
interest story does not require a random or representative sample, these stories were
identified through brainstorming among the evaluation team, the Child Rights Monitoring
officer and UNICEF Communications team.
Data Grouping
Data collection tools needed to be varied and complementary to secure strict triangulation
of data. This section presents how data was grouped, and which data collection tools were
used to this end.
Data grouping:
1. General data concerning the entire evaluation scope, mixing qualitative and quantitative
methods. This data was sourced through all data collection tools, as follows:
• Document review;
• Interviews with informants having a broad overview of the action;
• Focus groups and interviews with informants having an overview of the action;
• Interviews with CSO representatives, youth participants, parents, mentors, teachers,
community members, who can give insights on certain aspects of the project,
including specific questions during interviews with national and local representatives;
• Social media analysis.
2. In-depth data at local level in sampled municipalities:
• Interviews with the current municipal administration and elected officials, other
relevant duty bearers and service providers;
• Interviews with rights holders (including youth, parents, mentors, teachers, and
community leaders), local/national/international NGOs;
24 More about the sampling process for the evaluation, see annex 4.
EVALUATION OF THE UNICEF / UNFPA / UNDP PROJECT PROMOTING KYRGYZSTAN’S YOUTH COHESION AND INTERACTION TOWARDS UZBEKISTAN 31
• Collection and review of additional documents in the concerned municipalities (e.g.
samples of instructions, joint action plans, initiatives introduced by youth, sample
of decisions regarding support of these initiatives, sample of reports produced
locally, material relating to capacity-building measures of the project).
Data collection
Document review
The evaluation team reviewed documents for several purposes:
• Retrace the “story” of the project’s contribution to peacebuilding on the southern
border of Kyrgyzstan to Uzbekistan;
• Compare the vision, strategies and principles that transpire from the project and
the aspirations of various actors at local level, including in particular youth and their
communities, as well as local self-government representatives and local public service
providers;
• Test the theory of change of the project in relation to the national and regional peace-
building efforts as embodied by national documents;
• Compare the vision, strategies and principles that transpire from the project’s and the
Government of Kyrgyzstan’s strategic objectives;
• Trace the project’s contributions to decision making in the sampled locations;
• Analyse the inputs and activities invested by the project and other actors into
peacebuilding.
The documents analysed were of several types, addressing all EQs:25
• Background documents publicly available (e.g. reports by monitoring bodies/
monitoring mechanisms of UN);
• General strategic documents of the Government of Kyrgyzstan (e.g. national strategies
such as the Joint action plan 2017-2019 and provinces’ joint action plans, and Memorandum
of Understanding of the State Agency for Youth and Sport with its Uzbek counterpart);
• Strategic documents of UNICEF, UNFPA, UNDP and the PBF;
• Guiding documents and publications from UNICEF, UNFPA, UNDP and the PBF,
pertaining to evaluation methodology, peacebuilding, youth empowerment and other
related topics;
• UNICEF, UNFPA and UNDP project and programme documents, reports, budgetary
documents, pertaining to the project;
• Proceeds of project activities such as minutes, agendas, lists of participants,
presentations, etc.
• Documents related to interaction with the donor.
Semi-structured interviews
The semi-structured, remote interviews cover all the evaluation questions. Based on
implementing partners’ and local mentors’ recommendations about contact points
(snowball sampling of interviewees), the evaluation team reached out to various
stakeholders.26 UNICEF has mentors in every village, who could cover the participation of
UNICEF, UNDP and UNFPA project participants.
The National Consultant and International Consultant held interviews with United Nations
25 List of documents in section 8: References, and annex 17: List of Project Documents.
26 For the involvement of stakeholders in the evaluation and the rationale for the choice of interviewees, see stakeholder analysis in annex 2 and
list of interviewee categories in annex 5, and inception report.
32 EVALUATION OF THE UNICEF / UNFPA / UNDP PROJECT PROMOTING KYRGYZSTAN’S YOUTH COHESION AND INTERACTION TOWARDS UZBEKISTAN
and duty bearers at national level, while the national expert interviewed rights holders
and local beneficiaries (youth, parents, mentors, teachers), all according to the interview
templates (see annexes 6-10).
Targeted interview partners from the sampled municipalities enabled to collect the
experiences and opinions of stakeholders (rights holders and duty bearers: territorial
divisions of the State Registry Service, law enforcement, legal aid, CSO project partners,
youth participants, parents, mentors, teachers, community members). In particular, this
method informed whether and how the project has met the needs of the beneficiaries
(relevance), achieved its objectives (effectiveness), and secured conditions to have lasting
effects (impact and sustainability), at the municipal level. Interviews with rights holders
further informed on the perception of the project by the beneficiaries, the changes observed
during the project, personal experiences, changes in attitudes and behaviours experienced
and observed, and the expected impact. These one-time interviews also opened the way
to a follow-up for two Human Interest Stories, on a voluntary and informed basis (see
below, Ethics section, and in Inception report).
In total 92 persons were interviewed from November 11 to November 30, 2020:
• Staff of the UN agencies involved in the project, and other international stakeholders
(PBF, UN Regional Office): 10 people were interviewed
• National duty bearers and duty bearers in the Provinces: 24 people
• Youth Union of Uzbekistan: 1 person
• CSO project partners and activists: 15 people
• Rights holders on local level (youth, parents, teachers, mentors, community members):
52 people
Notes were taken verbatim in (or translated into) English within the templates for comparability
purposes, and shared only within the evaluation team. Deep interviewing techniques were
used so as to ensure rich qualitative data. Interviews were held in confidence, to preserve
anonymity.T he interviewees were informed and asked for consent as to the potential collection
of representative quotes for the final report, which were by no means to be attributable. Some
interviews were held with children (see Ethics section), as youth project participants were
aged 13-28. In the case-study municipalities, interviewed beneficiaries were sampled by
referral (snowball sampling). The collected data is deemed to be reliable, while recognising
the bias that may arise from snowball sampling and low access to internet in remote and
underserved regions. The evaluation team actively attempted to hear the points of view
of hard-to-reach beneficiaries and vulnerable groups, such as rights holders from remote
areas, young women and girls, and persons belonging to national minorities. Keeping this
focus in mind, the bias was remediated as much as possible, sometimes by the interviewees
themselves (unprompted) who relayed other people’s experiences. The interviewees were
offered a discussion beforehand, and a written consent form.
Focus groups
The evaluation team organised two online focus group discussions. One focus group
involved CSO representatives involved in the project (two per partner CSO including
“Youth of Osh”, “Accelerate Prosperity”, “International Debate Education Association in
Central Asia” and “Association of legal clinics of Kyrgyzstan”, amounting to 8 people) on 8
December 2020, to present and validate the preliminary findings. The other involved United
Nations staff (8 people), on 17 December 2020, to test possible recommendations. They
operated under Chatham House rules, but notes were taken verbatim by the evaluation
team for its own analysis and confrontation with interview and document review results.
EVALUATION OF THE UNICEF / UNFPA / UNDP PROJECT PROMOTING KYRGYZSTAN’S YOUTH COHESION AND INTERACTION TOWARDS UZBEKISTAN 33
Social media analysis
For the purpose of the evaluation and as discussed during the inception phase, the platform
Instagram was examined. Social media analysis aimed to compare the attitudes of the
general population with project participants’ views, as well as to corroborate the needs of
the beneficiaries. The keyword search was hampered by several factors (see annex 3: Social
Media Analysis), but the data gathered could nevertheless corroborate several findings.
Risks and limitations
The risks and limitations identified in the inception report were verified and countermeasures
applied successfully.27 Most prominently, due to the COVID-19 pandemic and public health
measures, interviews and focus groups were conducted remotely. This only marginally
impacted on the amount of data necessary for triangulation: the project had gone online
already in the course of 2020, and by the time evaluation interviews were conducted, the
stakeholders had already adapted to the circumstances.
The evaluation team, supported by the UNICEF Osh office and the implementing partners,
identified and contacted rights holders in sufficient number. Their access to phone or
internet could be secured with the help of the implementing partners. Interviews with the
rights holders were sometimes rather short, and the depth of reflection varied a lot from
interviewee to interviewee: this could be linked to varying degree of comfort with online
interaction, but also stems from cultural discretion regarding the sensitive topics tackled
by the project. While on-site interviews could have added depth marginally, there is no
indication that this factor severely affected the quality of the data.
Access to duty bearers was affected, not only by the remoteness of data collection, but also
by the events following the October Parliamentary Elections, which generated some turn-
over among officials. The evaluation team reached out to a large number of interlocutors
to compensate for this turn-over. In addition, unlike elected officials, the administrative
staff remained relatively stable and could be interviewed.
Another important factor was that the evaluation took place immediately at the end of the
project. On the one end, this created limits to assess the long-term impact of the project,
because it simply could not be observed: this limitation was fully acknowledged in the
terms of reference of the evaluation, and the evaluation looked into potential of impact,
rather than impact per se. On the other hand, this timing increased the reliability of the
data, because memories were fresh, stakeholders were still ready to interact regarding a
project that engaged them until recently, and documentary evidence (archived and online
including on social media) was easily available.
Other limitations, in particular concerning attribution of broad changes to this relatively
small project, inherent to most evaluations, were compensated by contribution analysis.
The quality of the interview data and the variety of people interviewed allowed to clearly
identify changes, causalities, and analyse plausible contributions, following the steps of a
theory of change-based analysis.
27 See risks and limitations section in the Inception report, annex 16.
34 EVALUATION OF THE UNICEF / UNFPA / UNDP PROJECT PROMOTING KYRGYZSTAN’S YOUTH COHESION AND INTERACTION TOWARDS UZBEKISTAN
4.3 Ethical Issues and Considerations
Ethical principles
The overall approach adhered strongly to the ethical guidelines of the United Nations
system and UNICEF:28
• UNICEF Procedure for Ethical Standards in Research, Evaluation, Data Collection and
Analysis (2015)
• The obligations of evaluators in the United Nations Evaluation Group Ethical Guidelines
(2008)
• The United Nations Evaluation Group’s Norms and Standards for Evaluation (2016)
• Ethical research involving Children, ERIC Compendium (2013)
• PBF Guidance Assessing Readiness for Remote Evaluation
• UNICEF Policy on Personal Data Protection (2020)
• Ethical Considerations in Using Social Media for Evidence Generation (2018)
• UNICEF Ethical Considerations for Evidence Generation Involving Children on the
COVID-19 Pandemic (2020)
The evaluation team has prepared and implemented an evaluation approach that meets
the ethical evaluation obligations and principles as described further.
Table 1: Observance of the UNEG ethical standards by the evaluation team
Respect for dignity Both national evaluation team members were recruited to carry
and diversity out the fieldwork and to support the evaluation team. The team
members were fully aware of local culture, local customs, reli-
gious practices, ethnicity, in particular as regards the gender roles
and the evolving role of youth, and of other traits, to ensure re-
spect during data collection. The disruption was to be kept to min-
imum providing notices to individuals and partner institutions in
advance to allow the national consultants involved in data collec-
tion to plan their schedule beforehand, so that each counterpart
had the time to organize for remote meeting arrangements, thus
securing the conditions to respect people’s right to privacy. This
anticipation enabled the team to check the representativeness of
interviewees, the inclusion of both ethnic groups to the maximum
extent, the gender balance, as well as the inclusion of more vul-
nerable stakeholders. The very structure of the project lent itself
well to an inclusive, diverse outreach to stakeholders.
Rights a. Right to Self-Determination: participants of the evaluation were
treated as autonomous agents. They were involved in data collection
based on their voluntary participation and were able to opt out of the
process at any time. The evaluation participants were informed fully
about 1) the aims of the evaluation and the background/composition
of the evaluation team, 2) why they were invited to participate in the
evaluation, and 3) what the benefits of the evaluation would be.
b. Fair Representation: participants were selected fairly in relation
to the aims of the evaluation, covering all project sites and all
project stakeholder groups.
28 UNICEF, Ethical Considerations When Using Social Media for Evidence Generation <www.unicef-irc.org/publications/968-ethical-consider-
ations-when-using-social-media-for-evidence-generation-research-brief.html> [10/10/2020].
EVALUATION OF THE UNICEF / UNFPA / UNDP PROJECT PROMOTING KYRGYZSTAN’S YOUTH COHESION AND INTERACTION TOWARDS UZBEKISTAN 35
c. Compliance with codes for vulnerable groups: the evaluation
team observed the international and national norms that govern
interviewing children and young people. The human rights back-
ground of the Team Leader, and a human rights-based evaluation
approach which envisaged the various stakeholders as rights
holders and/or duty bearers (as duty bearers are also citizens with
their rights), and which entrenches issues related to access to
rights at the very heart of the evaluation matrix, helped secure the
respect for the rights of the stakeholders throughout the evalua-
tion process and the integration of human rights considerations
in the data collection and analysis.
Finally, the conflict analysis and peacebuilding lens, which serve
as benchmarks to evaluate the relevance of the project both con-
tain important human rights elements: this aspect added to the
human rights orientation of the evaluation, both for data collec-
tion and for analysis.
Confidentiality The evaluation team respected people’s right to provide infor-
mation in confidence. The evaluation participants were assured
of confidentiality and anonymity. They were clearly informed of
the confidentiality measures: their contributions were aggregat-
ed and anonymized in the report, and their responses were kept
confidential. The final report has no reference to any names of in-
terviewees. While the final evaluation report may include quotes,
which are representative of widespread opinions expressed by
the interviewees, they have been screened by the evaluation
team members to check they are not attributable. Evaluation
participants were informed of this process. During interviews and
focus groups, the evaluation participants were asked permission
to take notes from interviews and discussions. Evaluation consul-
tants explained that detailed note-taking would assure the accura-
cy of the data. All interview notes were kept within the evaluation
team only (not forwarded to any other actor, even UN agencies),
stored in a password-protected drive during the evaluation, and
completely deleted upon completion of the evaluation. No sensi-
tive personal information was expected from the interviews.
No harm Following the “do no harm principle”, and the principle of benev-
olence not malevolence, the evaluation team made sure to mini-
mize risks to, and burdens on, people participating in the evalua-
tion. The evaluation sought to maximize the benefits and reduce
any unnecessary harm that might occur from negative or critical
evaluation, without compromising the integrity of the evaluation.
The no-harm data-collection process included clear information
about the data sought to be sent in advance to the evaluation
participants, online meetings and Key Informant Interview were
planned according to participants’ availability. The duration of the
meetings and interviews were kept within generally acceptable
time-limits.
The research needed for this evaluation included interviews with underage young
people. Children involved in the evaluation were between 14-18 years old. The elements
of the UNICEF Procedure for Ethical Standards in Research, Evaluation, Data Collection
36 EEVVAALLUUAATTIIOONN OOFF TTHHEE UUNNIICCEEFF // UUNNFFPPAA // UUNNDDPP PPRROOJJEECCTT PPRROOMMOOTTIINNGG KKYYRRGGYYZZSSTTAANN’’SS YYOOUUTTHH CCOOHHEESSIIOONN AANNDD IINNTTEERRAACCTTIIOONN TTOOWWAARRDDSS UUZZBBEEKKIISSTTAANN
and Analysis (2015) were observed such as: Respect, Informed consent, Privacy and
confidentiality, Harms and benefits, Justice, Payment and Compensation. A special
procedure was applied to obtain informed consent from children and their parents (see
consent forms in annex 11). As this evaluation was conducted entirely online and the UN
implementing agencies and partner CSOs supported logistically the evaluation team to
arrange online meetings, the project team was asked to inform the parents regarding
the evaluation and supported the consent procedure (signed forms) prior to interviews.
The children were informed about their right to choose the level of involvement in the
process of evaluation. The evaluation team ensured the data confidentiality at all levels.
Ethical Review Procedure
The inception report, including evaluation methodology, interview templates, and
consent forms were submitted to the Ethics Review Board in parallel with the quality
assurance procedure. Ethical approval was given on 11 November 2020 (see letter of
approval in Annex 11), after which the data collection phase started.
EEVVAALLUUAATTIIOONN OOFF TTHHEE UUNNIICCEEFF // UUNNFFPPAA // UUNNDDPP PPRROOJJEECCTT PPRROOMMOOTTIINNGG KKYYRRGGYYZZSSTTAANN’’SS YYOOUUTTHH CCOOHHEESSIIOONN AANNDD IINNTTEERRAACCTTIIOONN TTOOWWAARRDDSS UUZZBBEEKKIISSTTAANN 37
38 EVALUATION OF THE UNICEF / UNFPA / UNDP PROJECT PROMOTING KYRGYZSTAN’S YOUTH COHESION AND INTERACTION TOWARDS UZBEKISTAN
SGNIDNIF
NOITAULAVE
natszygryK/APFNU
©
5. EVALUATION FINDINGS
5.1 Relevance and Coherence
Evaluation question 1: To what extent were the project results relevant to the needs and
priorities of the beneficiaries, especially of the young women and men?
Key Findings:
Finding 1: The empowerment approach to peacebuilding at grassroot level is
relevant, as it responds to the most urgent need of the beneficiaries.
Finding 2: The link between youth empowerment and peacebuilding is not
clearly perceived by beneficiaries.
Finding 3: The project document diplomatically formulated this project as a cross-
border initiative, but concrete activities formed a mostly interethnic programme
within Kyrgyzstan.
Finding 4: Labour migration issue was overlooked.
Finding 5: Gender equality and empowerment of women was best targeted
within the equity-focused approach of the project.
Finding 1: The youth empowerment approach to peacebuilding at grassroot level is
relevant, as it responds to the most urgent needs of the beneficiaries.
Triangulated evidence basis
Interviews with youth participants, parents, teachers, mentors, municipal
authorities and leaders, implementing partners, duty bearers, UN staff
Focus group discussion with CSO representatives
Social media output and media coverage of the project
Academic publications
Project Document
United Nations Peacebuilding Priority Plans for Kyrgyzstan
The analysis of the project documents, confirmed by the interviews with the UN and
implementing partners, show that the project targeted a relevant and comprehensive
list of stakeholders, from the national to the grassroot level, which corresponded to the
intentions of the theory of change.Y outh participation in the project design phase is required
for a Youth Promotion Initiative of the PBF,29 and this proved essential for the project’s
relevance. The project then matched the needs of the respective groups of beneficiaries
with tailored activities, which were perceived as relevant by almost all interviewees.
29 <www.pbfgypi.org/> [22/02/21].
EVALUATION OF THE UNICEF / UNFPA / UNDP PROJECT PROMOTING KYRGYZSTAN’S YOUTH COHESION AND INTERACTION TOWARDS UZBEKISTAN 39
natszygryK/APFNU
©
The theory of change of the project pinpoints economic and social stability and prosperity
in Kyrgyzstan’s border areas (second expected impact in the theory of change) as a key
element of peacebuilding, which was validated in the design phase by stocktaking with
beneficiaries. High unemployment, lack of perspective and lack of “agency” affect social
stability and prosperity in the targeted regions, which in turn exacerbates or creates tensions
over resources, and makes individuals, especially the youth, easier to instrumentalize in
conflict dynamics.30 These shortcomings affect the youth and their access to economic and
social rights particularly (such as the right to work, right to an adequate standard of living),31
and age-specific vulnerabilities at that stage in life have lasting repercussions. Labour
migration to Russia is a symptom of the limitations to social stability and prosperity in the
targeted regions. It is a widespread strategy of households in reaction to unemployment
and the lack of income-generating opportunities for young people, as attested in academic
research and consistently confirmed by interviewees. According to interviewees from
among CSOs and local duty bearers, and confirmed by academic writings, the families’
most widespread strategy is that young men become labour migrants, while young women
tend to marry soon after their majority – and may rely on a remittances from a husband or
another relative, male or female. However, there are also young women who leave to work
in Russia. Therefore, labour migration is not exclusively a male strategy.
Quotes (implementing partners)
“I expected, when coming to these communities, a different attitude:
seeing the kind of conditions they live in (cold in winter, no electricity,
no internet), I would have expected them to complain, but no! I realised
what vulnerability really was. It helped me realize that our priority as
a society was to provide the basic conditions for them (education,
electricity, internet connection). Sometimes, just because of the rain,
their areas would be cut off from the internet grid! They don’t have a
sense of entitlement – but at the same time with the project they became
aware that their voice and their needs need to be heard.”
“In South Kyrgyzstan, as soon as they are 16 and get a passport, the
youth leave to Russia to become labour migrants. Those who stay are
those who were not able to go to Russia. Social pressure is to go work
abroad because there is no future in their homelands. It is hard to find
anyone around 18 in South Kyrgyzstan.”
Having identified these shortcomings in the social and economic fabric of the targeted
regions, the project designers aligned project planning with the expectations of the
beneficiaries: the youth themselves, their caregivers and teachers, their community and
local self-governance organs. The project targeted, at result level, the youth as civic activists
and potential entrepreneurs supported by their communities (second result of the theory
of change). The logic was that the youth themselves, supported by their community, had
the highest potential to demand and access their rights, and in turn reduce economic
and social tensions which contribute to conflict. The project designers in consultation
with implementing partners then researched the specific needs of the youth to use
this potential: they concluded that their capacity (skills, experiences, attitudes and self-
confidence) needed strengthening, and that their participation (in processes among peers,
within their community and with duty bearers) needed to be mediated and facilitated.
Interviews confirm this diagnosis. The project therefore adequately matched these needs
30 Peace nexus, Conflict and Peace Analysis, Kyrgyzstan, April 2019, p. 44.
31 International Covenant for Economic, social and cultural rights – Articles 6 and 11.
40 EVALUATION OF THE UNICEF / UNFPA / UNDP PROJECT PROMOTING KYRGYZSTAN’S YOUTH COHESION AND INTERACTION TOWARDS UZBEKISTAN
with a wide but coherent range of training and workshop topics. It adequately aimed to
facilitate the youth’s participation within their community and support by their parents: in
interviews, the youth’s need for recognition of their potential transpires very often, and it
is confirmed by the analysis made by the mentors and teachers.
One of the original features of the project design was to target communities, including
parents, teachers and community leaders around the youth. The communities targeted
by the project are underserved by international organisations, so the project filled a gap.
The aspirations of parents and teachers are closely linked to the needs of the youth in
their care: youth empowerment is directly relevant to their hopes for their children and
students. Furthermore, as members of the community, they aspire to project’s expected
results in terms of participation and access to services. The theory of change therefore
rightly assumed parents and teachers to be accelerators for actions targeting youth, and
their support to be instrumental to youth-led initiatives. According to this assumption,
without parents’ and teachers’ support, the youth could not have accessed the project
activities – they may have even been stopped by reluctant parents. With their support, the
participation of the youth became possible, and a place would be carved for the youth’s
involvement in community-wide decisions and projects. The project directly acted on this
assumption, by involving parents and teachers with parenting programmes and capacity
building to support youth participation in parallel with project activities aimed at youth.
This proved essential to the success of youth activities at outcome level, as stated in
interviews of youth participants, parents, teachers and implementing partners.
The project further targeted local self-governance bodies as well as national government
actors as duty bearers of the civil, political, economic, social and cultural rights of the end
beneficiaries (third result of the theory of change). For duty bearers at local and province
level, in terms of peace building, the role of youth is also crucial in the present and future
economic development and prosperity – and, in turn, access to economic and social rights
as well as social cohesion. This perception was expressed in interviews, and it explains
why the project’s focus on the youth was appreciated by local duty bearers. Likewise,
access to services is recognized by local duty bearers as an important element of social
cohesion: this aspect of the project was therefore in line with their expectations. Duty
bearers also welcome the idea that the population in general, and youth in particular,
should have legal outlets and possibilities to channel grievances and demand their rights
in non-violent ways – but the local capacity to support such processes is often insufficient.
Mediation and legal aid are directly sought to address this gap.
In a similar way, national duty bearers rely on youth for social peace, especially in border
areas. In addition to the assumptions of the theory of change that youth are instrumental
in conflict dynamics and that youth want peace (as actors of the present, not only in
future), national duty bearers are starting to comprehend the potential of the youth to
influence their community in either peaceful or less peaceful ways: national duty bearers,
in particular the Youth Agency, therefore need to establish a more direct link with the local
youth. This was also part of the project activities, which adds up to a very strong relevance
of the project activities overall.
The United Nations agencies used an inclusive process to ensure a good match between
the aspirations and needs of the stakeholders towards the full enjoyment of their rights on
the one hand, and the expected results and impacts, as well as target groups of the project
on the other hand. The project design team, consistent with its peacebuilding conceptual
framework, enabled stakeholders to participate in the design phase, either by collaborating
with State agencies, or with public consultations and focus group discussions in the
target municipalities. The project then tailored activities to various social groups. End
beneficiaries were not necessarily aware of this, but they appraised the project activities
for adequately addressing gridlocked problems, albeit on a small scale. For example, local
EVALUATION OF THE UNICEF / UNFPA / UNDP PROJECT PROMOTING KYRGYZSTAN’S YOUTH COHESION AND INTERACTION TOWARDS UZBEKISTAN 41
duty bearers felt that all activities conducted at the level of municipality were relevant,
including the activities with the young people.
In addition, throughout the implementation, the project adapted approaches and activities to
meet the needs or raised issues during the project by the various groups of stakeholders, like
the State Registry Service, improvement of the cross-border units, developing the website for
Ministry of Labour and Social Development on state benefits and social allowances.T he changes
included lateral transfers of budget between activities, consistent with the intertwinements in
the UN agencies’ collaboration. This adaptation is fundamentally in line with the expectations
of the Peacebuilding Fund according to its Learning and Adaptation strategy.32
Finding 2: The link between youth empowerment and peacebuilding is not clearly perceived
by beneficiaries.
Triangulated evidence basis
Interviews with youth, implementing partners, municipalities,
local and national duty bearers, UN staff
The theory of change explicitly linked youth empowerment with peacebuilding through
strengthening interethnic cohesion, and contributing to social peace in border areas.
Youth empowerment served as an optimal access point to wider social impact associated
with peacebuilding and indeed has. From the perspective of the Peacebuilding Fund, the
core meaning, at impact and purpose levels, is coined in clear terms.
Quote (PBF staff)
“This project is not about development of the youth. The project is about
participation of the youth in the peacebuilding process.”
Interviewees, including mentors and implementing partners, as well as some duty bearers
validated the choice of the youth as a good entry point for social cohesion and participation,
with higher returns on invested resources compared to alternative target social groups.
Quote (implementing partner)
“I had never worked before near the border. Uzbek and Kyrgyz people,
but the problem is that they don’t mix and they don’t trust each other. It
is not an open conflict, there is no violence, but rather they just keep a
distance. But the youth have a different attitude. Youth from the border
communities are more ready to engage actively in the project. By the
end of the project, they still work together.”
Quote (mentor)
“I am proud of being part of the opportunities that the teenagers have
seen under the project – the places they visited, even the hotels they
have stayed at during the trips, and also the social projects they have
accomplished, and also proud of the opportunity to bring together
teenagers from three provinces.”
32 UN Peacebuilding / Katinka Patscher-Hellbeck, Strategic Peacebuilding Review. PBF Portfolio in Kyrgyzstan 2018-2020, July 2020, p. 20.
42 EVALUATION OF THE UNICEF / UNFPA / UNDP PROJECT PROMOTING KYRGYZSTAN’S YOUTH COHESION AND INTERACTION TOWARDS UZBEKISTAN
However, when participants reflect on what the project meant to them, on a personal
level, and for their wider environment, peacebuilding and interethnic relations do not
spontaneously appear in their reflection (as opposed to youth empowerment). Generally,
participants (both youth and their parents) do not talk openly of interethnic environment
in their communities, and when asked explicitly, they tend to deny tensions or refer to
“the other”. From the perspective of the stakeholders, the vehicle (youth empowerment)
took over the purpose for various reasons. Some interviewees among the youth and their
parents had a difficult time connecting project activities in which they had participated
with the declared project purposes (interethnic cohesion). A few young people even
dismissed the link between the activities and the purposes altogether. The quote below
shows that some participants did not understand the link between what they did during
the project, and the purpose of the project, even after this purpose was presented to them.
This doesn’t mean the link between youth empowerment and peacebuilding is absent –
but stakeholders do not easily perceive it.
Quote (youth)
“The project was about strengthening relations between young people
of Kyrgyzstan and Uzbekistan. But I don’t know how. That is what they
told us about the project.”
All the interviewees in selected locations stated that residents of all ethnic backgrounds
(including minorities) live peacefully in their community. Such a positive appraisal is partly
due to a cultural norm in the Southern part of the country. It is considered inappropriate to
directly express anything that may be upsetting, to openly criticize, or argue. This tendency
is increased as government statements deny the existence of any interethnic conflicts.33
Interethnic disagreements tend to be cast as cross-border or little domestic disputes that
must be solved by the national government. Border problems, not interethnic tension, are
often presented as the root of all troubles, and the expectation that border delineation will
certainly put an end to all problems is widespread. However, both research and anecdotal
evidence manifest the fallacy of this assumption. Evidence demonstrates that even in
areas with delineated border, there are conflicts. The root reason is more likely the sense
of insecurity of border areas’ residents and limited access to justice.34 What field research
has shown is that border-related disputes (for instance, over land, water or pasturing
places) and interethnic defiance reinforce each other, as envisaged by conflict analysis.
For instance, when asked about the conflict situations that the project intends to address,
interviewees talked about a few anecdotes of cross-border incidents, and in parallel they
evoked lives apart for communities across the border. In the same context, while they
did not talk about separation of ethnic communities within Kyrgyzstan, they still shared
their thoughts about lack of mutual trust among communities and more generally a lack
of trust among different actors of the society, illustrated for instance by the reluctance of
certain parents to let their children participate, or the low expectations displayed towards
state services. These nuanced and varied inputs, show that, while perceptions on the role
33 For instance the Kyrgyz authorities claim that “both sides [ethnic groups] had guns and committed violence”. The Kyrgyz authorities also have
not admitted that there were more ethnic Uzbek people among the victims of the 2010 conflict, Human Rights Watch, Kyrgyzstan: Justice Elusive
10 Years On, 9 June 2020, <www.hrw.org/news/2020/06/09/kyrgyzstan-justice-elusive-10-years>;
This report of the OSCE meeting lists where the Kyrgyz Government has failed its interethnic policy - <www.osce.org/files/f/docu-
ments/3/c/432293_0.pdf>; about the various Government officials’ reaction to the international report, making the Finnish investigator a persona
non-grata and accusing him of inaccurate reporting, <https://kloop.kg/blog/2011/05/26/zhogorku-kenesh-zapretil-kimmo-kilyunenu-vezd-v-kyr-
gyzstan/> [27/01/2021].
34 Murzakulova, Asel, Gulbara Omorova and Evgenii Shibkov, Reconsidering the Meaning of Neighbourship: The Transformation of Uzbeki-
stan-Kyrgyzstan Border Areas after 2016, MSRI Brief, DOI: 10.13140/RG.2.2.19225.98406, May 2019 <https://www.researchgate.net/publica-
tion/335161251_Reconsidering_the_meaning_of_neighbourship_the_transformation_of_Uzbekistan-Kyrgyzstan_border_areas_after_2016>
[12/12/2020].
EVALUATION OF THE UNICEF / UNFPA / UNDP PROJECT PROMOTING KYRGYZSTAN’S YOUTH COHESION AND INTERACTION TOWARDS UZBEKISTAN 43
of the border differ depending on individual experiences, the question of the border is
usually seen as prominent, while interethnic relations are quickly discarded. This tends to
confirm the conflict analysis behind the theory of change, especially the assumption that
improved cross-border and inter-state relations on the one hand, and social/interethnic
peace (and the trust that it breeds) on the other hand, are mutually reinforcing.
Quote (mentor)
“People in border areas also have more fears, they don’t trust – neither
the authorities, nor other people. Why they don’t trust the authorities –
because their issues (at borders) haven’t been solved for many years,
they are in regime of self-survival, self-reliance.”
Quotes (parents)
“There are many cases of intermarriage here, between Uzbeks and
Kyrgyz. Many young people are friends with each other, in adult groups
of friends you can also see both ethnicities. Uzbek people are well
integrated here.”
“Our relatives are here and in Uzbekistan, 60km away from us. My sisters
are married and live there. We go to Uzbekistan without any problems,
they just check your passport. No interethnic problems [unprompted by
the interviewer].”
“In our village we only have Kyrgyz people. There is an Uzbek village,
but there is a border between us, so people don’t go there. “
“What can help is probably if the border issues get solved: I believe,
there are still some issues unsolved.”
Quote (youth)
“Our village is close to the border, that is why Uzbek and Kyrgyz people
are mixed here, they all live here. In some villages Uzbek and Kyrgyz
people live in separate parts of the villages (Kyrgyz – right side, Uzbek –
left side). But we have no conflicts between people in the village.”
Quote (teacher)
“One of main topics [of the project activities] was on conflicts, how to
manage them, how to solve them, since it is an acute topic in the South.
We have a border with Uzbekistan and Tajikistan, and the issues haven’t
been solved yet. So, we explain to our pupils that the situation depends
on our neighbouring countries. And that they are the ones who initiate
conflicts.”
At the same time, the unprompted claim that “everything is ok”, when interviewees deny
interethnic problems, the lack of communication and interaction between communities,
and the elusive language used by Kyrgyz authorities to describe interethnic relations, all
illustrate the underlying tension. Due to the denial of interethnic tension within Kyrgyzstan,
the stakeholders most likely refrained from expressing the need for inclusive dialogue at
community level, during the project design and activity planning phases. There is also
44 EVALUATION OF THE UNICEF / UNFPA / UNDP PROJECT PROMOTING KYRGYZSTAN’S YOUTH COHESION AND INTERACTION TOWARDS UZBEKISTAN
very little social media activity of villagers in general regarding interethnic relations or
cross-border/local incidents. Relatively poor internet connection clearly contributes to this,
preventing people from manifesting more of their societal activity online. Nonetheless, the
persistence of interethnic and cross-border tension is tangibly channelled by interviewees’
choice of words, though not manifested explicitly. The interethnic relations expert we have
consulted also claims there are online discussions on Tajik, Uzbek, Kyrgyz interaction,
including hate speech, however they are limited to restricted Facebook communities that
are closed to outsiders whom administrators do not know personally.
Quote (teacher)
“Since 2010,35 parents are still concerned about the safety [of their
children]”.
Quote (parent)
“We have Tajik-Kyrgyz conflict in our place. There is even shooting
sometimes at the border. Tajik people live among us, not in isolation. When
there are conflict times, we become cautious with each other, expecting
that the other person may attack. There is tension in those periods. Tajik
people even close their homes. But in peaceful times we live peacefully. “
Finding 3: The project document diplomatically formulated this project as a cross-border
initiative, but concrete activities formed a mostly interethnic programme within Kyrgyzstan.
Triangulated evidence basis
Project documents (design / implementation)
Interviews with implementing partners, UN staff, duty bearers, Peacebuilding Fund
Focus group discussion with CSO representatives, focus group discussion with UN staff
Cross-border interaction is an intended result within the theory of change of the project
(interethnic and cross-border youth interaction, and new cross-border cooperation
experiences for State actors), as well as an aspect of the intended impacts level (Kyrgyz
and Uzbek women and men are involved in an inclusive dialogue within Kyrgyzstan and
across the Kyrgyz-Uzbek border, and Kyrgyz and Uzbek local self-government and state
actors increase cooperation and dialogue). The project document reflects this approach,
both in the short theory of change presented in the project description, and in the narrative
of expected results.
The intention of the project document was to make the United Nations’ peacebuilding
agenda acceptable to national duty bearers to enable collaboration. This way of proceeding
opened the possibility of eventual ownership, by harnessing the existing dynamics
between the Kyrgyz and Uzbek Governments, which in turn increased the cooperation
effort between the youth agencies of both countries. It was therefore essential for the three
UN organisations not to deter Government stakeholders with language on interethnic
relations, which would clash with the official perception that this is a non-issue.
35 Major interethnic conflict in the South of the Kyrgyz Republic, primarily cities of Osh and Jalal-Abad.
EVALUATION OF THE UNICEF / UNFPA / UNDP PROJECT PROMOTING KYRGYZSTAN’S YOUTH COHESION AND INTERACTION TOWARDS UZBEKISTAN 45
Quote (UN staff)
“The main challenge has been: the State is in denial that it has a problem.
Ethnic cohesion, conflict, are taboos with a heavy bureaucracy [...]. But
evidence of progress can help us think of scaling up and planning more
long term.”
Yet, the project is conceived as exclusively active within the territory of Kyrgyzstan.36T he project
organised only few cross-border interactions.T he project mostly supported the implementation
of activities foreseen by the Kyrgyzstan Youth State Agency plan for cooperation with its
Uzbekistan counterpart. The most visible and symbolic were four one-off events organised in
person in 2019: two events in Osh, one in Jalalabad and one in Batken), in cooperation with
the State Agency and the provinces (Jalalabad, Batken) and Osh city. In addition, to the extent
possible, other project activities implemented exclusively in Kyrgyzstan (not cross-border
events) involved citizens of Uzbekistan who live on the territory of Kyrgyzstan: for instance,
UNDP legal clinics involved Uzbek citizens studying in Kyrgyzstan.
However, the project stayed clearly focussed on its main target groups: Kyrgyz citizens with
diverse cultural and ethnic background. The first reason for this approach was feasibility:
at the time of project drafting, cross-border interactions were still difficult to secure in
practice. In contrast, interethnic experiences were lighter to implement, as operating within
the country was less bureaucratic and easier to coordinate. They also responded closely
to the most pressing issues identified by conflict analysis, and the needs for facilitation of
interethnic interactions, perceived by the three UN organisations in the regions adjacent
to the Uzbek border, as presented in Finding 2 above.
The project design was therefore tailored to the duality of peacebuilding needs in Kyrgyzstan,
addressing both internal (within Kyrgyzstan) and external issues (cross-border). While
both needed to be addressed, the local needs for mediated interethnic encounters could
not be addressed explicitly in the project document. The project drafting team opted for
a practical solution: the outcome and outputs of the project of the project professed a
cross-border approach; the activities described in the project documents focused on the
Kyrgyz territory exclusively; the project team still pursued efforts to increase cross-border
activities during the implementation.
The project thus managed to align the diverging visions and expectations of different
stakeholders: the national Government level, who acknowledges transborder tensions but
sees no interethnic conflicts in the country; the local level, preoccupied by cross-border
issues but mostly in demand of opportunities for social and economic development; the
PBF who wanted to address both issues identified in conflict analysis: interethnic relations
and interstate relations. The project thereby mastered a tight-rope exercise of combining
forces that seemed contradictory at first glance. The approach was well suited to the
Kyrgyz situation and innovative in the face of a sensitive issue.
Finding 4: The labour migration issue was overlooked.
Triangulated evidence basis
Project document
Interviews with implementing partners, parents, youth
Academic papers
36 PBF project document, p. 10: All activities were to take place within the Kyrgyz side of the border.
46 EVALUATION OF THE UNICEF / UNFPA / UNDP PROJECT PROMOTING KYRGYZSTAN’S YOUTH COHESION AND INTERACTION TOWARDS UZBEKISTAN
The project specifically targeted the youth, but their labour migration issues were not
fully factored in. Migration and its implications were not a part of the theory of change
nor of the project documents as a factor that influences local prosperity, social cohesion
or interethnic relations. Due to the magnitude of labour migration and how it affects the
demographics of underserved regions such as rural border areas, this aspect must be
acknowledged and addressed assertively.
The report on selection of target communities in Osh, Jalal-Abad and Batken provinces for
the project acknowledges the issue and its magnitude among the youth, pointing to 2018
official estimates.37 During the interviews it was confirmed that labour migration is high
among border communities, e.g. “many people from Kerben leave to Russia for labour
migration, mainly Uzbeks” (teacher). Academic research has also identified that border
communities from the Southern provinces are especially prone to engage in external labour
migration to Russia, as a coping strategy for the decline of agricultural production.38 The
project intended to boost local economy, including employment: therefore labour migration,
as a major economic factor locally, should have been part of the project’s problem analysis.
The interviews with the representatives of the local self-governance bodies confirmed
that by the time they complete their secondary education, young people – mostly (but not
exclusively) young men – aspire to migrate, seeking jobs outside of the country, mainly
to Russia.39 Labour migration and its influence on the communities was expressed on
numerous occasions during the evaluation field work:
Quote (mentor)
“All the young people over 20 years old are in labour migration, all the
teachers at schools are old and female. It is a norm that everyone leaves
to earn – to build a house or to buy a car. Boys rarely speak of universities,
or of their wish to get education. Girls are more about education. Boys
are focused on leaving to go abroad.”
Indeed, labour migration affects all family members, especially children who are left at
home.40 Implications of migration of parents on the children left behind include significantly
37 Report on the analysis for selection of target communities Osh, Jalal-Abad and Batken provinces, see Ulan Nogoibaev, UNICEF / UNFPA /
UNDP project ‘Promoting Kyrgyzstan’s youth cohesion and interaction towards Uzbekistan’ (2019-2020)”, 2019 : more than 700,000 citizens of
the Kyrgyz Republic migrated for work; according to unofficial data, the figure equals to one million citizens of the Kyrgyz Republic. Of these
numbers, according to estimates (2018), more than 663,000 migrated to the Russian Federation, 30,000 to Kazakhstan, 14,000 to South Korea,
30,000 to Turkey, more than 20,000 people to other destinations (Europe, USA, Middle East, Asia). According to the State Migration Service under
the Government of the Kyrgyz Republic, quoted in this report, the number of children under 17 living in the Russian Federation is 17% of the total
number of migrated citizens in Russia. At the same time, people between the ages of 18 and 29 years old make up 50% of the total number of
emigrated citizens there. People from 30 to 49 years old make up 30% of the total number of registered citizens of the Kyrgyz Republic in Russia.
Women make up 40% of labour migration to Russia.
38 Murzakulova, Asel, Contextual Factors of Conflict in Border Communities in Batken Province, Kyrgyzstan, Technical Report, DOI: 10.13140/
RG.2.2.24353.024, September 2017 <https://www.researchgate.net/publication/320014772_Contextual_Factors_of_conflict_in_Border_Commu-
nities_in_Batken_Province_Kyrgyzstan> [12/12/2020], p. 20. For instance, in Talas province, external labour migration rates are quite low, given
farmers have established channels to sell beans, mainly to Turkey (Tilekeyev, Kanat, Productivity Implications of Participation in Export Activities:
The Case of Farmers in Talas Oblast of Kyrgyzstan, Institute of Public Policy and Administration Working Paper 17 (2013) <https://ucentralasia.
org/Content/downloads/UCA-IPPA-WP17-BeanKR-Eng.pdf> [05/01/2021]). Climate change, decay of agricultural infrastructure, and loss of infor-
mal agricultural knowledge are named among the reasons for agricultural decline (Sagynbekova, Lira, Environment, Rural Livelihoods, and Labor
Migration: A Case Study in Central Kyrgyzstan, Mountain Research and Development 37.4 (2017): 456-463). At the same time, internal migration
from villages to cities within Kyrgyzstan has become characteristic of all regions, the rural-rural migration (agricultural and construction labour)
mostly from Batken, Jalal-Abad and Osh to Chui province (Murzakulova, Asel, Rural Migration in Kyrgyzstan: Drivers, Impact and Governance,
University of Central Asia, MSRI Research paper # 7, DOI: 10.13140/RG.2.2.35258.21442, June 2020, <https://www.researchgate.net/publica-
tion/344362648_Rural_Migration_in_Kyrgyzstan_Drivers_Impact_and_Governance> [12/12/2020]).
39 According to the Conflict and Peace Analysis (2019), the share of women in labour migration has steadily risen since 2000, estimating 59.6
percent in 2015 of all labour migrants from Kyrgyzstan. According to IOM Kyrgyzstan website, the young people aged between 15 and 29 years
working abroad constitute 60.4 percent of the total number of migrants (2018).
40 <www.unicef.org/kyrgyzstan/press-releases/over-277000-children-have-been-left-behind-their-parents-kyrgyzstan-labour-migration>
[03/01/2021]. UNICEF reports that there are over 277,000 children have been left behind by their parents in Kyrgyzstan for labour migration (2018).
EVALUATION OF THE UNICEF / UNFPA / UNDP PROJECT PROMOTING KYRGYZSTAN’S YOUTH COHESION AND INTERACTION TOWARDS UZBEKISTAN 47
lower academic scores of the children with both parents in migration, compared to those
who have at least one parent at home.41 Children of labour migrants are at higher risk of
institutionalisation, and of having their rights violated: they suffer from child abuse and
neglect, child labour, and exploitation more often than other children, rendering them more
vulnerable to instrumentalization in conflict situations. The children are often raised without
the role models they require.42 During field work, it was confirmed that labour migration
affects children the most. Some young people wish to stop labour migration by creating
opportunities at home, but understand it is too complex to address on their own.
Quote (youth)
“Nearly 50% of pupils in my class have their parents in Russia as labour
migrants. I believe it is hard when parents are far away. Over time, they
probably get used to it. We also considered it among the problems that
we wanted to solve. But we realized we cannot solve it.”
The community lawyers also came across extreme cases of children whose rights were not
fulfilled, as an indirect consequence of the migration of the parents.As pointed out above,
one of the original features of the project design was to target communities, including
parents, as they are closely linked to the needs of the youth under their care and youth
empowerment is directly relevant to their hopes for their children. The theory of change
therefore rightly assumed parents to be accelerators for actions targeting youth. Parental
support was an important prerequisite for the success of youth activities at outcome
level, as stated in interviews with youth participants, parents, teachers and implementing
partners. This assumption is undermined if parents are absent on a large scale.
In the southern regions, due to the outflow of young people and the working-age population
in general, there is a serious concern about the demographic outfall, which the project did
not fully take into account when selecting the age groups. In some areas, implementing
partners had difficulty finding youth after school age, as they were gone already. When they
realised that, from their target group (17-28 year olds), a significant part was mainly absent,
the implementing partners had to re-adjust the target groups slightly, moving towards the
14-18 year olds. But this aspect was not evoked by the UN organisations staff interviewed.
Quote (teacher)
“At the project start, we were told to focus on 14-28 year olds, but we
just couldn’t find young people of this age [beyond school age], they
are not here. The few who are still here are very busy with work. There is
almost no one younger than 28, only older. That’s why we had to focus
the project on schoolkids [which corresponds to 14-18 years old, note of
the evaluation team.”
While this aspect was not fully taken into account during project design, the empowerment
of youth within their community by the project is relevant to the issue, as it may give the
youth options at home. The local self-governments are acutely aware of this and formulate
it as a need, hence their eagerness to invest in youth initiatives.
41 Murzakulova, Asel, Rural Migration in Kyrgyzstan: Drivers, Impact and Governance, University of Central Asia, MSRI Research paper # 7, DOI:
10.13140/RG.2.2.35258.21442, June 2020, <https://www.researchgate.net/publication/344362648_Rural_Migration_in_Kyrgyzstan_Drivers_Impact_
and_Governance> [12/12/2020]. See also: NOODU Study, the Ministry of Education and Science, 2017, Natsionalnoe ochenivanie obrazovatelnix
dostijeni uchashihsya, 2017. Ministerstvo obrazovaniya Kyrgyzskoi Respubliki.
42 Peace Nexus Foundation, Conflict and Peace Analysis Kyrgyzstan, April 2019.
48 EVALUATION OF THE UNICEF / UNFPA / UNDP PROJECT PROMOTING KYRGYZSTAN’S YOUTH COHESION AND INTERACTION TOWARDS UZBEKISTAN
Quote (mentor)
“There was a story: one mother in Moscow was watching her own kid’s
stream online, her son was very active. She started crying that her son is
so accomplished and is conducting trainings already! Other parents felt
like crying too! It was a very emotional moment.”
Finding 5: Gender equality and empowerment of women was best targeted within the
equity-focused approach of the project.
Triangulated evidence basis
Project documents
Lists of participants disaggregated by gender
Interviews with youth, parents, CSOs, UN staff
The project was designed to address issues of equity (e.g. easier access to state services,
targeting people from ethnic minorities for participation), which in turn would decrease
discrimination. However, the rate of participants with Kyrgyzstani vs Uzbek ethnic
background in the design phase is not documented and their views were not solicited
specifically. Some groups remained harder to reach, for instance the youth who dropped
out of school, because the project harnessed the schools as an existing network to identify
participants. This issue was difficult to address for such a short project and was left aside
in project documents. Now that mentors are established locally, they could be a new relay
to reach out to this particularly vulnerable category in future interventions.
Gender equality and the empowerment of women is better documented, as a factor in
the conflict analysis painted by the Peacebuilding Priority Plans, in the project document,
and in the project’s monitoring documents (project reports, project financial and human
statistics). However, the Peacebuilding Priority Plans and the project documents did
not conduct a full-fledged gender analysis. They rather examined the role of radicalized
women, or the particular human rights violations women are exposed to in the context
of the conflict or in the targeted border areas. Yet, when planning activities and during
implementation, particular attention was paid to gender transformative results which
were never explicitly articulated. The gender distribution of participants shows that this
principle was upheld throughout the project with a constant slight majority of women
(between 50 and 60%).43 Based on the project reports, for the UPSHIFT methodology, the
total number of young people (13-17 year olds) recruited was 117 (53 male and 64 female),
of which 97,4% successfully completed the programme. Project Output 1.1. involved 238
young people: 45% boys and 55% girls at the Leadership Innovation Academy, Make-
Athon, UPSHIFT.44 30% of the total project budget was allocated to activities in direct
pursuit of gender equality and women’s and human rights (e.g. legal clinics).
The relations between girls and boys, and girls’/women’s enjoyments of their human rights,
were explicitly addressed in the project through workshops, training and other events
with the youth. During group events, the mentors and the youth introduced gender roles
as discussion topics. Mentors handled group dynamics where these roles were expected
43 PBF Project Document, p. 2. Annual report 2019, p.3.: 60% are girls in presentation of the project to pilot communities. P. 9: The project ensures
gender equality by involving both boys and girls, young women and men in the project activities, starting from the selection of project partici-
pants, as well as the participation of girls with ethnic minority groups and from the religious families.
44 Project progress report, June 2020.
EVALUATION OF THE UNICEF / UNFPA / UNDP PROJECT PROMOTING KYRGYZSTAN’S YOUTH COHESION AND INTERACTION TOWARDS UZBEKISTAN 49
to transform. For example, Forum Theatre aimed to address early marriage and women
and girls’ education. That was particularly relevant to the youth: the 30 UPSHIFT teams
identified early marriage, and girls’ restricted by their parents from accessing education,
among the priority issues in their communities.
Quote (young person, female)
“I also don’t like the idea that girls don’t need education and must stay
home. I see this happening often in my circle, in my village. Thank God,
my parents are not against my education, they support me. But some
girls are told ‘Why do you need education; you’ll get married anyway’. For
instance, my neighbour got married without education, she got married
right after returning from Russia. So, I think her life got stolen. I think she
could live her own life, rather than getting married so early (she is 19
years old). She could have found her own goals, her own meanings. She
will stay home now, as a married woman. I don’t think this is a life, this is
something strange.”
Quote (youth participant, male)
“Topics were about social issues, and about girls’ issues. So much is
about boys in society. We also had topics on roles of youth and others
that were raised by girls.”
In the border and remote communities, parents sometimes had
concerns about their daughters’ safety if they participated in the project
activities. The project successfully overcame this by gaining the trust of
the parents, by involving them in project activities and keeping them
informed in general. Many parents supported the involvement of their
daughters in the project activities from the start.
Quote (father)
“I want her to be able to do everything on her own, take care of herself
in life. To be able to talk to different people. That is why parents need to
send their kids to school, whether it is a boy or a girl”
Evaluation question 2: To what extent is the project based on a logical Theory of Change
and how coherent was it in practice?
Key Findings:
Finding 6: The project design was based on conflict analysis and PBF expertise.
Finding 7: The actual theory of change was internally coherent, but its formal
expression in the project documents required adjustments.
Finding 8:T he shift to online activities due to COVID-19-related prevention measures
was handled swiftly, presenting constraints but also unexpected opportunities.
50 EVALUATION OF THE UNICEF / UNFPA / UNDP PROJECT PROMOTING KYRGYZSTAN’S YOUTH COHESION AND INTERACTION TOWARDS UZBEKISTAN
Finding 6: The project design was based on conflict analysis and PBF expertise.
Triangulated evidence basis
Documents review: PBF reports, PBSO priority plans, academic papers on conflict
analysis and Kyrgyz borders, United Nations Security Council Resolutions 2250
(2015) and 2419 (2018), and following publications
Project documents
Interviews with UN staff
The theory of change was consistent with the strategic approach of the Peacebuilding
Fund to conflict transformation. In addition to incorporating key documents such as the
Peacebuilding Priorities, the project design phase involved the staff of the PBF through
consultations, inputs and commentaries to the project document. As a result, the project
document was largely in alignment with PBSO priorities.
Conflict analysis was mostly embodied by the United Nations Peacebuilding Priority Plans,
backed up by a corpus of publications, many of which are referenced on the website of
the PBF. However, it should be noted that, while conflict is highly dynamic and volatile,
the Peacebuilding Priority Plans (now terminated) were prepared every four years. It is
therefore highly plausible that some details of this conflict analysis could be outdated, or
would require additional details to acknowledge new developments. Yet, the PBF does not
offer any tool to support closer conflict monitoring, ongoing analysis, and their integration
in project design, monitoring and adjustment. Neither is there any mechanism that would
facilitate exchange of experience in matching the experiences of several recipients facing
similar conflict situations or implementing comparable peacebuilding initiatives. There is
great potential in equipping the recipients of the PBF with dynamic tools.
The 2013-2016 UN Peacebuilding Priority Plan for Kyrgyzstan identifies the root causes of
conflict, and the conflict risks, as lack of trust between different groups of people (often
along ethnic lines); increased segregation and estrangement of ethnic communities in
some areas directly affected by the violent conflict in June 2010; lack of justice; and the
memories of the 2010 and 1990 conflicts; a sense of human insecurity and violation of
rights exacerbating stereotypes, nationalism, inequality and discrimination; inadequate
legislation and partial implementation of laws and policies; lack of respect for the rule of
law and lack of accountability.45 The 2013-2016 UN Peacebuilding Priority Plan for Kyrgyzstan
therefore selected the following top intervention areas for peacebuilding: (1) Human Rights
and Rule of Law, (2) Strengthening of Local Self-Government bodies, and (3) Support to the
development of a common civic identity, multilingual education and respect for diversity
and minority rights.46 The project clearly corresponds to points (2) and (3).
A 2017 survey about drivers of conflict identified four threats to peace in Kyrgyzstan: youth
unemployment, non-demarcated boundaries, corruption and radicalization. A large majority
also cited social fracture due to migration, lack of basic infrastructure and education/social
services.47 Youth unemployment and exclusion, as well as an increased attention to violent
extremism, were put in focus for future Gender and Youth Promotion Initiative projects at
the close of the 2013-2016 UN Peacebuilding Priority Plan. Its successor, the 2018-2020 UN
Peacebuilding Priority Plan, set in its continuity, provides the background of the project
45 UN Peacebuilding Priority Plan Kyrgyzstan (2013-2016), <https://kyrgyzstan.un.org/en/31253-peacebuilding-priority-plan-ppp> [13/10/2020], pp. 2-3.
46 UN Peacebuilding / Katinka Patscher-Hellbeck, Strategic Peacebuilding Review. PBF Portfolio in Kyrgyzstan 2018-2020, July 2020, p. 6.
47 Jantzi, Terrence, Fernanda Faria, and Anara Alymkulova, Evaluation of the Peacebuilding Fund (PBF) Project Portfolio In Kyrgyzstan, Evaluation
Report, 31 August 2017, <http://kg.one.un.org/content/dam/unct/kyrgyzstan/docs/General/UNPBF%20Kyrgyzstan%20ER%20Final%20-%2031%20
August%202017.pdf> [29/12/2020], p. 40.
EVALUATION OF THE UNICEF / UNFPA / UNDP PROJECT PROMOTING KYRGYZSTAN’S YOUTH COHESION AND INTERACTION TOWARDS UZBEKISTAN 51
evaluated here. This Plan identifies root causes and long-term challenges as (1) weak
governance and rule of law, and risks of human rights violations, (2) marginalisation and
isolation of certain populations, and (3) understanding of religious diversity.
The project addresses these root causes on multiple levels: by increasing trust and
interethnic interactions and collaborations; by targeting communities in the areas which
experienced the 2010 conflict; through access to, and capacity of, justice and legal aid as
well as other state services; by enhancing critical thinking and youth participation in local
decision making. Another point of conflict analysis, based on the Kyrgyzstan-Tajikistan
border conflicts, is that militarization of the borders increases tensions.48 T his was addressed
at input level with capacity building of law enforcement and border management, aiming
at enhanced access to rights on results level, for an ultimate progress towards conflict
settlement on purpose level of the theory of change. All these aspects are an integral part
of human security, defined as freedom from want and from fear49.
The project’s intended results (youth empowerment through employment and inclusion) and
impacts (economic and social stability) are well recognised as vehicles of peacebuilding in
conflict theory.50T he theory of change assumes that youth are instrumental in conflict dynamics,
because they can either build peace, or on the contrary be instrumentalized for conflict, as was
witnessed during the 2010 events. The theory of change also assumes that youth have vested
interests and a propensity to support peaceful relations within their community and between
communities: in essence, youth tend to want peace because young people are affected by
conflict in life-cycle specific ways, with short-, medium- and long-term effects ranging from
repeat victimization to psychological trauma, identity-based discrimination, and social and
economic exclusion. In general conflict analysis, their agency for peace is at risk of being
ignored.51 Conflict tends to disproportionately affect their human rights, and so they aspire
to conflict resolution. These assumptions are strongly backed up by state-of-the-art research,
analysis and reporting.52
The youth’s potential to act as agents of change is another important assumption of the
project – but in itself, it presupposes readiness, ability and willingness from both the youth
and their surrounding actors. UN document recognises their capacity to mobilize their
peers and other community members and to understand local dynamics and priorities that
might be easily overlooked by others involved in peacebuilding.53 The project built on this
recognition to boost it through project activities.
The fourth assumption in the theory of change is least evident, and the project design
rightly took existing analysis one step further: whereas the Peace Nexus Conflict and
Peace Analysis Kyrgyzstan identifies parents and teachers as possible barriers to youth
inclusion and participation, especially for young women, and recommends promoting
dialogue with parents (amongst others),54 the theory of change of the project counted
48 Murzakulova, Asel, Contextual Factors of conflict in Border Communities in Batken Province, Kyrgyzstan, Technical Report, DOI: 10.13140/
RG.2.2.24353.024, September 2017 <https://www.researchgate.net/publication/320014772_Contextual_Factors_of_conflict_in_Border_Communi-
ties_in_Batken_Province_Kyrgyzstan> [12/12/2020], pp. 17-18.
49 Commission on Human Security (2003), Human Security Now, New York, quoted in UN Peacebuilding Priority Plan Kyrgyzstan (2013-2016),
<https://kyrgyzstan.un.org/en/31253-peacebuilding-priority-plan-ppp> [13/10/2020], p. 2.
50 UNSCR 2250 (2015) and UNSCR 2419 (2018); UN Peacebuilding Priority Plan Kyrgyzstan (both iterations: 2013-2016 and 2017-2020), <https://kyr-
gyzstan.un.org/en/31253-peacebuilding-priority-plan-ppp> [13/10/2020]; Peace nexus, Conflict and Peace Analysis, Kyrgyzstan, April 2019, p. 44:
High unemployment & few economic opportunities as drivers for conflict; Jantzi, Terrence, Fernanda Faria, and Anara Alymkulova, Evaluation of
the Peacebuilding Fund (PBF) Project Portfolio In Kyrgyzstan, Evaluation Report, 31 August 2017, <http://kg.one.un.org/content/dam/unct/kyrgyz-
stan/docs/General/UNPBF%20Kyrgyzstan%20ER%20Final%20-%2031%20August%202017.pdf> [29/12/2020], p. X.
51 “Youth resilience for peace”, General Assembly Security Council, 72nd session, agenda item 65, Peacebuilding and sustainable peace,
02/03/2018, p. 2-11.
52 “Youth resilience for peace”, General Assembly Security Council, 72nd session, agenda item 65, Peacebuilding and sustainable peace,
02/03/2018, p. 8.
53 “Youth resilience for peace”, General Assembly Security Council, 72nd session, agenda item 65, Peacebuilding and sustainable peace,
02/03/2018, p. 9.
54 Peace Nexus Foundation, Conflict and Peace Analysis Kyrgyzstan, April 2019, pp. 6, 7, and 10; also: inter-generational gap as a source of
conflict, p. 36.
52 EVALUATION OF THE UNICEF / UNFPA / UNDP PROJECT PROMOTING KYRGYZSTAN’S YOUTH COHESION AND INTERACTION TOWARDS UZBEKISTAN
on parents and teachers as accelerators in a positive process. This is remarkable, as
the idea is not particularly prominent in existing literature but was instrumental for the
project: the involvement of teachers and parents had merely been mentioned as adding
to sustainability,55 but their involvement in practice (parenting trainings, participation in
consultations and events, support of youth at home and in public) was in some cases a
necessary condition for participation of youth, and certainly essential at least up to results
level if not beyond.
The link between youth empowerment and peacebuilding, which backs up the intended
impact of the project, is therefore largely treated in pre-existing conflict theory, and
explicitly considered through fundamental assumptions at relevance level of the theory of
change, as well as on the impact and purpose levels.
The middle layer of the theory of change (results levels) is less grounded in conflict theory.
Accompanying stakeholders from youth empowerment activities to peacebuilding is a
“long shot”: in the field, this link can seem more tenuous or theoretical, which is fully
recognized by conflict theory. The theory of change of the project seeks to transfer a
theoretical approach to peacebuilding into practice, by investing in the youth through
multiple activities focused on many different aspects of the communities’ life. These
activities try to establish an indirect link between the youth’s (and communities’) multiple
needs on the ground, and peacebuilding theory. The multiplicity of these needs partly
accounts for the broad spectrum of the project.
Finally, the project activities, being very varied and modular (they could be assembled in
a different way in each location), enabled the team to adapt to the different conflict factors
and to the varying relations among communities in each location.
Finding 7: The actual theory of change was internally coherent, but its formal expression
in the project documents required adjustments.
Triangulated evidence basis
Annual project reports
Interviews with UN staff
The project’s theory of change was internally coherent: the chain of causality is logical
and rooted in conflict analysis and peacebuilding theory, and well suited to the target
areas of implementation. In practice, a rebalancing of activities and an adjustment of the
monitoring and evaluation framework took place during the implementation, notably
regarding interethnic relations vs. cross-border focus. During the monitoring and evaluation
workshops organised in October and November by UNICEF Osh and the Peacebuilding
Fund, the recipient UN organisations, and later their implementing partners, matched
more strongly the theory of change with the implementation framework and adjusted
the indicators.56 They unpacked the links between the levels of the theory of change, and
between the project components, they agreed on terminology, and verified their common
understanding of intermediate and strategic outcomes. They were therefore able to better
reflect the actual peacebuilding approach – i.e. interethnic relations rather than cross-
border – while adjusting inputs to the theory of change, for instance by fleshing out cross-
border interactions. This ensured a shared understanding of the indicators and led to a clear
55 Annex “additional findings on effectiveness and sustainability”, p. ii, in: de Weijer, Frauke / PeaceNexus Foundation, Review of PBF Cross-Bor-
der Cooperation for Sustainable Peace and Development in the Border Area of Kyrgyzstan & Tajikistan, 20-11-2017.
56 Monitoring frame developed as a result of the monitoring and evaluation workshops, Annual report 2019, pp. 8 and 9.
EVALUATION OF THE UNICEF / UNFPA / UNDP PROJECT PROMOTING KYRGYZSTAN’S YOUTH COHESION AND INTERACTION TOWARDS UZBEKISTAN 53
monitoring plan, thereby securing effective coordination and reporting: the project partly
overcame the original dilemma between cross-border and interethnic approaches.57
Quotes (UN staff members)
“The original intention was to include participants from Uzbekistan.
We discussed it with the other UN agencies and with the implementing
partners. We knew we had to achieve the goals set in the monitoring
framework […]. So, we organised a monitoring and evaluation meeting
with our implementing partners […]. There, we unpacked the theory of
change to find better linkages to the outcome indicators. As a result, we
put more realistic indicators. As a result, the monitoring and evaluation
framework was adjusted.”
“It’s difficult to maintain accountability towards the PBF, the UN in
general, beneficiaries, the Government – all with different visions. The
monitoring and evaluation workshop helped with that. What is sellable
to the Ministry of Foreign affairs in the government is not sellable to the
donor, and vice versa.”
From that point, project monitoring reports flow more logically, use a more direct language,
and are easier to read. Having composed of different expectations at the beginning, the
project staff realised the weaknesses in the project design when confronted with reality,
and they had the courage to adapt – with success. This process created a useful positive
experience: interviewees who took part in this process were well equipped to reflect on the
project, explain causalities and voice opinions. This exercise further rendered the project
resilient in the face of crisis: equipped with common understanding, the UN staff and
implementing partners and adapted well to the COVID-19 crisis.
Finding 8: The shift to online activities due to COVID-19-related prevention measures was
handled swiftly, presenting constraints but also unexpected opportunities.
Triangulated evidence basis
Project reports
Interviews with implementing partners and UN staff
Interviews with mentors
Social media analysis
The COVID-19 pandemic and the lockdown measures obviously complicated the project
implementation. However, the pandemic did not directly influence any of the key
assumptions of the theory of change, nor did it make the chain of change less relevant
or less coherent. The lockdown measures slowed activities down and prevented timely
completion of the project within the planned timeframe, leading to a no-cost extension of
six months until Mid-November 2020, approved by the donor.
This transformation represented a constraint for all. The UPSHIFT programme swiftly
went online and 34 (70% girls) participants from seven locations joined it. To support
young people under quarantine regime and help overcome their difficulties with remote
schooling/study, the project delivered online live consultations with a psychologist for 949
57 Annual report 2019, p. 3.
54 EVALUATION OF THE UNICEF / UNFPA / UNDP PROJECT PROMOTING KYRGYZSTAN’S YOUTH COHESION AND INTERACTION TOWARDS UZBEKISTAN
young people. The COVID-19 pandemic risked increasing inequalities linked to internet
access, leaving unconnected youth invisible and off the grid. A shift to online activities
implies connectivity (device, internet access/network coverage) as necessary (but not
sufficient) condition, on top of “usual” constraints (time, work, that is to say at risk of
increasing the gender gap). For example, the participants sometimes had limited access
to internet, or lacked literacy with online communication tools. The implementing partners
responded with individual advice, and by topping up the participants’ balance on their
mobile phones, and/or providing mobile phones to those most in need.
The shift from in-person activities to online participation also accentuated the predominance
of activities aiming at civic participation and prosperity, rather than interethnic interactions,
as this component of the project was strongly based on common experiences and team
compositions.
At the same time, these circumstances pushed the project teams to explore new ways to
reach the participants, which created new opportunities:
• more contact with the Youth Agency from Uzbekistan to conduct online activities, such
as the Youth Peace Dialogue online forum including an online Youth diplomacy week;
• exposing the youth’s potential to operate a general digital shift, thereby enhancing their
status in their community. This was visible in the social media activity of participants;
• highlighting the need for digital infrastructure: the project showed that the local self-
governments responded well when told about the needs of the young people and of
the community. Some provided premises (e.g. in Aidarken for co-working centre) and
material to the participants;
• possibility to reach more participants online than offline. Provided there is internet
access and online interaction is perceived as safer than travel, online participation also
potentially eases access for hard-to-reach groups (such as remote communities or
girls from traditional families) and/or people who are not comfortable with in-person
participation (or whose parents are apprehensive of in-person events).
5.2 Effectiveness
Evaluation question 3: To what extent have the expected results of the project been
achieved on the output level?
Key Findings:
Finding 9: There is conclusive evidence of youth empowerment created by the
project, which was an unexpected and new experience for all involved.
Finding 10: There is anecdotal evidence of progress regarding the interethnic
component. Self-censorship is symptomatic of conflict structure.
Finding 11: A large share of girls participated in the project activities, and the
transformative results of the activities are particularly visible for them.
Finding 12: Success stories emerged from the project activities where municipalities
supported youth initiatives.
Finding 13: The pilots projects concerning service delivery in municipalities were
well received, but they remain modest and scattered.
Finding 14: National level duty bearers and their regional level representation
became better connected with the final beneficiaries’ aspirations and realities.
EVALUATION OF THE UNICEF / UNFPA / UNDP PROJECT PROMOTING KYRGYZSTAN’S YOUTH COHESION AND INTERACTION TOWARDS UZBEKISTAN 55
Finding 9: There is conclusive evidence of youth empowerment created by the project,
which was an unexpected and new experience for all involved.
Triangulated evidence basis
Interviews with youth participants, parents, teachers, mentors, municipal authorities
and leaders, IPs, duty bearers, UN staff
Focus group discussion with implementing partners
Project documents, Youth of Osh quarterly report
Social media output and media coverage of the project
As anticipated by the theory of change, youth empowerment-related results were
achieved with a significant proportion of participants who became influencers, civic
activists or entrepreneurs and upheld a spirit of friendship with their peers from various
backgrounds. All interviewees talk about the change they personally experienced (youth,
mentors, parents) or observed (municipalities staff, local and national duty bearers).
Shining examples may serve as models and open perspectives. Youth and duty bearers
alike talk about new initiatives, led by the youth, towards the enjoyment of their rights.
However, these changes are unlikely to have reached a critical mass towards wider,
regional transformations.
More than 90 young people participated in the offline UPSHIFT programme and were
supported by mentors to use new skills and perspectives to identify local issues (2019). The
new online UPSHIFT programme in June 2020 formed 18 teams in all nine project locations
with 56 new project participants. Participants learned about and practiced leadership,
tolerance and civic activism and empathy. 30 youth-led initiatives were developed based
on the results of their own research determining the needs and requirements in their
communities, developing social or business initiatives over the course of three months.
As for the LIA, 90 young people and 7 mentors participated (60% female, 40% male). The LIA
consisted of several stages, from capacity building workshops to participative community
needs assessments, and data analysis and visualisation data. 600 people (village heads
of villages, heads and representatives of local self-government bodies, deputies of the
local and city councils, youth, teachers) then participated at the public hearing events for
needs assessments in the nine target locations. Finally, online trainings, video lessons
and a Makeathon focused on developing social entrepreneurship projects. As a result,
nine youth initiative groups presented the small initiatives they had developed to nine
local self-government representatives, business and education experts.
For young people this was a personal transformation, an initiation into a world of adults
and new possibilities. This change was particularly perceptible among usually withdrawn
young people. Interestingly, the project did not so much identify existing leaders among
the youth to make them even more visible or prominent: it rather released the potential of
understated personalities, who became more self-confident. This strongly contributes to
the participants’ capacity to enjoy their right to “freely determine their political status and
freely pursue their economic, social and cultural development” (Art. 1 of the International
Covenant on Economic, social and cultural rights).
Quote (school director)
„What I really appreciated and what warmed my heart is that some shy,
reticent, timid kids had their motivation, leadership ignited.”
56 EVALUATION OF THE UNICEF / UNFPA / UNDP PROJECT PROMOTING KYRGYZSTAN’S YOUTH COHESION AND INTERACTION TOWARDS UZBEKISTAN
Quote (youth)
“I can say that I have found myself because of this project. I understood
what my interests were. My self-esteem got higher. I have new goals
and new dreams. My big goal is now marketing, I want to study it.”
The figures show the youth’s increased agency: 70% of the youth-led initiatives in the
project aimed at supporting the implementation of plans for cooperation and/or local
development. Youth initiatives show empowerment beyond the scope of the project
activities and the participants’ capability to undertake initiatives and transpose and use the
skills learned during the project without waiting. For example, a youth team searched for
other funding sources for their project, in case they would not get funding within the UN
project. They wanted to be able to go through with their idea in any case, as they saw the
relevance of their action. Others organised a petition to obtain internet coverage of their
village and appealed to telecom companies, for the community to better enjoy its right to
access, what is now a basic commodity. While initiating these projects, the youth learned
to adapt their behaviour to their counterparts and context. This in turn led the youth to
perceive themselves, and community members to recognize them, as peer members of the
community who can and do bring an added value. Individual stories of realization changed
the perception of youth among their peers and within their community, generating mutual
respect. Mutual respect, be it among ethnicities, but also more generally, coincide with
the impact level of the theory of change, in terms of inclusive dialogue and social stability.
Being respected and owing respect to others were new experiences.
Local self-governments and youth started discerning common interests and opportunities.
Local authorities did not expect that young people could initiate and implement projects
that benefit local communities. Interviewed local self-government representative were
impressed by the realisation of the initiatives and by the benefits that youth can bring.
They were eager to receive more support for their youth, in terms of local initiatives and
cross-border opportunities. Most of all, local self-governments are acutely aware that their
youth may choose to emigrate to Russia as soon as they finish school and any perspective
at home might prevent that.
Quotes (youth)
“Teachers and fellow-villagers started treating us like adults. They
discuss with us how problems can be solved. They treat us like peers. We
learnt to talk to local village councillors. We requested them to make the
local budget transparent. They didn’t reject it and followed our advice.”
Quotes (mentor)
“The youth learnt to interact with local governments, school principal –
before the project, they would just come to school and leave. And now
they were approaching authorities with requests. They started behaving
reliably.”
“These girls become respected, people respect them. They become an
example for others. They received gratitude letters from the mayor’s
office. They get lots of accolades.”
EVALUATION OF THE UNICEF / UNFPA / UNDP PROJECT PROMOTING KYRGYZSTAN’S YOUTH COHESION AND INTERACTION TOWARDS UZBEKISTAN 57
The project also connected the young participants with one another, and, as some put
it “with the world out there”. Acquiring a wider social network and gaining exposure to
different environments also formed part of the young participants’ initiation experience.
The interviewees appreciated this widening of horizon and building of bonds.
Quotes (school directors)
“The teenagers went to Nooken, Osh, other places with the project. They
made friends. They realized they can develop their community on their
own. They have many ideas now. They say: ‘We should have done this,
or this’. They have seen projects of other villages. There is development
in children. They were isolated here, in the village, so they went out.”
“When they went to Kochkor-Ata, the youth saw a different world – it
was very clean, neat, nice, food was good – do you think their parents
take them to such places?”
For parents, the project activities brought reconceptualization of parent-child relationship
and renewed their view of their own children as capable members of the community.
The 78 parents who, in all nine locations, joined the parenting workshop within LIA on
adolescent psychology and parent-child communication children. Involving parents was
also important for the parents to acknowledge their children’s success and grow closer
to them. The parents interviewed confirmed that they were proud and at the same times
surprised to find out that their children could speak up, generate ideas and contribute to
the development of their communities. Project staff reports that not all parents gave their
support, but all whom they convinced to come and pay attention, were impressed and
more supportive in the end. Thus, the project succeeded in establishing communication
bridges between the young people and their parents (though the issues of migration of
parents, especially from the border communities still remain to be addressed.)
Quote (parent)
“I see changes in my son, in his behaviour. He started having interests.
“Mom, if I do this, that can work out”, he says. Before this, he would just
go to school and come back. But now we talk more of his ideas, he sets
goals. That brought lot of joy for us.”
Among communities, more than 600 residents across all nine target locations gathered at
various public hearings to get acquainted with the activities of the young people who had
identified local community problems and suggested ways to solve them. When teachers
mention the concrete competencies acquired by their students (leadership, analytical
thinking, legal, media literacy, conflict management and teambuilding skills / including
under the aspect of gender), they are overwhelmingly positively surprised, and this often
coincides with the most significant change interviewees identify.
58 EVALUATION OF THE UNICEF / UNFPA / UNDP PROJECT PROMOTING KYRGYZSTAN’S YOUTH COHESION AND INTERACTION TOWARDS UZBEKISTAN
Quote (youth participant)
“We [participants on the project] became like ‘authorities’ (someone
who is respected by others) at school. Teachers now see that we can
achieve own goals.”
“People started treating me differently in the village. When I greeted
someone, they praised me for the trees [we planted as part of our
initiative]. I was surprised people recognized me and knew about our
trees. I’m glad I became useful for my community, that I brought some
benefit to people.”
Quote (teacher)
“Frankly, we didn’t expect much from the kids. But they tried so much to
do their best for the village.”
National duty bearers, in particular the Youth Agency through their local branches, followed
but did not lead the process. According to interviews, this is connected to the remoteness of
the targeted locations and lack of resources for salaries and travel.
Human Interest Story: Mirlan Ubraim uulu
Despite his young age, 25-year-old Mirlan
Ubraim uulu has the diverse background of a
migrant worker, a healthcare professional, a
certified teacher and a young leader in Kerben
town of Jalal-Abad province, Kyrgyzstan.
Mirlan is grateful that he had the chance to
be a mentor for “Friendship has no Limits”
project implemented in his community from
2019 to 2020 by UN agencies and partner
organisations. He is also a Chairman of the
Youth Committee of Kerben town, which was
established in 2019. Mirlan interacted with
international organization such as UNICEF and
civil society organisations like “Youth of Osh”
for the first time.
The project “Promoting Kyrgyzstan’s youth cohesion and interaction
towards Uzbekistan” (non-official title “Friendship has no Limits”) was
implemented in the Kyrgyz-Uzbek border communities of the Kyrgyz
Republic from January 2019 to November 2020. The project was carried
out jointly by UNICEF, UNFPA and UNDP. The project was funded by the
Peacebuilding Fund and aimed at supporting the national government, local
self-governments and youth in their efforts to establish and promote youth
cohesion and positive interactions in border areas with further catalytic
effects for the entire country. All project activities took place in Kyrgyzstan
EVALUATION OF THE UNICEF / UNFPA / UNDP PROJECT PROMOTING KYRGYZSTAN’S YOUTH COHESION AND INTERACTION TOWARDS UZBEKISTAN 59
with some activities involving youth and authorities from Uzbekistan.
Activities were conducted at national level, and local level namely, in the
provinces of Osh (Kara-Suu, Kashkar-Kyshtak, Tepe-Korgon), Jalalabad
(Kerben, Kashka-Suu, Kok-Serek) and Batken (Aidarken, Birlik, Suu-Bashy).
Kerben, where Mirlan lives, is a small remote town in the southern part of
Kyrgyzstan with a population of less than 15 000 people. The town was
selected at the initial project site selections stage due to a high percentage
of labour migrants and of unemployed youth, and the openness of the local
authorities and youth leaders.
Mirlan has been inspired by the youth work done as a mentor in the project.
He says that he has changed and become more open, ambitious and with
a clear vision of his future.
Mirlan graduated from the Medical College of Osh State University in 2016
as a paramedic. After graduation he returned to his hometown to start his
career in healthcare. But his first experience crashed against the reality
of everyday life in a remote community. Even though he had graduated
with distinction, he was not welcomed as a young professional and faced
different constraints.
While at College, as a promising student he was recommended to continue
his medical studies in the Russian Federation. But his decision to return to
his home community was dictated by the fact that his family was facing
financial constraints and was not able to support his further studies. Instead
of pursuing education, Mirlan decided to migrate to Russia as labourer in
2016, following the general trend in communities like his. In 2017, he returned
and continued to study at the higher education level at the Jalal-Abad State
University. He graduated in 2020 with the diploma of a biology teacher.
Currently he combines professional development working as a half-time
paramedic at the local healthcare unit, and voluntary activity leading the
Youth Committee. He is most inspired by the work with the youth. As project
mentor he supervised 15 young people during the project: seven boys, eight
girls. Since he is a trained teacher, he thought that he knew how to interact
with young people. The project invested in his practical skills of effectively
working with adolescents, rather as a peer, to better understand their needs,
to have fun and satisfaction of this interaction. Mirlan says “Mentors work is
very important as we need to inspire youth and motivate them. Unfortunately,
the young people have no place to get this motivation. Most of the teachers
in the rural areas have limited skills to positively interact with young people.
Teachers instruct kids and tell them what to do. But this way we fail to
discover kids’ potential or their leadership. A mentor is different: he tries
to enter the inner world of kids, understand what they are going through
and open up their potential.” The young people under his mentorship were
from different backgrounds: some of the kids were from vulnerable families,
when one or both parents were in Russia as labour migrants “…and when
you give encouragement, they open up” he points out.
His mentoring goes beyond the project, now he utilises the new skills
he acquired in everyday life “mentoring” his family members, friends,
community members: “I try to motivate people, especially when there are
real tangible immediate results. I have clearer goals now” he says.
60 EVALUATION OF THE UNICEF / UNFPA / UNDP PROJECT PROMOTING KYRGYZSTAN’S YOUTH COHESION AND INTERACTION TOWARDS UZBEKISTAN
He is planning to take classes in one of the local schools to keep interacting
with young people. Most importantly he is inspired by the training provided
within the UPSHIFT project and how he was able to support the young
people: “I am very proud of the progress these kids have made”, he says.
According to Mirlan, there are still very remote communities in the mountains
in the region where he lives. Young people are at a disadvantage there,
especially girls and young women. Neglect, abuse, including sexual abuse,
no access to development opportunities, deteriorating infrastructure are
among numerous problems there. “There is no bright future for us unless
we start investing in our youth. Now the youth work is more important to
me”, concludes Mirlan.
Mirlan looks favourably upon the idea of the project of positive interaction
with the youth across the border. He maintains contact with the youth leaders
from Jangi Korgon region of Uzbekistan and even developed further plans
with them such as conducting a camp with the youth from Uzbekistan and
Kyrgyzstan in 2021, ensuring funds from the Mayor’s office for this.
Finding 10: There is anecdotal evidence of progress regarding the interethnic component,
though interviewees’ self-censorship is symptomatic of conflict structure.
Triangulated evidence basis
Interviews with youth participants, parents, teachers, mentors, municipal authorities
and leaders, IP/CSOs, duty bearers, UN staff
Focus group discussion with implementing partners
Social media output and media coverage of the project
UNFPA quarter 2 report, YoO quarterly report 2
When assessing the progress of the project’s interethnic component, the disparate
interethnic situation in three targeted provinces should not be overlooked. According to
the 2019 official statistical data,58 the majority of the Batken province are Kyrgyz (77%),
with Uzbek (15%) and Tajik (7%) minorities. Batken also hosts all six enclaves of the Kyrgyz
Republic. Moreover, Batken province has not experienced interethnic conflicts such as
Osh and Jalal-Abad in 2010. On the contrary, Osh city and Osh province in general have
a higher percentage of ethnically Uzbek population, compared to the two other southern
provinces. In 2019,59 the city of Osh had 43% of ethnically Uzbek and 51% of ethnically
Kyrgyz population. Moreover, Osh city was the epicentre of the 2010 ethnic conflict. Jalal-
Abad province had 72% Kyrgyz and 36% Uzbek population in 2019.60 Some researchers
suggest Osh and Jalal-Abad were the focal points of the 2010 ethnic clashes because
of high rates of internal migration of rural residents (and the consequent change in the
demographic structure) and weaker vertical and horizontal ties between local elites and
58 <http://stat.kg/ru/publications/demograficheskij-ezhegodnik-kyrgyzskoj-respubliki/> [13/01/2021].
59 <http://stat.kg/ru/publications/demograficheskij-ezhegodnik-kyrgyzskoj-respubliki/> [13/01/2021].
60 <http://stat.kg/ru/publications/demograficheskij-ezhegodnik-kyrgyzskoj-respubliki/> [13/01/2021].
EVALUATION OF THE UNICEF / UNFPA / UNDP PROJECT PROMOTING KYRGYZSTAN’S YOUTH COHESION AND INTERACTION TOWARDS UZBEKISTAN 61
activists.61 Thus, the conflict potential of major settlements varies between the three
southern provinces, as does their interethnic situation at the project onset. This makes the
assessment of the progress of the project’s interethnic component rather context-specific
for each location.
Interethnic and cross-border youth interaction, as planned at the result level of the theory
of change, was achieved. 30% of the youth-led initiatives in the project aimed at supporting
diversity and equality, involving interethnic cooperation within Kyrgyzstan. As long as the
activities took place in person, these interactions were part of the experience for the youth.
Interethnic interactions were brought about by thematic activities, but also through group
compositions. Some project participants missed the interethnic component among the
project goals, some on the contrary commented on it, seeing the intention but not identifying
it as relevant – and nevertheless confirming the personal link established and/or change in
attitude. When they mentioned ethnic diversity, interviewed youth and parents displayed a
newly supportive attitude. This may be due to social desirability bias and the cultural norm
not to speak negatively of others,62 or that the peacebuilding component was delivered
in a language that was less theoretical – friendship, accepting “otherness”, tolerance, etc.
Actual accounts of the interethnic climate can be gleaned through implicit perceptions of
interviewees. A panel of quotes shows the project achieved effective change in perceptions,
attitudes, and even values professed by interviewees, at least at individual level.
Quotes (youth, majority group)
“The project was around friendship between youth of Uzbekistan and
Kyrgyzstan. It probably hasn’t achieved 100%, but it will in the future.
It is better for us to be in good relations with Uzbek people. We are a
border community, so there are people of different ethnicities. After the
trainings we also explained to people at school that having arguments
based on ethnicity is wrong.”
[the main project outcome was] “… that I became friends with students
of other schools, I started talking often because of the project. There
were Tadjik and Kyrgyz teenagers. Under other circumstances, I wouldn’t
have befriended them.”
“I used to think that other ethnicities are worse than us, I am sorry for
this. But I changed my view. I realised we all have our own norms.
Because I became friends with one girl from another school, and she
told me about their rules in their ethnic group […]. And then I realized I
was absolutely wrong.”
“Our town is multi-ethnic. The project aimed at strengthening Kyrgyz
and Uzbek relations. When I had arguments with my Tadjik friends, I
used to say things like ‘Go and live in your own country, what are you
doing here!’. But then I realized that they are also citizens of Kyrgyzstan,
just like I am. […] After the project my attitude to people changed.”
“The project helped to improve relations between people. Before it we
thought that we cannot be friends with Tajik people. But then we realized
we can talk to each other.”
61 Megoran, Nick, John Heathershaw and Alisher Khamidov, Bottom-up Peacekeeping in Southern Kyrgyzstan: How Local Actors Managed to
Prevent the Spread of Violence from Osh/Jalal-Abad to Aravan, June 2010, Nationalities Papers, Routledge, 2017 <https://doi.org/10.1080/0090599
2.2017.1335695>.
62 Tendency of interviewees or respondents to give responses that they believe to be socially approved rather than those that reflect their actual
behaviour or thoughts.
62 EVALUATION OF THE UNICEF / UNFPA / UNDP PROJECT PROMOTING KYRGYZSTAN’S YOUTH COHESION AND INTERACTION TOWARDS UZBEKISTAN
Quote (youth, minority background)
„I thought ‘Everyone is Kyrgyz here, will they separate us?’ But then I
got used to it.“
Parents who expressed positive reaction towards interethnic friendships their children
had developed within the project were mostly of minority ethnic background. Feedback of
parents of majority ethnic background had more reserved, albeit with positive tone.
Quote (parent, minority ethnic group)
“There is some tension between Uzbeks and Kyrgyz people in the
country. It’s good if children speak Kyrgyz and Uzbek and become friends
with each other. Now my son has friends from different ethnic groups –
how would he find them without such a project?”
Quote (parent, majority group)
“Teenagers started to get to know Uzbek people in our village, to better
understand their interests, in foreign languages and other things. They
were sharing views and getting to know many new people.”
With the shift to online activities, the building of close bonds among youth from different
backgrounds who didn’t know each other before could hardly be achieved anymore,
especially within the given timeframe. As to cross-border youth interactions at local
level, there were joint activities where youth from Uzbekistan was invited, but those did
not take place due to COVID-19-related restrictions. Young people’s small projects and
empowerment cast the ethnic composition of young people’s groups into the shade.
Cross-border activities were significantly less sizeable: the volume of grassroot-level
cross-border activities is insufficient to result in a critical size of stakeholders having
experienced positive cross-border interaction. Yet, some online events specifically enabled
cross-border interactions.
Finding 11: A large share of girls participated in the project activities, and the transformative
results of the activities are particularly visible for them.
Triangulated evidence basis
Project documents
Focus group with implementing partners
Interviews with youth participants, parents, teachers,
mentors, local self-governments, CSOs
The expected result of the theory of change (youth empowered as peace-making
influencers, civic activists and entrepreneurs) was especially impressive concerning
female participants, as leadership and participation in decision making is not part of their
traditional gender role. Besides, as presented in finding 4, labour migration is an issue for
EVALUATION OF THE UNICEF / UNFPA / UNDP PROJECT PROMOTING KYRGYZSTAN’S YOUTH COHESION AND INTERACTION TOWARDS UZBEKISTAN 63
the border communities. Male school graduates tend to leave their community looking
for jobs in other regions within the country or abroad. Girls tend to stay longer in studies,
but this doesn’t always materialise in women having more gainful employment (in the
best case they work in public service, e.g. as teachers). Targeting female participants was
therefore particularly important for the theory of change of the project.
As noted in finding 5, the share of the girls who participated in the project was well balanced.
For example, the share of the girls who successfully completed the UPSHIFT programme
and were awarded certificates by UNICEF, Youth of Osh and Accelerate Prosperity was the
following:
• from Batken province 39 participants - 53.8% (girls), 46.2% (boys),
• from Osh province 37 participants - 48.6% (girls), 51.4% (boys),
• from Jalal-Abad province 38 participants - 57.9% (girls), 42.1% (boys).
As for the LIA, 90 young participants were part of this activity and 7 mentors (total 97):
• from Batken province 35 participants – 63% (girls), 37 % (boys)
• from Osh province 31 participants – 52% (girls), 48% (boys)
• from Jalal-Abad province 34 participants – 53% (girls), 47% (boys)
The project made a point to engage young Kyrgyzstani women of Uzbek ethnic background,
but their participation was variable and will need further attention regarding obstacles.
Unfortunately, the project team did not systematically monitor the ethnic composition of
the groups for each activity (unlike the gender balance in general): it was therefore not
possible for the evaluation team to quantitatively assess the level of inclusion of girls
from ethnic minorities in the activities. Ethnic inclusion is mostly relayed by participants’
impressions. They report that vulnerable groups such as Kyrgyzstani of Uzbek ethnic
background, particularly girls, although targeted by the project, had more difficulties in
participating: some Uzbek children were not allowed by their parents to participate, who
reportedly felt too unsafe. The evaluation team unfortunately did not succeed to interview
these parents to understand their rationale. This also brings up the issue of (self-)exclusion
and access to opportunities for Kyrgyz citizens belonging to ethnic minorities in the
border areas, especially youth. Restrictions may be even tighter for girls of Uzbek ethnic
background. Some studies demonstrate that one of the coping strategies of ethnic Uzbek
families after the 2010 clashes was stretching previously endogamous marriage pattern
to a wider Uzbek ethnic group and hurried arranged marriages of young girls.63 This was
pointed out by youth participants themselves, which shows a certain degree of awareness
on the subject as well as a readiness to talk about it openly. It is particularly interesting to
observe that youth participants who could access the project were sensitive to the fact that
others could not. This empathy probably predates the project.
Quote (youth participant, Kyrgyz ethnic background)
“The purpose of the project was to strengthen friendship between
two ethnicities. But unfortunately only Kyrgyz participants ended up
participating. We were also upset and called over the phone to Uzbek
participants to persuade their parents. But their parents didn’t allow
it. Our second team proposed a project on Uzbek-Kyrgyz friendship,
unfortunately it was not supported.”
63 Ismailbekova, Aksana, From Endogamous Marriage to Ethnicity: Uzbek Community Survival Strategy After the 2010 Conflict in Osh, Anthropolo-
gy & Archeology of Eurasia 58:3 (2019), pp. 134-154.
64 EVALUATION OF THE UNICEF / UNFPA / UNDP PROJECT PROMOTING KYRGYZSTAN’S YOUTH COHESION AND INTERACTION TOWARDS UZBEKISTAN
Quote (youth participant, male)
“There were 5 girls and 5 boys at the beginning, then by the end of the
project we had 3 girls and 7 boys, since parents were prohibiting girls
from participating.”
Quote (teacher)
“In Kara-Suu girls are not allowed to participate in outside events. I
talked to mothers, then fathers, then grandparents. It’s good that I speak
Uzbek language.”
Quote (teacher)
“ Because after the 2010,64 parents are still concerned about the safety
[of their children]. They also wonder whether their daughter will be able
to get married if she gets education. I convinced them that even if she
gets married, being educated is an advantage, as she will help her own
children.”
The young people went for the training outside of their villages and regions to Osh,
Kochkor-Ata, Jalal-Abad, which implied overnight stays outside of their homes. Getting
permission for girls from their parents was an extra effort for the implementing partners.
Quote (implementing partner)
“A lot of work was done there with the parents, because at first many
parents did not want to let their girls into the project and these parents
came to the hotel, looked at our academy, at our trainings. Then they
made sure that we were on the right track and they didn’t bother too
much about their daughters and they let them participate at the end.
It was difficult in the beginning, they were always worried about their
daughters. In [one of the target locations] the people are religious and
especially their daughters are not allowed to go anywhere.”
The boys and girls interacted well in the project. As families tend to be more traditional
in border communities, this interaction constitutes a significant change – though among
themselves, some stereotypical gender roles persisted. While awareness attaches itself to
major decisions such as marriage or studies, participants still often fell back on habitual
gender behaviours during mundane, daily inter-personal and group dynamics.
Quote (young person, female)
“At the first events, we couldn’t build good relationship with boys. But
then we started developing more warm relations, like elder brother, or
like friends. Older ones called us ‘little sister’ (‘karyndash’).”
64 Major interethnic conflict in the Southern part of the country.
EVALUATION OF THE UNICEF / UNFPA / UNDP PROJECT PROMOTING KYRGYZSTAN’S YOUTH COHESION AND INTERACTION TOWARDS UZBEKISTAN 65
The mentors systematically applied gender equity practices throughout activities, making
sure to engage girls and treat them without prejudice, and indeed ensure that the project
never led to gender-based discrimination. According to implementing partners, mentors
and some female young participants, this brought about changes in attitudes for the
youth and their parents, young women and men. Interviewees mentioned this in strong
terms, which demonstrates personal realisation and critical thinking, from girls and boys.
This also shows that the gender issues tackled by the projects were meaningful for all
participants.
Both girls and boys interviewed by the evaluation team emphasized how girls in the
project owned many of the successful initiatives and gains in terms of recognition. Success
stories, such as coworking spaces or libraries, almost always included a large proportion
of girls. Realising their potential and being acknowledged, supported and encouraged by
parents, communities and local self-governments not only constituted a novel experience:
it also opened new perspectives they would not have envisaged before the project. All
project stakeholders appreciated this opportunity (local self-governments, young people,
mentors, teachers, parents).
Quote (youth participants, female)
“After the project I realised I should be responsible for myself, no one
will do things for me. I can make my parents and other people proud of
me. I changed so much. I pay attention to people around me: if someone
has poor grades, I try to help. Previously we only thought of one solution
to a problem. Now we think of many solutions, many implications,
advantages and disadvantages. I started treating people differently.”
“I could also feel that I was changing. I realised I could accomplish
things. I used to be afraid all the time, but now I am more confident. I
was looking at our mentors, teachers, speakers and realised that I can
become like them too.”
Finding 12: Success stories emerged from the project activities where municipalities
supported youth initiatives.
Triangulated evidence basis
Project documents
Local self-governance documents from sampled municipalities
Social media analysis
Focus group with implementing partners
Interviews with local duty bearers, youth, parents, mentors, implementing partners
The theory of change aimed at local self-governments enhancing equitable access to
rights. The successful occurrences of municipalities supporting youth initiatives uphold
several elements of the theory of change, in particular civic participation (results level),
towards prosperity issues (impact level). Beyond the local results and success stories,
these occurrences can serve as models to champion further implementation of similar
initiatives.
66 EVALUATION OF THE UNICEF / UNFPA / UNDP PROJECT PROMOTING KYRGYZSTAN’S YOUTH COHESION AND INTERACTION TOWARDS UZBEKISTAN
As a result of the youth empowerment measures of the project, the young people not only
acquired skills to speak up - they also defined the burning issues of the communities and
contributed solution to local self-governments. In all four sampled municipalities, they
harnessed support from the municipalities to realize their initiatives. For example, the
young participants in Aidarken identified the problems in their town during bootcamp
events: the lack of opportunities for personal growth, lack of organized spaces for leisure,
environmental degradation of the city. Having met with the Mayor, they obtained premises
and established a coworking centre in the city-hall building and 20,000 Kyrgyz soms from
the local budget for the reconstruction of the city park. Currently the coworking centre is
functioning and the municipality covers the internet connection and electricity cost. In the
same municipality, two young girls trained by the project on media literacy, publishing,
maintenance of social media outlets and news feed, digital photography, now maintain
the town’s social network pages and relay the youth’s initiatives through this outlet.
In Kerben the young people lobbied the Mayor’s office for the purchase of computers for
the students in the local school (which had only one computer for the teachers and the
director). With the mini-grants from the project, the school was equipped with several
computers, tablets and books, and opened an electronic library.
In Kok-Serek, the local government provided a whole building and refurbished it, so the
young people opened a youth centre and a hairdresser there. The hairdressing salon
equipment was financed by the project grant.
In Kashkar-Kyshtak, the community is multinational, with a large representation of
Uzbeks along Kyrgyz people. As informed by the interviewees, the young people were
already civically active before the project. They opened their own youth initiative group,
established a registered youth centre where they conduct numerous events, partly through
the project’s mini-grants programme, and beyond.
In eight of the nine locations of the project, local self-governments provided the young
participants with at least 350,000 Kyrgyz soms worth of monetary and in-kind, in the form
of premisses for youth centres and other initiatives, purchase of computers and laptops
for various purposes (one-stop-shop, school, youth centre).65 All interviewed local self-
government representatives confirmed that they will allocate budgets for 2021 for youth
support, without however mentioning exact figures. Some village councils already annually
allocate funds for youth work: for instance in Kerben, the Youth Committee has 200,000
soms for youth work, and the Mayor’s office planned 300,000 soms from the municipal
budget 2021 for youth and additionally around 400,000 for sports. This shows a new, strong
convergence between the local administration and elected officials, and the youth.
Quote (local duty bearer)
“I myself changed my tactics when interacting with the young generation. I
decided to work closely with the young people as they bear the future… The
main outcome was the people and myself believe the young people can
bring new ideas, resolve issues to benefit the whole community.”
65 Project report June 2020.
EVALUATION OF THE UNICEF / UNFPA / UNDP PROJECT PROMOTING KYRGYZSTAN’S YOUTH COHESION AND INTERACTION TOWARDS UZBEKISTAN 67
Finding 13: The pilots projects concerning service delivery in municipalities were well
received by local self-governments and rights holders, but remained modest and scattered.
Triangulated evidence basis
Project documents
Focus group with implementing partners
Interviews with local duty bearers, implementing partners
The theory of change aimed at local self-governments and the State government enhancing
equitable access to rights and to redress mechanisms. This point was identified as crucial
by the project’s baseline study.
Some interviewees shared that staff working at the village councils do not actually think
of improving their services, not necessarily deliberately, but because they are caught
in their routine and lack expertise in a context of slow public reforms. But during the
trainings, when asked about their vision for local service delivery, they put themselves in
the rights holders’ shoes and talked about shorter waiting time, suppression of bribery,
and streamlining of users’ interactions with fewer officials. By modelling the expectations
of the population, the trained duty bearers experienced a shift in their mindset.
The single-window (one-stop-shop) points for services piloted by the project after training
of relevant duty bears allow beneficiaries living in pilot municipalities to get information
and documents with a single-entry point overseen by the municipal jurist who reviews
and refers citizens’ requests, which facilitates access, especially for remote communities.
People then individually refer to the village council specialists – who sit in the same room.
No formal procedure was yet established to monitor customer satisfaction, though the
clients had a chance to file their satisfaction rating in the logbook of the municipal jurists
where they registered their cases.66 In each target location, a short regulation document
was adopted to institutionalise the service. Basic infrastructural developments were made
to launch the one-stop-shop approach of municipal service delivery, like repairs of the
premises used for this purpose, which were supported by the municipalities, and furniture
and computers provided by the project.
It is too early to evaluate the quality of service and its impact of the services in terms
of effective enjoyment of their rights by the rights holders, as it started only recently,
but both the local self-governments and the rights holders welcomed the initiative. The
service was well received according to representatives at both national and local levels.
They used this opportunity to do their job and better fulfil their mandate. However, these
pilots could not be refined nor could they cover all intended areas of expertise in such
short a time. In addition, the municipalities will not have the resources to continue beyond
the end of the project and would need backing up from central agencies. Digital means of
information processing is lacking, and local administrative processes would need to be
linked to the national databases. Larger structural changes within public administration
reform are needed to implement the single-window system – which is not within the
mandate of peacebuilding initiatives.
Additionally, since July 2020, the project supported the State Registry office in its delegation
of four types of registry services to the level of municipality: ID renewal, marriage, death,
and birth certificates issuance. This would enable the population to receive these registry
services locally, saving them money and time, instead of going to the regional administrative
66 These spontaneous feedbacks inform on the degree of satisfaction of the beneficiaries concerning the possibility to channel their complaints
and grievances linked with the quality of the services provided by the local institutions.
68 EVALUATION OF THE UNICEF / UNFPA / UNDP PROJECT PROMOTING KYRGYZSTAN’S YOUTH COHESION AND INTERACTION TOWARDS UZBEKISTAN
centre. This service is particularly relevant to vulnerable populations for whom travelling
is difficult (people with disability, poor people). Thus, the project used the current ongoing
initiative of the Registry office to speed up this delegation of authority in the project pilot
regions at least. However, due to the pandemic, the service was launched very late in the
project, and its concrete results could not be assessed. Besides, the delegation of functions
would have required regulatory, and possibly legislative amendments to go beyond small-
scale experiment. Local officers called for intensive guidance by the regional registry
office on every aspect of the delegated duty, starting with taking photos for IDs which
corresponded to the specified requirements. The modest frame of this project activity is
not equipped to respond to such deep and vast reform requirements.
At the beginning of the project, the implementing partners arranged focus group discussions
during which 347 people were consulted (128 men, 219 women, and 174 youth from the total)
on their needs related to legal issue, to channel conflict towards legal means.T he implementing
partner, the Association of Legal Clinics, led the focus group discussions with the beneficiaries
at the target project locations involving a mobile working group: the director of the department
of the registry service, a representative of the President Apparatus, a regional representative
of ombudsperson’s office, regional representatives of the Ministry of Justice, the Legal Clinics,
UNDP, etc. The project developed a mini-guide for municipal jurists and tailored services.
School students also delivered presentations in class on human rights, Constitution, family
law, civil law, media literacy, peaceful co-existence as part of the society.
In total, 906 people received primary legal aid within the project timespan.67 From May
2019 to the end of July 2020, 735 beneficiaries (20,4% youth, 55,1% women) received legal
services tailored by the project, such as the legal support within the single window or
Youth-to-Youth Legal Aid.
Legal clinics are a good example of providing non-violent avenues for conflict resolution,
access to human rights, and redress in case of violation. The law students were instrumental
for this. The three universities in Osh, Jalalabad, Batken concluded tripartite Memorandums
of Understanding with the village councils and Legal Aid Clinics. The law students had an
opportunity to provide peer-to-peer primary free legal aid withing their internships in local
administrations of where they came from. This initiative was supported by the UNDP. Said
experience was well received locally, both by duty bearers and rights holders. In some cases,
at the close of the project, village councils offered jobs and accommodation to “their” law
students. As a result of this initiative, 141 people received primary legal aid (out of this number
42% were youth; and 43% of the total number were citizens of the neighbouring countries).
Quote (implementing partner)
“A student of Batken State University, who is originally from Aidarken,
was placed for internship at the Mayor’s office in Aidarken. As a result, at
the end of her internship she got a certificate from the Mayor of Aidarken
for her contribution. It was a great chance for a young person like her.“
Based on the key informant interviews, the legal services delivered by the project lawyers
were popular among the communities, especially to resolve citizenship issues of the border
population, and in turn birth certificates, allocation of social entitlements, and access to
economic and social rights such as healthcare and education. Unfortunately, this service
was not resumed by the target municipalities when the project support terminated, and
there is a concern that failure to fulfil the rights of others affected by citizenship and birth
certification issues is not corrected in the future.
67 Presentation by Nargiza Tashtemirova on youth cohesion project data, with figures on the legal aid provided.
EVALUATION OF THE UNICEF / UNFPA / UNDP PROJECT PROMOTING KYRGYZSTAN’S YOUTH COHESION AND INTERACTION TOWARDS UZBEKISTAN 69
The border area communities welcomed another initiative: the improvement of the basic
infrastructure at four border checkpoints, in the interest of citizens of Uzbekistan and
Kyrgyzstan crossing the border. A small-scale project in itself within the current project,
it certainly contributed to improving relations in the border areas by providing positive
experiences to the citizens of both countries when crossing the border (so we gather on
the Kyrgyz side at least). This also corresponds to the wide-spread view of the causes for
tensions (see finding 10) and border area communities therefore regard this as highly
relevant. Based on the informal feedback they received, border officials report that 99% of
the people crossing the border expressed a positive opinion regarding the fast procedure
after the new computers were installed. Before that, many rights holders said that they
had had to wait longer due to old and slow computers at the Kyrgyz border checkpoints.
With the new equipment, the speed and most importantly the reliability of actually being
authorised to cross the border increased. Border officials report there were no failures,
which shows high satisfaction with the project input.
Quote (local duty bearer)
“It is important to say that these checkpoints are crossed by the
citizens of the Uzbekistan living in enclaves (Sokh, Shahimardan) and
it is important to provide them with a positive experience so that their
attitude to the neighbouring country will be positive. The main project
idea was not only about the Kyrgyz citizens, so here the result would be
felt by both sides.”
Overall, all services established with support of the project were received with great
enthusiasm by the project stakeholders at all levels, and supported by local level duty
bearers. The assumption in the theory of change about the political will (on local level)
to support such changes is realised. However, the links between the core component
of the project, youth empowerment, and some of the service provision supported by
this component (the one-stop-shop and the border crossing points) is tenuous. These
constituted interesting pilots, but belong in vaster public administration reform and border
management programmes.
Finding 14: National level duty bearers and their regional level representation became
better connected with the final beneficiaries’ aspirations and realities.
Triangulated evidence basis
Interviews with national and regional duty bearers, interviews with youth
Project reports
Official documents integrating youth initiatives, or financing/supporting
youth initiatives
The theory of change aimed at local self-governments and the central government
enhancing equitable access to rights and redress. The project created channels for the
voices of the rights holders, and offered solutions through pilot initiatives. These pilots,
as well as civic events, then allowed the national duty bearers and their regional level
representation to become better connected with the final beneficiaries’ aspirations and
realities.
70 EVALUATION OF THE UNICEF / UNFPA / UNDP PROJECT PROMOTING KYRGYZSTAN’S YOUTH COHESION AND INTERACTION TOWARDS UZBEKISTAN
The staff of State Agency on Youth affairs were reportedly fully aware and supportive of
the project.68 The project trained the staff of the Agency, and enabled them to interact
with the young people of border areas during large project events such as consultations
with the beneficiaries, the Kyrgyz-Uzbek Forum (March 2019), online forum, etc. This was
meaningful for the Agency as the COVID-19 pandemic resulted in a tighter budget and
travel bans which limited its ability to reach the remote regions. According to interviews
with the Agency at national and regional level, the staff also improved cooperation with
their counterparts from Uzbekistan (former the Youth Union of Uzbekistan, now the Agency
on Youth Affairs under the Government of Uzbekistan) during these events. Other national
level duty bearers, such as the Ministry of Labour and Social Protection, experienced new
avenues to connect with their final beneficiaries by informing the population on social
allowances, even if during a short time span. Even if the interaction of the project with the
national partners was for a short period (a few months with the project), it allowed them
to get the best use of this cooperation especially in terms of connecting with their final
beneficiaries.
Quote (national level duty bearer)
“Our department has learnt that many people do not know about maternity
allowance, ritual aid [funeral allowance], monetary compensations.
I understood that we need to inform people more broadly on these
allowances and benefits. But maternity allowance is given for working
mothers, many of people in the villages do not have official jobs and
they do not know about this allowance. “
5.3 Efficiency
Evaluation question 4: To what extent have the project implementers optimized their
assets and comparative advantages?
Key Findings:
Finding 15: Federated by a common peacebuilding approach, the recipient
United Nations organisations achieved deep cooperation, but missed some
synergies with sister projects across the borders of Kyrgyzstan.
Finding 16: The recipient United Nations organisations made the most of their
assets within the country, particularly local offices and their network of CSOs,
to reach out to underserved regions with a large panel of activities, within a
modest budget.
Finding 17: The slow start of the project due to inter-agency coordination and
then the COVID-19 crisis led to a final rush.
68 Annual report 2019, p. 7-8: The State Registry Service, Presidential Administration, Ombudsman’s office, Ministry of Justice, local municipalities
demonstrated a high interest in the project as they agree on the need of the preventive activities helping to promote youth cohesion and, as a
result, sustainable peace.
EVALUATION OF THE UNICEF / UNFPA / UNDP PROJECT PROMOTING KYRGYZSTAN’S YOUTH COHESION AND INTERACTION TOWARDS UZBEKISTAN 71
Finding 15: Federated by a common peacebuilding approach, the recipient United Nations
organisations achieved deep cooperation, but missed some synergies with sister projects
across the borders of Kyrgyzstan.
Triangulated evidence basis
Project documents
Interviews with UN staff, IPs, PBF
PBF reports
Closed UN projects with Tajikistan
Conflict analysis in Central Asia
Focus group discussion with UN staff
The input level of the theory of change foresaw a high complementarity and an interwoven
engagement of the three UN agencies. At first, the evaluation team tried to separate UN
agencies activities, to unpack the project documents and attribute areas or implementing
partners as would be expected, but found a more complex intertwinement than usual
– this is a testimony to the level of integration of the three agencies in the project,
where a real cooperation took place rather than separate but coordinated activities. The
three agencies shared the same methods (training, youth groups, participatory project
proposals, component on small grant), and had the same understanding of the theory of
change and key assumptions.
The clarity of the project logic, and a genuine will to cooperate rather than just coordinate,
were the key success factor for this real joint implementation. The peacebuilding approach
was a good federating avenue for this cooperation, because:
• Contributing to peace mobilized strong values and beliefs among the staff;
• Peacebuilding is a wide and inclusive enough concept to accommodate the mandates
and specialities of all three agencies;
• The strength of conflict analysis, embodied by the Peacebuilding Priority Plans which
had already mobilized intensive reflection among the United Nations agencies,
federated efforts into a clear conceptual framework.
The monitoring and evaluation workshops were also instrumental in that regard and were
a driving element of efficiency. This led to a smooth collaboration with a good synergy
among the UN partners, with intense communication and discussions. This common
vision was in part facilitated by the alignment with the youth empowerment approach of
the National Youth Agency, whose Director actively participated in project design and was
ready to cooperate with all three United Nations Agencies.
Another key success factor was the enabling approach of the leadership: the Resident
Coordinator and the recently appointed heads of all three agencies personally followed
the project, and sent a clear message to the staff on deep cooperation. Finally, the
existence of a UNICEF Office in Osh, with representatives from all three agencies, was a
decisive factor: directly exposed with the realities of the rights holders and empowered
by their management, they felt strongly about joining forces because they perceived joint
implementation as the most effective way to reach out to more beneficiaries and serve
them better. For instance, the UN agencies supported each other with awareness-raising
and mobilization of participants through their own project participants. This empowerment
of the project staff proved to be invaluable in 2020: implementing partners reported that
72 EVALUATION OF THE UNICEF / UNFPA / UNDP PROJECT PROMOTING KYRGYZSTAN’S YOUTH COHESION AND INTERACTION TOWARDS UZBEKISTAN
the project staff were highly equipped to face the COVID-19 crisis and adapted in direct
alignment with the project’s objectives and purpose.
Quotes (UN staff)
“Joint planning, common monitoring and evaluation framework, joint
implementation: these are exceptional! Getting UN agencies to do that
for real is difficult. Usually, for instance, it is very difficult to get them to
report jointly. In this case it was fairly easy.”
“We managed to involve youth from Uzbekistan thanks to the
mobilisation of UNICEF, and UNDP, and UNFPA who pushed for this: the
one-UN approach really helped.”
During implementation, the division of labour reflected the existing networks and
experiences of the United Nations in Kyrgyzstan, with all three agencies engaged in youth
empowerment and capacity building of local self-government (and UNDP taking the lead
on rule of law issues). UNFPA and UNICEF mostly divided work geographically. UNICEF
being the lead agency, its project management procedures applied, but key procedures
were implemented jointly. The joint selection of implementing partners for UNICEF and
UNFPA was a novel experience, which required heavy alignment of procedures and long
negotiating processes, but which eventually succeeded. Lengthy procurement spent the
donor’s patience capital and strained the implementing partners’ calendar.
The degree of collaboration between the three UN agencies was an interesting experience
for the staff, who took ownership of it and reflected it in the monitoring and reporting. The
monitoring mechanisms adapted midway through the project were expedient in measuring
progress and reporting along jointly crafted indicators and in the same document. This also
enabled clear decision making and guidance of all three agencies towards the implementing
partners, in an autonomous but fully coherent: none of the interviews with implementing
partners suggested that they ever received mixed messages, which is rather exceptional.
Except a few instances of participants having attended events of both the Promoting
Kyrgyzstan’s youth cohesion and interaction towards Uzbekistan” and UNDP events,
there is no indication of duplication nor of overlap with other UN initiatives in Kyrgyzstan,
such as another UNDP civil society support project involving border communities, and
a comparable cross-border project with Kyrgyzstan and Tajikistan. This is partly because
the project evaluated here was rather small compared to the other UNDP projects. As the
project pioneered some activities, the work was clear-cut and overlaps were improbable
from the start. The project objectives are also complementary with other PBF projects, as
its funding focusses on Rule of Law and dialogue, and has a special Gender and Youth
Promotion Initiative (GYPI) component.69 The other GYPI project in Kyrgyzstan funded by
the PBF, “Strengthening capacity of young women and men in Kyrgyzstan to promote
peace and security” follows similar lines, to “empower youth to advocate for action
and accountability from their authorities, and create opportunities for meaningful youth
participation in decision-making processes around peace and security”,70 thus, creating a
coherent effort regarding objectives and timing.
In contrast, the project mostly ignored other conflict-related projects in the region, for instance
a sister project in Uzbekistan. There was very limited benchmarking with other PBF-funded
projects, or with the peacebuilding plans of other United Nations Offices, in Uzbekistan and
69 <www.un.org/peacebuilding/sites/www.un.org.peacebuilding/files/documents/kyrgyzstan_two-pager.pdf> [30/12/2020].
70 <https://kyrgyzstan.un.org/sites/default/files/2020-01/UNPBF-%20KYRG-Saferworld%20UNPBF%20GYPI%20-%20project%20document.pdf>
[30/12/2020].
EVALUATION OF THE UNICEF / UNFPA / UNDP PROJECT PROMOTING KYRGYZSTAN’S YOUTH COHESION AND INTERACTION TOWARDS UZBEKISTAN 73
Tajikistan for instance. In interviews and focus group discussion with the United Nations
staff, it became clear that cooperation with the United Nations Office in Uzbekistan was
never considered, because the project was implemented on the territory of Kyrgyzstan, and
because the Kyrgyz National Youth Agency had a prominent role in cross-border activities,
which should not have been overshadowed. This is surprising, as the project meant to
mobilize state and local actors as well as youth from Uzbekistan, which proved challenging
in practice: youth from Uzbekistan were involved to the extent possible, which was only a
very modest extent. Facilitation by other projects in Uzbekistan could have gone a long way
to enhance the cross-border aspect of the project. Focus group participants acknowledged
that an opportunity had not been used, and that there is a potential for much more synergy
in the future. They also pointed that cross-fertilisation among PBF-funded projects is mostly
driven by individual initiative. The project stakeholders were also unaware of comparable
initiatives being undertaken by PBF-funded projects in the Western Balkans. There clearly
lacks a systemic platform that would connect PBF projects and their implementers with one
another, in order to breed mutual support, inspiration and learning.
The project staff was familiar with the Cross-border Cooperation for Sustainable Peace and
Development (Kyrgyzstan andT ajikistan) project, which inspired some youth empowerment
activities,71 and there is evidence of exchange of experience with the UN agencies in
Tajikistan.72 However, the project documents do not explicitly refer to this project, and
no joint activities were implemented. The project documents stated: “The project closely
coordinated with UN Peacebuilding (YPI and GPI) and Prevention of violent extremism
(PVE) projects within frames of PPP implementation, to discuss best practices and lessons
learnt. The RUNOs coordinated implementation of activities with other peacebuilding
projects in the project locations including Search for Common Ground, Global Partnership
for Prevention of Armed Conflicts, Saferworld, International Alert, Helvetas, Internews and
other partners working in the area of peacebuilding and PVE.” However, these transversal
possibilities were not used. They were either not relevant to the project, or reaching out
was too heavy to be useful. A reflection on the adequate format of interactions, if any,
might contribute to the external assumptions (efficiency criterion of the theory of change).
Finding 16: The recipient United Nations organisations made the most of their assets
within the country, particularly local offices and their network of CSOs, to reach out to
underserved regions with a large panel of activities, within a modest budget.
Triangulated evidence basis
Interviews with UN staff, with implementing partners
Focus group with implementing partners
Project documents and reports
To implement the project, the United Nations agencies relied on several assets:
• The financial resources provided by the PBF ($ 1,500,000);
• The human resources of each agency in the country, with their experience, expertise
and individual professional reputation;
• The political clout of the United Nations Office in Kyrgyzstan and respective agencies,
based on the mandates and set of standards of the respective agencies, the heritage
71 Cf. de Weijer, Frauke / PeaceNexus Foundation, Review of PBF Cross-border Cooperation for Sustainable Peace and Development in the
Border Area of Kyrgyzstan & Tajikistan, 20-11-2017.
72 <http://en.kabar.kg/news/kyrgyz-tajik-specialists-on-capacity-building-of-youth-meet-in-osh-to-exchange-experience/>, [28/12/2020].
74 EVALUATION OF THE UNICEF / UNFPA / UNDP PROJECT PROMOTING KYRGYZSTAN’S YOUTH COHESION AND INTERACTION TOWARDS UZBEKISTAN
of past projects and partnerships, and generally the reputation of the United Nations
in the region;
• The network of partners, from government to local level and CSOs;
• The existence of a strong back office for each agency and as a full-fledged United
Nations Country Office, with a decentralised structure (representation in some
provinces, particularly in Osh), set of administrative and financial processes and
procedures, auditing standards, tendering and recruitment capacity, logistical means,
communication and public relations, etc.
The theory of change at input level assumed (and heavily relied on) the existence of civic
activism and capacity: this was clearly the case, as implementing CSOs (and company)
proved both very committed to, and capable of conducting the activities while mobilizing
all stakeholders within the communities. Civic activism and capacity were not only pre-
existing, the engagement in cooperation was also remarkably successful. This enabled the
swift and competent implementation of the project. This was corroborated in the interviews
with the CSOs, who highlighted the smooth and mutually beneficial cooperation. Duty
bearers at local level mostly interacted with the implementing partners rather than with
UN officials. This limited public perception of the UN agencies among project participants,
but did not impede achievements.
Thanks to the synergies described in finding 15, the project made the most of the existing
partnerships of the United Nations at national and municipal levels within the territory of
Kyrgyzstan. The political clout of the United Nations was instrumental in striking the deals
required to launch this bold project in sensitive provinces. Clear mandates and standards
for the agencies, the prestige of the function of Resident Coordinator who in addition
personally advocated the project at national level, and the reputation of both the institutions
and the individual, were all instrumental to secure political will, a key assumption of the
theory of change. Had the project been entrusted to a regional organisation or directly to
CSOs, it would have been unlikely to obtain such support.
There is clear evidence of the benefits brought by the UNICEF Office in Osh. The project
harnessed these advantages in terms of administrative capacity to back the activities up locally,
in terms of networking with local officials. The Office in Osh, along with the implementing
partners, also brought close understanding of the local peculiarities of each province and
municipality, which in turn were instrumental to adjust the activities and the monitoring of
the project throughout its implementation. This was particularly needed to face the COVID-19
crisis and move activities online swiftly, in a way that was adapted to local conditions. As
a result, there is no indication that any locality was under-served compared to the others
within the project. All interviewed stakeholders were highly appreciative of this geographic
equity, and of the project’s capacity to reach out to the most remote locations, where no other
such project had gone before. The Osh branch carried out active outreach to the targeted
communities, which were multiplied by the implementing partners, in a decisive fashion to
reach the most deprived and isolated participants.
Carrying out test drives in these regions, the project did not – indeed could not – create
systemic changes. The intention was rather to create new opportunities and expectations,
and this was achieved thanks to full mobilisation of the above-mentioned factors. With its
reasonable budget and its relatively small scale, the project therefore succeeded to open
many doors. The review of the project’s budget does not show any waste, although the budget
was somewhat scattered between the many activities and components. The value for money
of the project is therefore quite good, because the financial resources were optimized thanks
to other assets examined above. The PBF now needs to follow up on the paths explored,
otherwise the investment to open doors will have been in vain. The way ahead, based on the
project’s exploration, is to focus thematically but scale up in magnitude.
EVALUATION OF THE UNICEF / UNFPA / UNDP PROJECT PROMOTING KYRGYZSTAN’S YOUTH COHESION AND INTERACTION TOWARDS UZBEKISTAN 75
Finding 17: The slow start of the project due to inter-agency coordination and then the
COVID-19 crisis led to a final rush.
Triangulated evidence basis
Interviews with CSOs
Focus group discussion with implementing partners
Project documents
Quarterly reports by implementing partners, reports on each activity
from trainers, responsible staff
The high complementarity of the UN agencies, visible at input level of the theory of
change, implied intense coordination, particularly visible during the inception phase and
the tender process to contract the implementing partners. Joint selection of implementing
partners involved a common financial management process and intense negotiations
to clarify the selection process and criteria. This process was instrumental to equip the
implementing partners with a clear framework and common direction. However, the
length of the tendering process curtailed the implementing partners’ ability to deliver on
time and at the pace originally envisaged by the project plans, because it delayed severely
the start of the implementing partners’ activities and led to rush the participants. Once
the implementing partners were recruited, the cooperation was perceived as good both
by the UN agencies and the implementing partners. The COVID-19 crisis and the time
required to move online, though it was handled swiftly and efficiently, compounded these
delays. While some youth had trainings throughout the year, others only had two or three
months of participation. They saw their intervention constrained, with too many activities
too quickly. The project benefited from a 6-months no-cost extension. This was however
not enough to overcome the slow start and the adaptation to COVID-19 circumstances.
At local level, the cross-border activities took longer to setup than expected. Much
preparation and convincing was needed to organise local cross-border events, as the
communities and duty bearers consider that there are not existing relationships with the
neighbours to begin with, they see no ground for improvement. Involving participants from
Uzbekistan made implementation heavier and more bureaucratic in terms of clearance
from governments at national and local levels. Moving online due to the COVID-19
crisis provided some opportunities to circumvent this situation: online interaction was
logistically lighter and better accepted by officials.
Evaluation question 5: To what extent were interventions under this project complementary,
harmonized, coordinated with the government’s and other peacebuilding actors’
interventions?
Key Findings:
Finding 18: On paper, there is an alignment of project and Government strategy.
In practice, the UN vision also incorporates interethnic relations, which are not an
explicit objective of the Government.
Finding 19: There is a good alignment of strategic objectives between the project
and CSOs/implementing partners.
76 EVALUATION OF THE UNICEF / UNFPA / UNDP PROJECT PROMOTING KYRGYZSTAN’S YOUTH COHESION AND INTERACTION TOWARDS UZBEKISTAN
Finding 18: On paper, there is an alignment of the project and the government strategy.
In practice, the UN vision also incorporates interethnic relations, which are not an explicit
objective of the Government.
Triangulated evidence basis
National strategy (joint action plans of cooperation at State and Province levels)
Memorandum of the Understanding between youth-related government
agencies of Kyrgyzstan and Uzbekistan
Project documents
Interviews with implementing partners, UN project staff
The assumptions of the theory of change on political will were fulfilled, but the project
hinged on an implicit “agreement to disagree” on the interethnic component of the
project. The political will for increased interaction with Uzbekistan is clearly articulated
in the joint action plan with the Uzbek government for 2017-2019, the Memorandum of
Understanding between the Kyrgyz and Uzbek State Agencies for Youth and Sport, and
the three southern provinces cooperation action plans with their Uzbek peers. All are
compatible with the activities planned by the project: for instance, the Memorandum
of Understanding between youth agencies foresees cooperation for the participation of
youth in conferences, round tables, festivals or exhibitions, visits to historical cities of both
countries, and prioritizes some of the project’s areas of interest such as entrepreneurship,
employment, IT or culture.
The project harnessed the momentum created by these documents, which increased
ownership while broaching sensitive issues. The State Agency for Youth in particular
was consulted during the drafting of the project, which was developed based on their
suggestions and inputs. Synergy was strong,73 as demonstrated, amongst other things,
by the Youth March 2019 forum which was held by the State Agency for Youth, Physical
Culture and Sports under the Government of the Kyrgyz Republic with the support of
the UN in Kyrgyzstan and with the participation of an Uzbekistan delegation. During
that event, more than 100 young people from three bordering provinces of Kyrgyzstan
and Uzbekistan discussed the partnership perspectives and advocated their proposals
with national agencies.74 Such a symbolic and visible event shows converging interests
between the project and the government.
On a different note, the project faced difficulties to rally the Ministry of Education to the
project.75 The Ministry of Education and Science and the NGO “Youth of Osh” signed a
Memorandum of Understanding at the end of 2019, granting “Youth of Osh” access to
schools, as some schools were not allowing access to NGO staff. UNICEF has a framework
agreement with the Government that is renewed once in 5 years, so UNICEF does not
usually sign Memorandum of Understanding for individual projects. However, in practice,
implementing partners report inertia from the Ministry of Education, and limited involvement
of the schools. There is a large potential for improvement of the synergy with the Ministry
of Education.
73 Annual report 2019, p. 7: “The State Agency on Youth, Physical Culture and Sports of the Kyrgyz Republic (SAYPCS) fully owns the project. The
project work plan was developed in coordination with all stakeholders and signed by the State Agency.
SAYPCS is part of all major events and aware of all interventions planned and conducted in the regions.”
74 PBF project progress report June 2019, p. 4.
75 Annual report 2019, p. 5: “One of the main difficulties in the field is the participation of school students in the project activities. The project
team issued an official letter to the Ministry of Education and Science of the Kyrgyz Republic to provide support and endorsement to the activity.
Given the delays in the official reply the project team is temporarily implementing the activities with the support of local government, parents and
schools’ administrations on the margins of the education process.”
EVALUATION OF THE UNICEF / UNFPA / UNDP PROJECT PROMOTING KYRGYZSTAN’S YOUTH COHESION AND INTERACTION TOWARDS UZBEKISTAN 77
Most importantly, political support for work on interethnic relations within the country is
still very uncertain. The positive in-country effect within local communities, while widely
recognized, could not go as far as bringing about an open approach to the domestic interethnic
issues with government officials. The unique position of UN agencies can be pivotal to further
advocate for this issue in the future. UNICEF, UNFPA and UNDP in Kyrgyzstan are mandated
to work with the youth, civil society actor and local self-government, who are identified
among priority groups by the PBF Peacebuilding Priority Plan in Kyrgyzstan 2017-2021, and
can therefore support the Government to develop and implement programmes promoting
peace and tolerance. It is now time to build on the good reputation and encouraging results
of the project, in a context of scarce government resources to follow up, and to advocate for
the emergence of a social and interethnic cohesion agenda.
Finding 19: There is a good alignment of strategic objectives between the project and
CSOs/implementing partners.
Triangulated evidence basis
CSOs websites
Proceeds of the tendering process
Project documents, project reports and report of implementing partners
Interviews with implementing partners
Focus group with implementing partners
The theory of change assumed not only the existence and capacity of CSOs to support
civic activism: it also assumed that the CSO’s and project’s objectives and approach would
coincide. This was the case, as CSOs which were already well implanted, for example in
Osh city, were ready and willing to start reaching out to communities in border areas, and
transfer their expertise in youth empowerment to more vulnerable target groups than
their usual beneficiaries.
Quotes (implementing partner)
“As youth organisation, we work with youth from various areas and social
groups, but we had never worked with youth from border areas. We had
already worked with UNFPA here on the peacebuilding approach. With this
project, we wanted to start working with vulnerable people throughout
the region, and especially in Kyrgyzstan.”
“It was interesting for me to study our beneficiaries. Lately, we all pay
more attention to how we provide information to the people. And in
what format. We received a great support and push.”
Testimonies on successful cooperation (in interviews and implementing partners’ reports),
as well as the online presentations of the implementing partners, also demonstrate
close alignment of approaches and techniques. Implementing partners quickly grasped
the peacebuilding and youth empowerment nexus that forms the project’s theoretical
framework. They fully recognized themselves in the impact and purpose levels of the
theory of change. They also found the United Nations’ approach to activities very close
to their own experience. For instance, “Youth of Osh develops young people as active
78 EVALUATION OF THE UNICEF / UNFPA / UNDP PROJECT PROMOTING KYRGYZSTAN’S YOUTH COHESION AND INTERACTION TOWARDS UZBEKISTAN
citizens in Kyrgyzstan, by strengthening their capacities and promoting their interests in
the community.”76 IDEA CA “promote[s] youth participation in civic life” and tends “to the
needs of underprivileged youth”77 and “Accelerate Prosperity in Kyrgyzstan is focused on
promising entrepreneurs from rural and semi-rural areas” and works “on catalysing local
small and medium businesses where economic opportunities remain insufficient”.78 This
proximity of values, strategic objectives and know-how enabled them to swiftly assimilate
the tools and methodologies developed by the United Nations Agencies, such as UPSHIFT
or LIA, and to adjust them to the realities of their audience.
The implementing partners’ capacities and added value therefore blended well into the
project’s theory of change in terms of target groups and input-level assumptions, and
through the chain of anticipated changes. They also ripped some benefits of the project for
their own organisational development: they were already engaged in youth empowerment,
but the project enabled them to expand their outreach to the southern regions, to better
integrate peacebuilding into their agendas, to formulate their vision strongly on this
issue, and to develop and test innovative methods of youth engagement and support.
In the future, they will remain an important relay for the United Nation’s advocacy on
peacebuilding, especially on interethnic integration and cohesion.
Quote (implementing partner)
“We were contacted by the UN regarding how to work on peacebuilding,
defusing radicalisation. Here, lecturing on the values of Islam is
counter-productive. Better just create and talk about alternatives of self-
development. This can lead to real peacebuilding. We brainstormed on
this, and then we worked on projects.
5.4 Impact
Evaluation question 6: How effective have the project strategies and approaches been in
contributing to peace and stability in border areas?
Key Findings:
Finding 20: Most significant changes are at individual level: more trust, more
confidence, more hope.
Finding 21: Youth prove a good catalyst for impact.
Finding 22: Youth agencies on both sides of the border increased their cooperation.
Finding 20: Most significant changes are at individual level: more trust, more confidence,
more hope.
Triangulated evidence basis
Interviews with youth, parents, mentors, teachers, CSOs
Project reports
76 <www.peaceinsight.org/en/organisations/youth-of-osh/?location=kyrgyzstan&theme> [30/12/2020].
77 <https://peacenexus.org/idea/> [30/12/2020].
78 <https://kg.accelerateprosperity.org/en/> [30/12/2020].
EVALUATION OF THE UNICEF / UNFPA / UNDP PROJECT PROMOTING KYRGYZSTAN’S YOUTH COHESION AND INTERACTION TOWARDS UZBEKISTAN 79
The theory of change envisages inclusive dialogue at impact level, and the project has achieved
this in many ways. This was very often mentioned in interviews as the most significant
change. The precondition for this is self-confidence and hope of the stakeholders on the one
hand, and mutual trust on the other hand. This clearly took place among individuals and
was rendered possible by personal transformations for youth and their communities, first at
the personal level, and then at the level of interpersonal relations. This was particularly the
case for female interviewees among the youth, although it is too early to separately analyse
potential impact according to sex.
The object of the dialogue varied from group to group: among youth (and to some extent
between youth and their parents) the issue of “friendship” among ethnic groups and across
the border took place. Between youth and the local self-government, the dialogue rather
concerned civic participation and empowerment. The interviews with the youth, parents and
mentors point to increased trust in people beyond their personal circle, which for many
participants was a new realisation: this includes the project implementors and mentors,
local self-government officials, youth from other municipalities, gender, social or ethnic
background. For instance, the project inspired other initiatives: there are new interactions
between Kyrgyz and Tajik community schools in Aidarken city, which did not work together
previously. They needed their interaction to be facilitated at the start and they now have
plans to carry on, especially concerning the delivery of conflict-resolution classes. Inclusive
dialogue in terms of gender and ethnicity within Kyrgyzstan and across the Kyrgyz-Uzbek
border was mentioned positively by interviewees when they reflected on these interactions.
Even though we must assume that reserved opinions would hardly be voiced in the
context of an evaluation (cultural bias) and that enthusiastic participants would particularly
volunteer for interviews (volunteer bias), this data is not inherently flawed as to its contents
(i.e. changes induced by the project), merely as to its quantitative representativeness.
Reimagining brighter future with Takhmina
Takhmina is a 17-year old girl in a border
town of Aidarken in Batken province. She
concedes rural communities in Kyrgyzstan are
not always able to offer diverse development
avenues for young people: boys go to Russia
as labour migrants, girls get married in their
early twenties. Border communities have
even less capacity to do so, as they are often
isolated; few people pass by them. It is thus
no surprise children in these communities lack
role models to follow, which would help them
imagine lives they can live. Takhmina admits
that a year ago she used to be a shy and timid
girl too, concentrated only on her studies and
rarely thought of her future.
Then Takhmina’s teacher suggested she participate in the project “Cheksiz
dostuk” (Borderless friendship), initiated by UNICEF, UNDP and UNFPA.
Within the project, about a hundred young people of 15-25 years old from
nine border communities of Osh, Batken, and Djalal-Abad provinces were
80 EVALUATION OF THE UNICEF / UNFPA / UNDP PROJECT PROMOTING KYRGYZSTAN’S YOUTH COHESION AND INTERACTION TOWARDS UZBEKISTAN
empowered to participate in peacebuilding and decision-making. This way
UNICEF is abiding by its mission to enable the youth to enjoy their rights
fully. Throughout a year, Takhmina, along with her 15 peers from other
border communities had trainings on public speaking, design thinking,
and debating organized by UNICEF and UNFPA. They played games with
mentors, visited different places and learnt to interact with local authorities.
It was at the project events, that Takhmina met young people who spoke
English, studied abroad, and had professions she had never heard before,
like IT and marketing.
Within a year of being part of this project, Takhmina says she has changed.
She is much more confident and outspoken. A friend from “Cheksiz
dostuk” project, himself a resident at Kashkar-Kyshtak village, suggested
to Takhmina to apply for the “School parliament” project, and she got in.
Another “Cheksiz dostuk” friend from Padysha-Ata village got high score
at the Republican school test last year, and now she helps Takhmina to ace
the test. With her new friends, Takhmina discusses books, professions, and
studies. She has already finished reading her fifth book this month!
On top of that, after Takhmina’s team opened a media center for the local
community, she realized she could manage the social media pages of
Aidarken town mayor’s office. Takhmina has been doing the job for a year
already. She is keen about learning Social Media Marketing and design.
Her eyes shine brighter when she talks of logos and patterns. She says she
couldn’t imagine such an interesting life a year ago. Now Takhmina has
dreams: she wants to study IT and see the world.
Quote (youth)
“At the beginning, my father was strongly against my participation. Even
several months later he told me to leave. And then I went to him and
explained that it was important. He said that I would not have been able
to tell him this before, and now I can, and then he said I should continue
with the project.”
Quote (youth)
“When we went to Kochkor-Ata, we got to know so many knowledgeable
people: our mentors, teachers. So, we thought – ‘What if we treat people
around us like that – respectfully’”
Increased mutual trust and respect in turn contribute to social peace in the communities,
according to mentors and implementing partners in particular. Some youth also contribute
to the resilience of communities to conflict. For instance, an implemented partner shared
the example of a young project participant who intervened to prevent a fight over natural
resources with a neighbouring village across the border: while he did not prevent the fight
from happening, he impressed his elder with his commitment, and triggered discussions
in the community. While anecdotal, such example points to the potential of impact on the
EVALUATION OF THE UNICEF / UNFPA / UNDP PROJECT PROMOTING KYRGYZSTAN’S YOUTH COHESION AND INTERACTION TOWARDS UZBEKISTAN 81
communities’ permeability to conflictual rhetoric and resilience to conflictual situation.
The project’s impact-level assumption that dialogue and fulfilment of rights encourage
reconciliation, is therefore plausible, but it still too soon to observe this.
On an anecdotal but symptomatic note, racketeering in some schools was reported to have
decreased, as the project activities drew and channelled pupils’ attention. Young participants
talked about their rejuvenated interest in studying, to achieve more with their life.
Quote (school director)
“Rates of bullying decreased significantly (informal school hierarchy,
money extortion by older pupils). These are very complex problems: you
can’t punish the hooligan, and the victims don’t complain and never tell
us about those cases. For instance, in one team [within this project],
there were teenagers from 9th, 10th, and 11th grade, and they ended up
being friendlier.”
The individual-level changes in terms of self-confidence, skills and entrepreneurship or
activism, presented in Findings 11 and 12, also bear the potential of expansion beyond the
immediate project beneficiaries. If a few develop into long-term civic activist, advocates
or local entrepreneurs - which is plausible given the level of commitment of some young
participants and the support they gathered from their parents, teachers, local self-
government - the project will have achieved impact.
Rethinking leadership with Nursultan
A 15-year old Nursultan resides in Monok village,
Kara-Suu district, Osh province, Kyrgyzstan. The
village borders with Uzbekistan and numbers
3,500 residents.
Nursultan is a self-described leader: leading
comes naturally to him. However, without
compelling role models to inspire and guide
him, Nursultan saw no new horizons for own
development.
With “Cheksiz dostuk” project Nursultan had
an opportunity to discover new dimensions
of his leadership capacities, to lead wider
and diverse audiences, and to learn to
manage team dynamics. “Cheksiz dostuk” is
a joint project of UNICEF, UNDP, and UNFPA
aimed at strengthening social cohesion in
border communities of Southern provinces
through empowering women and young
people and ensuring their participation in
82 EVALUATION OF THE UNICEF / UNFPA / UNDP PROJECT PROMOTING KYRGYZSTAN’S YOUTH COHESION AND INTERACTION TOWARDS UZBEKISTAN
peacebuilding and decision-making. Through this project, UNICEF strived
to further push its agenda of ensuring youth’s access to their rights.
Within the project, around a hundred teens from several border communities
in Djalal-Abad, Osh, and Batken provinces underwent a series of trainings,
conducted research on their own community, and drew up development
project proposals for their own villages. Successful project proposals were
to be selected for funding. Nursultan and his teammate found out that their
fellow villagers had to travel to a neighbouring village in order to get their
documents printed. They proposed to set up a printing studio, and were
selected for funding.
Encouraged by the positive community response to the printing studio,
Nursultan and his teammate intend to open a hairdresser’s salon for the
village. Without such a service, villagers have to travel to neighbouring
communities to get a haircut. Moreover, a salon would provide at least
2 jobs for local residents, and would be the first business endeavour for
Nursultan and his friend.
Nursultan’s leadership found a new direction: he realized he can lead teams
and get meaningful causes implemented that benefit whole communities
and help set up jobs. Now he sees how he can develop, what he needs to
learn, and what kind of a leader he can become.
Quotes (youth)
“I have new goals after the project. One day I want to start my own
organisation. I started collecting information about it, thinking about
how I can fund it. […] I want to help people to express themselves, to
conduct trainings, to understand themselves, to learn languages. The
knowledge we have received is kind of advance payment, so we need to
disseminate it.”
“We don’t have good internet in our village. I collected signatures of all
villagers to get good internet connection. Villagers were glad I was doing it.
I asked my mentor to help. We approached several telecom companies, all
of them replied. Megacom company replied that they would put a station
near us, and they did. The other company also visited and explored our
location. This was my first independent initiative after the project.”
“I’m proud of setting up the polygraphic centre [printing studio]. We have
over 10,000 people in our village and we are proud that we have helped
these people. And hopefully we will expand this. We also don’t have a hair-
dresser’s salon, so we hope to open it too. Me and my teammate renovated
the centre on our own. It cost 7,000 KGS, we paid it from our own money.”
“I used to be very indifferent towards community problems. Now I see that
if I live in this village, I am among the reasons of its development or lack
of development. It is within our hands to change the place where we live.”
EVALUATION OF THE UNICEF / UNFPA / UNDP PROJECT PROMOTING KYRGYZSTAN’S YOUTH COHESION AND INTERACTION TOWARDS UZBEKISTAN 83
Quote (parent)
“My son is not afraid to go and talk to important people at local
government bodies and ask support for their own projects. Their school
now has a sports stadium, and more computers.
What I appreciate is that he has become more independent. […] They are
more prepared to choose their profession.”
Finding 21: Youth prove a good catalyst for impact.
Triangulated evidence basis
Interviews youth, parents, mentors, teachers, CSOs, local duty bearers
Project reports
At impact level, the theory of change aims at economic and social stability, equity, prosperity
in border areas of Kyrgyzstan. It is too early to ascertain systemic impact, but key results
of the project contributed in these directions, albeit on a small, often individual scale. In
particular, several rights holders reported an improvement about the level of service they
obtain, thanks to the initiatives of the project, especially the youth-led initiatives. While
small, these changes demonstrate the potential impact of the youth, and their comparative
advantage in demanding their and their community members’ civil, political, economic,
social and rights, in particular equitable access to rights and entitlements.
Quote (youth)
“[The main project outcomes are that] people in the village had their
need satisfied, they don’t need to waste their money, they can get their
things done here. Me and my teammate can earn some money there, for
petty money. There were lots of changes in our life owing to this project.”
“There is a regular bus that runs through our village, but we don’t know
its schedule, we need to change and put its schedule, so that people
don’t waste their time waiting for the bus.”
“Before this project we thought about everything, even the smallest
thing, ‘It should be done by the government or authorities’, ‘The mayor’s
office should provide us with that’, but now I understand that at least you
should raise issues. What seems like a big problem to you, may look like
a petty thing for authorities, so if you explain to them that this is serious
and influences many people, they will understand its magnitude.”
The small projects designed and implemented by school students were supposed to
support interethnic friendship in order to obtain mini-grants. The general denial of existing
interethnic tension (see finding 2) led to a slightly different framing of their projects: they
proposed and implemented them with social cohesion in mind: a coworking space or
library for all the local youth (Kyrgyz, Uzbek, etc.), a radio for all villagers, the park for
all villagers, a creative centre for music and dancing classes for villagers, etc. While the
84 EVALUATION OF THE UNICEF / UNFPA / UNDP PROJECT PROMOTING KYRGYZSTAN’S YOUTH COHESION AND INTERACTION TOWARDS UZBEKISTAN
youth’s discourse is not exactly that of the project, it is their way of approaching inclusion.
Social cohesion is consistent with interethnic friendship and peacebuilding. It was a key
impact-level assumption of the project (Stability and prosperity deter conflict) and the
youth have delivered on both, in keeping with the theory of change of the project.
Quote (parent)
“What I really liked is that we now have the hair salon. It works both for
women and men. We didn’t have a salon before. The project brought this
to our village. And young people made it possible.”
Quote (youth)
“We want to organize a series of events – to select an Uzbek book
and arrange its discussion. We also want to organize a diversity fair of
different ethnicities – to arrange it with three schools. Why I want to
organize these events: it is good to be friends, when you live in one
town. Having friends of other ethnicities is cool and interesting, people
can learn other languages.”
Finding 22: Youth agencies on both sides of the border increased their cooperation.
Triangulated evidence basis
Interviews province-level duty bearers, State agency regional office, national
duty bearers, UN staff
Project reports
Kyrgyz and Uzbek local self-governments and youth agencies at the province level on both
sides of the border increased their interactions and cooperation, at least to some extent,
which corresponds to an intended impact of the theory of change. Local self-governments
reported that the interaction could have been more intense if not for the pandemic.
Quote (province level duty bearer)
“The aim of the project was also to show the best practices in our pilot
regions and in the future to work with the Uzbek side. Unfortunately, due
to the pandemic, it was not possible Actually we had planned actions to
work or to conduct joint activities with the youth from Uzbekistan, but
due to the pandemic, it was not carried out.”
While the COVID-19 induced digital shift impeded in-person activities, it also resulted in
more contact to the Uzbek counterparts on youth agency level. Most of the national level
activities were either re-scheduled or transferred online as a result of bilateral agreements.
Among the most relevant is the “Youth Peace Dialogue” online forum including an online
“Youth diplomacy” week, which aimed to engage young people from both countries
to discuss the importance of peace, diplomacy and cooperation. The project facilitated
the cooperation of the State Agency on Youth Affairs in Kyrgyzstan to establish practical
contract with its counterpart in Uzbekistan when organizing activities for the project. This
EVALUATION OF THE UNICEF / UNFPA / UNDP PROJECT PROMOTING KYRGYZSTAN’S YOUTH COHESION AND INTERACTION TOWARDS UZBEKISTAN 85
cooperation between the youth agencies of both countries is set to continue. In times of
crisis, such activities speak for the will of both agencies, at national level and within their
regional branches, to recognise and pursue common goals and to work on cross-border
youth issues as a common priority.
5.5 Sustainability
Evaluation question 7: How likely is it that the project’s contribution to peacebuilding at
the Kyrgyz/Uzbek borders will last in the long run?
Key Findings:
Finding 23: Youth interaction and initiatives have outlasted the closure of the
project, even though their frequency and intensity have diminished.
Finding 24: Local self-governance units are supportive of youth-led initiatives and
ready to carry on, but will require continued support from national authorities
and from international cooperation partners to do so.
Finding 25: With a wide variety of fields and methods, the project was exploratory.
Impact will require follow up and prioritization.
Finding 23: Youth interaction and initiatives have outlasted the closure of the project, even
though their frequency and intensity have diminished.
Triangulated evidence basis
Interviews with implementing partners, youth, mentors
Social media
The project has resulted in experiences of interactions and dialogue among participants
of diverse ethnic, cultural, social, gender and geographic backgrounds. These experiences
could have lasting effects due to their intensity for the participating youth, and sustained
interactions and initiatives of the youth beyond the end of the project. Peaceful interaction
of youth beyond these differences continues. The experiences have become a habit for
some: youth teams continue to be active; inclusive community venues created by the
youth (coworking space, library, radio station, school computer labs, parks, hairdresser
salons…) continue to exist; project participants continue to interact and support each
other on social media.
Quote (youth, female)
“I have friends in Batken now. If I have a problem now, I call them. If they
have problems, they call me, and I’ll do my best to solve it. Although we
have different problems. I’m close with [a female participant] from Batken,
and I asked her to help me with the Republican test for school-leavers, she
had it last year, and she helps me.”
“young people become more active; they ask me: ‘What should we do
next? Who needs help? How can we contribute?’”
86 EVALUATION OF THE UNICEF / UNFPA / UNDP PROJECT PROMOTING KYRGYZSTAN’S YOUTH COHESION AND INTERACTION TOWARDS UZBEKISTAN
Quote (youth, female, majority background)
“There is ‘School parliament’ that accepts applications. [An Uzbek
male participant] suggested me to apply there, and I did! [The female
participant] from Padysh-Ata got high score at the Republican test for
school-leavers last year, and now she helps me with tips on how to get
a high score.”
Quote (mentor)
“After the project, young people went to visit the families that live right
at the border and asked them about their relations with Uzbek residents,
told them about the project goals and their experiences with the project.
They explained that the [cross-border] relations between Uzbek and
Kyrgyz will improve when people start treating each other better.
In May 2020 in Uzbekistan the Sardaba water reservoir had a
breakdown, and people in our community under IDEA’s guidance started
brainstorming how we can help. They organized a charity event – people
collected money and clothes. We communicated with our relatives in
Uzbekistan and organized the transfer of clothes and money through
the border. Uzbek people said that when the situation with the pandemic
gets better, they will invite us, they agreed we should keep our hands
together [remain friends].”
However, this concerns a small number of people, not a systemic trend, and will require
means to capitalize on the good will and new network of relationships among the youth,
and between the youth and mentors. The partner CSOs and local self-governments are
committed, but have the financial and human capacity to keep only few of the successful
initiatives alive, let alone expand to a more systemic level.
Quote (implementing partner)
“We expected that out of 100 000 viewers of our videos, about 900
to 1000 people would pick a task, out of which we would pick 50 and
mentor them through the task. But mentors want to increase it to up to
200 people: since it’s online, we can do it even beyond the end of the
project. We want to give chances to as many people as possible.”
Without dedicated funding, these are unlikely to be maintained beyond a couple of
examples. While the change experienced by the youth in terms of exposure and self-
perception will outlast the project, their ability to influence their communities will require
sustained support for these initiatives. In the long run, renewed positive experiences will
be required to also maintain motivation: expectations have increased, and disappointing
them could have counter-productive effects.
EVALUATION OF THE UNICEF / UNFPA / UNDP PROJECT PROMOTING KYRGYZSTAN’S YOUTH COHESION AND INTERACTION TOWARDS UZBEKISTAN 87
Finding 24: Local self-governance units are supportive of youth-led initiatives and ready to
carry on, but will require continued support to do so.
Triangulated evidence basis
Interviews implementing partners, local self-governments
Project reports
The theory of change assumes that prosperity and peaceful interethnic relations will
mutually reinforce in the long run. Successful grassroot initiatives and enterprises
motivate local self-governments to durably support participation, work harder on service
provision to all their constituents regardless of ethnic background when advocated, and
to accept the ethnic diversity of the youth taking part in these initiatives. However, there
is a long way to go for the duty bearers to take an active part in peacebuilding between
ethnicities, especially across the border. The project efforts need to be further sustained.
The initiatives implemented by the young people in the pilot regions were very popular
among the local self-governments. The village heads and deputies involved in the
implementation of the project appreciated how the project invested in the young generation
in the regions:
Quote (village head)
“The main outcome is that the young people from our municipality
acquired new skills. It was a good opportunity for them. This is beneficial
for the upbringing and general development of our youth.”
Young interviewees appreciated the goodwill of the local authorities and see the agency
it gives them, which they are ready to take. This kind of virtuous circle means that some
preconditions for sustainability are in place in terms of intentions, mutual recognition and
commitment.
Quote (youth)
“We approached [the mayor] together with our mentors with our request.
We needed to find premises before the pitching, to demonstrate the
sustainability of the project. We were afraid that the mayor will consider us
like small kids and wouldn’t support us. But he did support us – because if
youth is developed, it will be an advantage for the mayor and the community
too, since we help other young people, so it is kind of a chain.”
Local authorities also welcomed and supported, to the extent possible, the legal aid
initiatives. The commitment and quality of the law students involved, the high demand
they created, the readiness of municipalities to retain the young law students, and the
cooperation mechanisms put in place with the Law Faculties, form a conducive constellation
for the continuation of an initiative that complements other youth empowerment activities,
as it creates peaceful and legal avenues for conflict settlement.
As explained in Finding 12 and 13, the local self-government officials felt surprised and
motivated by the engagement of the youth, and especially by the success of their social
88 EVALUATION OF THE UNICEF / UNFPA / UNDP PROJECT PROMOTING KYRGYZSTAN’S YOUTH COHESION AND INTERACTION TOWARDS UZBEKISTAN
enterprises. This convinced them to support where they could, either in kind or financially.
What is remarkable is that municipalities afforded this support to future-oriented initiative
in a time of crisis (related to the COVID-19 pandemic), and of shortage of funds. For
example, Kok-Serek municipality provided 140,000 soms of financial contribution and
premises for the initiatives of the young people (renovation of the park and establishment
of the radio centre). The municipality’s budget is subsidised by the state, as the majority
of the project locations.79 The total budget of Kok-Serek municipality is 1.5 million soms
which covers salaries of the municipal employees among other costs.80 The municipality’s
contribution to the youth’s projects is therefore very significant: over 9% of a constrained
municipal budget81 (not accounting for the modest additional funds provided by the
state for infrastructure development in two villages which are at the border within this
municipality). In spite of the shortage of funds, the local self-governments are planning to
continue to support youth-led initiatives in 2021 and beyond, as also confirmed by local
stakeholders during the interviews.
Modest local budget is among the reasons the village councils are not able to build on these
initiatives systemically. Delayed disbursement of national budget towards the local self-
governments, difficulty to raise funds at the municipal level, and in general the development
of these regions, are long lasting issues. The situation only worsened with the lockdown
measures due to the pandemic. Local authorities therefore welcome any support to local
development, and they displayed strong commitment to continued cooperation with the
project or its successor. The scarcity of local budget is therefore a double-edged factor: it
could endanger the sustainability of the project’s results if municipalities are incapable of
supporting them in the long run, but it also increases their will to cooperate with future
projects – in time, it could create more openness to acknowledge ethnic diversity, if that
remains at the core of future projects’ discourse. Without follow-up projects, the local
self-governments, who do not really see interethnic relations as a priority, are extremely
unlikely to pursue such efforts of their own initiative. They require, not only the spur of
youth empowerment activities, but also a hook into more systemic national policies,
including but not limited to that of the National Youth Agency.
During the project, the role of educational institutions was limited to consultation with
individual teachers or school directors for the selection and support of youth teams, and
to the Memorandums of Understanding between Law Faculties, legal clinics and village
councils. So far, nothing systemic has been put in place with the Ministry of Education and
its regional representations. There is a vast unexplored potential of school programmes,
curriculum development on youth empowerment and diversity management, teacher
training, cross-border and inter-province school interaction that needs to be explored
in order to connect the dots of youth empowerment at the community level, youth
participation in local self-government, interethnic relations and peaceful approach to
diversity, and cross-border youth interaction.
CSOs are also decisive to carry the theory of change through to local stakeholders, and
connect stakeholders at all levels. This project heavily relied on the implementing partners
and their capacity, and some of them expressed the opinion that they sometimes lacked
institutional support within this and similar projects. This would increase their ability to
accompany a scaling up of youth-centred activities while pushing the cross-border and
interethnic agendas higher on the stakeholders’ priorities.
This strand of the project (interethnic cohesion through youth empowerment and
participation in local self-government) represents the very core of the theory of change,
the most acclaimed aspect of the project, and its trademark. In order not to betray the
79 83% of village councils in the country receive subsidies from the state, source: <http://longreads.cabar.asia/> [05/01/2020].
80 From the interview with the head of Kok-Serek municipality.
81 Figure provided by the head of Kok-Serek municipality.
EVALUATION OF THE UNICEF / UNFPA / UNDP PROJECT PROMOTING KYRGYZSTAN’S YOUTH COHESION AND INTERACTION TOWARDS UZBEKISTAN 89
hopes of the stakeholders, and not to lose the momentum created, any successor project
would have to pick it up, scale it up, and give it a stronger cross-border aspect.
Finding 25: With a wide variety of fields and methods, the project was exploratory. Impact will
require follow up and prioritization.
Triangulated evidence basis
Project documents
Memorandums of Understanding
Focus Group discussions with United Nations Staff
Interviews with local duty bearers, mentors, teachers, CSOs representatives
The ultimate purposes of the project (interethnic cohesion, social peace in border areas
and progress towards conflict settlement) are quite broad, and accordingly, the project
activities tested (successfully) various ways of enabling change in those directions. This
was an exploratory project, which resembled the inception phase of a multi-component
programme. The project opened options and demonstrated what could be done. This was
a valid approach for an “entry door” project, but if continued in the future, it would likely
result in spreading resources too thin into scattered initiatives. Choices need to be made
to prioritize only a few of the tested initiatives:
• Youth empowerment and interethnic youth dialogue within local communities
(addressed in Finding 25 above);
• Youth cooperation across the border;
• Facilitation of cross-border interaction among duty bearers at local and national levels;
• Legal avenues for conflict resolution and access to rights (legal aid and similar)
(addressed in Finding 25 above);
• Support to local service delivery, in particular through one-stop-shops and border
crossing facilities.
Youth interaction and interaction among local self-governance officials across the border
were limited to one-off events. Peer support among the youth and local officials of Kyrgyzstan
and Uzbekistan towards peaceful interethnic relations, empowerment and participation
in local self-governance, have not yet taken place. However, the first attempts created
positive precedents which could make larger follow-up initiatives easier to implement.
It would be an important connector between the interethnic, cross-border, and youth-
centred strands of the theory of change. It is also, if not a condition for changes to last, an
additional element of sustainability. National strategic documents envisage to continue
cooperation with Uzbekistan on Youth Agencies level. The project achieved ownership
by the Youth agency through early engagement. There are some commitments for future
cooperation among Youth Agencies across the border, but their realisation was altered by
the pandemic. National level duty bearers report increasing diplomatic interaction: while
this is hardly attributable to the project, it guarantees a conducive policy environment for
local and regional level interactions to continue and pick up, enabled by the messaged
delivered at national level. The resilience so far in the face of the COVID-19 crisis, and the
aftermath of the last elections suggest that security and stability, a top-level assumption
of the theory of change, are so far on track – although several interviewees pointed to the
volatility of these factors, especially considering the elections on 10 January 2021. Finally,
90 EVALUATION OF THE UNICEF / UNFPA / UNDP PROJECT PROMOTING KYRGYZSTAN’S YOUTH COHESION AND INTERACTION TOWARDS UZBEKISTAN
the United Nations Office in Kyrgyzstan can rely on an under-used asset: the presence of
peer offices in the neighbouring countries. Securing a genuine cross-border component.
In short, several conditions are now in place that are conducive to the success of a more
ambitious cross-border peacebuilding agenda, from the national to the grassroot level.
Support to local level service delivery, particularly through one-stop-shop facilities is a
promising pilot, but it would require massive support at a large scale, from the national to
the local level, in order to be sustained. National authorities have backed these efforts up,
as pointed in the project’s annual report in 2019: “The State Registry Service of Kyrgyzstan
and Ombudsman’s office demonstrated readiness to work on follow-ups on the case-to-case
basis within the period of the project and after the project ends.”82 At local level, a short
regulation was adopted by the pilot village councils based on the Model provision: the state
registry office delegated six functions to 234 village councils since 2020. However, only 11
work based on these agreements, including the pilot villages. This shows the will of the state
registry office to establish such partnerships, but that the resources and capacity are not
available. While improved service delivery, decentralisation and local public administration
reform would certainly indirectly contribute to social peace and prosperity, which in turn are
beneficial to peacebuilding, public administration reform goes well beyond peacebuilding.
It requires legislative (and possibly constitutional) reforms, regulatory reforms, strategic
planning for multilevel governance, civil servants capacity building, local infrastructure and
networks, public finance management and local finance accountability reforms, etc… PBF-
funded projects are clearly not the avenue to pursue such vast initiative, whether in terms
of the magnitude of the funding required, or in terms of links to peacebuilding. If the United
Nations and the Government of Kyrgyzstan decide to engage on this path, they will need
much more sizeable funding sources, and a long, holistic joint strategic planning process.
82 Annual report 2019, p. 8.
EVALUATION OF THE UNICEF / UNFPA / UNDP PROJECT PROMOTING KYRGYZSTAN’S YOUTH COHESION AND INTERACTION TOWARDS UZBEKISTAN 91
92 EVALUATION OF THE UNICEF / UNFPA / UNDP PROJECT
DENRAEL
SNOSSEL
&
SNOISULCNOC
NOITAULAVE
natszygryK/APFNU
©
6. EVALUATION CONCLUSIONS & LESSONS
LEARNED
6.1 Conclusions
The project “Promoting Kyrgyzstan’s youth cohesion and interaction towards Uzbekistan”,
funded by the PBF, rested upon a coherent theory of change, which was built in a participatory
way by UNICEF, UNFPA and UNDP with the PBF and Agency for Youth based on solid
conflict analysis. This theory of change complemented the empowerment of youth within
their community in the south of the country and towards local self-governance bodies
with capacity building for local self-governance officials and local service providers, as a
vehicle to create positive experiences of interethnic and cross-border relations among the
youth and among duty bearers from the national to the local level.
These multiple facets of the theory of change were meant to complement each other, but also
to conciliate the various nuances of the Government’s, donor’s, and local self-government
actors’ approach to peacebuilding. While Kyrgyz authorities at national and local level
read peacebuilding chiefly through the lens of a border dispute and ensuing cross-border
conflicts, the PBF and the United Nations Office in Kyrgyzstan identify interethnic relations
within Kyrgyzstan as the other fundamental issue to be addressed. Local self-government,
the youth and their communities, meanwhile, bowed to the approach of national
authorities, while mostly embracing any initiative in support of youth entrepreneurship
and activism, in remote and under-served border areas: interethnic or even cross-border
conflict were secondary issues compared to social and economic development. Besides,
and despite warming relations between Kyrgyzstan and Uzbekistan, embodied in national
and inter-state strategic documents, the project designers anticipated difficulties around
cross-border activities, and planned for a project implemented exclusively on the territory
of Kyrgyzstan.
The theory of change and its monitoring framework had to be tweaked during
implementation to overcome this dilemma while adjusting to the COVID-19 crisis. A joint
exercise ensured, which gathered United Nations Agencies and implementing partners
around methods, terminology and monitoring indicators. Beyond the sound adjustments
this exercise enabled, stronger common understanding and values emerged, which
constituted one of the keys of the project’s efficiency, resilience during the COVID-19 crisis
and ability to convince.
The three United Nations agencies pooled their assets and mandate to champion this “test-
run” project which explored many different avenues to find entry doors and realize the
theory of change. this ambitious package. They planned tried and tested methodologies
such as the UPSHIFT programme, Leadership and Innovation Academy, Janyration
Chakyrygy Creative contest, cross-border events among youth and local self-government,
legal aid and one-stop-shop municipal service provision. They successfully targeted a
broad range of (at times hard to reach) stakeholders including the youth, their parents
and teachers, community members, local self-governance bodies, national agencies from
Kyrgyzstan and (to a lesser extent) Uzbekistan) and their regional chapters.
The resulting project design was coherent with the needs identified, but also hesitated
between a fully Kyrgyzstan-internal, interethnic approach (relatively easily implemented
but politically sensitive) and a cross-border approach (politically more acceptable but
difficult to set afoot). It an effort to open inroads, it piloted a large number of different
PROMOTING KYRGYZSTAN’S YOUTH COHESION AND INTERACTION TOWARDS UZBEKISTAN 93
natszygryK/APFNU
©
initiatives within a short timeframe and a relatively modest budget. This multiplicity of
directions, while all contributing to a common peacebuilding purpose, at times lacked
linkages and an anchor into broader national systems, such as the education system or
public administration reform. Nevertheless, they resulted in stronger commitment and
increased openness on the part of stakeholders, and a momentum of enthusiasm at the
local level. Their concomitant implementation proved demanding, and it would have been
possible without the strong synergy among United Nations Agencies, and between the
United Nations and its committed implementing partners.
From the project design to its implementation and reporting, the three implementing
United Nations Agencies, with the administrative lead of UNICEF, experimented with an
exceptionally deep level of cooperation. Joint design, joint tendering, joint monitoring and
reporting, co-implementation of activities converged to fully materialize the “delivering
as one” approach. The experience was somewhat time consuming, as procedures had
to be adjusted and joint decision making demanded long clearance and negotiations.
Compounded by the COVID-19 crisis, which required profound adaptation to move most
activities online, these delays weighed on the implementing partners and (to a lesser
extent) participants, who had to rush into activities during the second half of the project
despite a non-cost extension. However, the commitment of the implementing partners and
the leverage of the United Nations agencies made it possible to intensify implementation
and pick up a rhythm that some participants found exhilarating. The joint process made
the most of UN agencies’ assets in terms back office, field presence, existing network of
partners, reputation and political clout. The donor can trust in the value for money of the
project. The momentum thus created will be precious for successor initiatives.
The project design aimed at inclusion of equity across what was identified as dividing lines
in the society of the border provinces: ethnicity, gender, remoteness from urban centres.
This project activities proved effectively inclusive and created unprecedented interethnic
and gender-inclusive interactions, which left a strong impression on their participants.
These positive experiences convinced the project stakeholders that diverse groups of
youth can function together to create value for their communities. They elicited the trust
of the parents, because the project involved them and treated them not as impediments
to youth participation, but as accelerators.
The expected results were achieved. The participants displayed deep transformations
in their attitudes towards the capacity of the youth to bring value to their community,
towards interethnic and cross-border interaction. Youth appreciated their new-found roles
as peace-making influencers, civic activists and entrepreneurs and are eager to continue
investing in their community. Local and central governments enhanced equitable access
to rights and to redress within the frame of modest but promising pilots. New cross-
border cooperation experiences for State actors increased openness to new modes of
cooperation. Political will snowballed, particularly at local level. Most visibly, the youth
who participated in the project experienced it as a revealing experience of initiation into
adulthood and self-leadership. The most spectacular transformations were witnessed
among the most withdrawn, the most geographically isolated, and among young girls
who discovered the roles they could take on. Some meaningful community development
initiatives took place, led by the youth and supported by local self-government, such as
legal clinics or new inclusive community venues.
The commitment and individual transformations are evident; however, they now require
sustained and more systemic support to spill over and measurably contribute to social cohesion,
prosperity and peace in the border areas. The United Nations Office in Kyrgyzstan will need to
carry on pooling the assets and expertise of its agencies, government and local partners and
implementing partners, as well as the mobilizing capacity of the Office in Uzbekistan, to focus
its peacebuilding initiative more precisely while scaling up to a more systemic level.
94 EVALUATION OF THE UNICEF / UNFPA / UNDP PROJECT
6.2 Lessons Learned
1. A streamlined, precise focus is difficult to define in peacebuilding projects because the
realm of factors that influence conflict or peace, and that can be acted upon, is very
broad. The stakeholders of peace are varied and likely to have diverging priorities.
Peacebuilding projects therefore must often compose with dilemmas through complex
decision making, and a fluctuating environment: no matter how well grounded in
conflict analysis, their theories of change are likely to require adjustment during
implementation. In reaction, this project acknowledged its dilemmas and addressed
it with a strong institutional learning moment: the mid-term monitoring workshops
were the occasion to 1°) discuss terminologies, 2°) unpack the theory of change and
3°) adjust indicators against the backdrop of the realities of the project. This cathartic
moment was instrumental to realign the approach of the three United Nations agencies
and the implementing partners, to prepare them for better results-based monitoring
and reporting, and to make them ready in the face of a major crisis in the form of the
COVID-19 pandemic (which is transposable to other domestic or international crisis,
a plausible event in peacebuilding context). A mid-term monitoring and evaluation
workshop channelling the reflexion of all implementers is an easily reproductible good
practice. Re-tracing the logical links between the levels of the theory of change at
an early stage enables a project team to consciously identify the specific strategies
and problematic points, in this case respectively interethnic and cross-border issues.
Working on such clarifications at an early stage simplifies multi-actor complex decision
making. However, in this project, these events were organised late: organised at the
end of an inception period, they would have had better effects on the alignment of the
actors, on reporting, and possibly on swift decision making including on administrative
aspects. Recognising early on in the project the extent of cooperation needed, would
enable to identify likely points of contention in administrative processes, and anticipate
the corresponding procedures. For instance, a joint project with a joint tender means
that the Terms of Reference and the main lines must be formulated by the beginning of
the intervention. This way, the collaboration with the implementing partners can start
in the early stages.
2. UNICEF, UNFPA and UNDP embarked on this joint project with a high level of cooperation
(beyond mere coordination or parallel implementation). While this is clearly a good
and rare example of the “delivering as one” approach, in which the three United
Nations agencies displayed genuine good will and creativity from Country Team to
field office level, they faced the constraints of their different internal processes and
procedures. Joint tendering, while absolutely worthwhile as it catalysed synergies,
was particularly lengthy. It resulted (compounded by the COVID-19 crisis) into delays
in implementation, an unreasonable rush during the last few months of the project,
and unnecessary strain on the implementing partners.
3. The project, while targeting cross-border interactions and anticipating difficulties
in mobilizing partners from the Uzbekistan side, did not involve the United Nations
Office in the neighbouring country. This was a missed opportunity. In any project with
a cross-border component, United Nations agencies need to systematically consult
with their peers in the neighbouring country during project design, coordinate and
exchange regular information during implementation, and build on the existing
network and partnerships of the neighbouring Country Team to gather support to
mobilize counterparts across the border.
4. The project was intended as a door opener, and it indeed opened many doors, but in
doing so it spread itself too thin. Each initiative had a very small budget, which created
expectations and momentum, but also risks eliciting disappointment. Grassroot level
peacebuilding projects, while hearing and understanding the needs and aspirations
PROMOTING KYRGYZSTAN’S YOUTH COHESION AND INTERACTION TOWARDS UZBEKISTAN 95
of the stakeholders, cannot cater to all: they need to prioritize, at least to some extent,
from the onset. For instance, while the one-stop-shops were an interesting experiment,
they did not receive sufficient funding, preparation and holistic attention to have
meaningful and sustainable impact beyond individual human stories. The project
prepared guidebooks but the regulations are not in place. Only a full-fledged public
administration reform and decentralisation programme is in a position to address
these needs. Peacebuilding projects can make inroads into systemic changes, in areas
that directly address the key conflict drivers in targeted areas locally – but they cannot
serve to test other, broader reform projects that do not directly relate to peacebuilding.
5. The project recognised that parents, community members and influencers such
as teachers, can impede children’s participation, empowerment, and interethnic
interactions, unless they are prepared. It was excellent practice to assume parents
could instead act as accelerator, to involve them in several key activities, and to offer
them empowerment and capacity building. At the same time, the project’s action on
6. other part of the assumption, that is to say the involvement of teachers and schools,
lagged behind. Collaboration of the Ministry of Education is necessary, and in this
case their reluctance could not be overcome. Youth-oriented projects need to strongly
engage education institutions from the start as relays and multipliers, in an effort to
systematize youth empowerment activities with them.
7. Conflict analysis states that youth unemployment counts among the biggest threats
to peace.83 However, the project easily avoided the pitfall of menial and precarious
employment84 from the design onwards, by putting strong emphasis on consultation
and focusing on youth participation and empowerment rather than just employability.
This was due to consultations with beneficiaries and using these insights in the design
of the project. This good practice could be transposed whenever peacebuilding is
approached via youth empowerment.
8. The evaluation team missed explicit data on ethnicity of participants. If ethnic inclusion
is one of the objectives of the project, then it must be systematically measured, as it
was for gender in an exemplary manner.
9. The initial consultation of youth during the design phase increased relevance and
enabled to target employability along the youth’s aspirations while avoiding the
common pitfall of menial, unqualified work. This was due to the GYPI funding is a
competitive process, and integration of GYPI guidelines in the theory of change of the
project, but this approach can serve as good practice for other projects, regardless of
the source of funding.
83 Jantzi, Terrence, Fernanda Faria, and Anara Alymkulova, Evaluation of the Peacebuilding Fund (PBF) Project Portfolio In Kyrgyzstan, Evaluation
Report, 31 August 2017, <http://kg.one.un.org/content/dam/unct/kyrgyzstan/docs/General/UNPBF%20Kyrgyzstan%20ER%20Final%20-%2031%20
August%202017.pdf> [29/12/2020], p. X.
84 “Youth resilience for peace”, General Assembly Security Council, 72nd session, agenda item 65, Peacebuilding and sustainable peace,
02/03/2018, pp. 13-14.
96 EVALUATION OF THE UNICEF / UNFPA / UNDP PROJECT PROMOTING KYRGYZSTAN’S YOUTH COHESION AND INTERACTION TOWARDS UZBEKISTAN
7. RECOMMENDATIONS
The recommendations laid out below were discussed and validated in three steps:
• In the Evaluation Reference Group meeting (11 December 2020) the evaluation team
requested suggestions on possible recommendations.
• In the Focus Group Discussion with UN staff (17 December 2020) the preliminary
recommendations and their feasibility were put to scrutiny
• Upon completion of the first draft of the final report, UNICEF staff and the Evaluation
Reference Group commented on the recommendations, both in terms of content and
structure.
The recommendations are presented in order of priority for each intended user.
7.1 United Nations Peacebuilding Fund
1. In order to capitalize on the opportunities created by this project, the PBF should
continue supporting youth empowerment projects as vehicles for peacebuilding in
Kyrgyzstan along with neighbouring countries.
Rationale of the recommendation: The donor should continue to support youth
empowerment in Kyrgyzstan as an effective and efficient means to implement the priorities
of the Peacebuilding Priority Plan. This aspect was acclaimed as the core of this project,
and as transformative force for communities. At this stage, it has not reached out to a
critical mass of stakeholders and is therefore unlikely to spill over on its own towards a
measurable contribution to peace. A momentum was created that should not be let down.
Expectations are high, which also creates opportunities, through the empowerment of
diverse youth in diverse communities, to secure better recognition of interethnic relations
as the root causes of the conflict as identified in the PBF conflict analysis. However, having
several parallel projects in each country of the region does not appear as an optimal
solution: projects in Kyrgyzstan, Kyrgyzstan-Tajikistan, and Uzbekistan have all created
new opportunities, and have boosted the capacities of the United Nations agencies and
their partners in the three countries. The PBF could be a catalyst to channel funding into
follow-up projects. For instance, the Government of Uzbekistan was ready to contribute
with a consequent budget to the project, on par with the PBF. A regional project would
achieve economies of scale, build on new opportunities, cross-fertilize experience among
the three countries and among United Nations agencies and Country Teams, and smooth
clearance for cross-border events.
Operational suggestions:
• See Recommendation 3.
2. The PBF should consider setting up an online community of practice on peacebuilding
projects accessible to its recipients.
Rationale of the recommendation:T he PBF publishes a corpus of useful resources on conflict
analysis and peacebuilding interventions, several of which are quoted in this evaluation.
These documents provide a backup to funding recipients for their conflict analysis and
project design. However, they do not easily access good practices, experiences, lessons
learned, peer advice and partnership opportunities. It is symptomatic that even the United
Nations Office in Kyrgyzstan did not peer up with its counterparts in neighbouring countries
PROMOTING KYRGYZSTAN’S YOUTH COHESION AND INTERACTION TOWARDS UZBEKISTAN 97
to inspire this project and explore a great potential of synergy. Although demanding in
terms of setup and maintenance, a community of practice facilitated by the PBF, which is
at the same time a donor and a centre of thematic expertise, could inspire better linkages
and a learning community of implementers. The community of practice could also provide
the shell for eventual results-based monitoring and evaluation for the PBF.
Operational suggestions:
• This online tool could contain a library (as currently does the PBF’s website), a database
of past and ongoing projects, a repository of good practices and lessons learned
associated to their success/hindering factors, a peer support space, and possibly an
interactive results-based monitoring and reporting space.
• The PBF could start with a feasibility study, to assess the needs and expectations of
its recipients for such a facility, and the necessary resources (human and financial)
to set it up and maintain it. This study should benchmark with other communities of
practice (e.g. DCAF/ISSAT community of practice, which has proved successful among
users, monitoring-and-evaluation communities of practice within the United Nations
and evaluation societies) and results-based management tools (e.g. OHCHR’s PMS,
Council of Europe PMM, or European Union OPSYS) to identify the level of publicity
for each type of information/each space within the platform (e.g. public/restricted to
members/restricted to project manager and PBSO), the metadata necessary for the
project database, good examples of peer support spaces, lessons learned, do’s and
don’ts, factors that ease setup, facilitation and maintenance, and factors that improve
users’ experience.
• The PBF could then mobilise technical expertise, overseen by a reference group of
potential users (fund recipients and PBSO staff) to design a pilot version, and test
this version with a small number of recipients to fine tune its structure, contents and
maintenance modalities before full deployment.
7.2 United Nations Country Team in Kyrgyzstan
3. The United Nations Country Team in Kyrgyzstan (UNICEF, UNFPA, UNDP and any other
relevant agency such as UN Women) should initiate a regional, modular follow-up youth
empowerment and peacebuilding programme with its peers in Uzbekistan and Tajikistan.
Rationale of the recommendation: The evaluation found that the project created a
momentum on youth empowerment for both interethnic relations and cross-border
relations – albeit at a modest scale – with a broad range of actors: the youth and their
communities around them (parents, teachers, some community leaders), the local self-
governments, the regional representations of some national agencies, and some key
national actors, as well as the civil society and private actors who implemented the project.
In addition, the project is surrounded by other comparable projects within Kyrgyzstan
and in the neighbouring countries (such as the Kyrgyzstan-Tajikistan cross-border project
involving both Country Teams), at a time of gradual rapprochement between the three
countries. The UN should boost and catalyse these dynamics. Now is the right time to be
go a step further with a regional programme, rather than go for small parallel projects with
limited sustainability. Such programme will need to pool the efforts made by the United
Nations along with the Government, local self-government and civil society partners in
the three countries, while affording the flexibility to tailor the outputs to the situation in
each country and location.
98 EVALUATION OF THE UNICEF / UNFPA / UNDP PROJECT PROMOTING KYRGYZSTAN’S YOUTH COHESION AND INTERACTION TOWARDS UZBEKISTAN
Operational suggestions:
• If the PBF expresses interest in a regional project, the United Nations Country Team in
Kyrgyzstan should reach out to its peers in Tajikistan and Uzbekistan, to jointly analyse
the architecture and outcomes of their respective initiatives on youth empowerment
towards peacebuilding, and identify the objectives and key components of their follow
up projects. A “task force” integrating the PBSO in the three countries could be a good
vehicle for this exercise.
• If the PBF, or other United Nations Country teams disagree to engage in a regional
project, then the United Nations Kyrgyzstan Country Team should design a successor
project in Kyrgyzstan building on the experience of the present project and the
Kyrgyzstan-Tajikistan youth empowerment project, in close consultation with their
peers in Uzbekistan and Tajikistan.
• Regional or not, the successor project could be built around a common core component
centred on youth empowerment at the local level, using the key youth empowerment
tools tried and tested through previous projects. UPSHIFT and LIA for instance are
good platforms for interethnic and cross-border activities. All United Nations Agencies
involved should take an active part in this common core component.
• To complement the common core component, the successor project should design
optional thematic modules on sub-themes or parallel issues such as (i) the role of public
services and access to rights for inclusion, social cohesion and ultimately peacebuilding;
(ii) legal redress and para-legal mediation mechanisms, (iii) cross-border cooperation
opportunities for youth agencies; (iv) education to/for diversity. These modules should
be designed by the United Nations Country Teams in consultation with the PBSO and
the counterparts among national authorities, local self-government and civil society.
Each Country Team in agreement with its national/local partners should be able to opt
in or out of these modules for each border area. The uptake of the respective modules
by each individual United Nations agency within each Country Team should be decided
on a case-to-case basis.
• The United Nations Country Teams should reach out to the Western Balkan PBF regional
project (led by Albania UN Country Team) for examples, good practices and lessons
learned on a regional peacebuilding project centred on youth empowerment.
• The young participants and mentors of the present project could serve as relays for
future activities (act as mentors and engage in peer-to-peer transfer of knowledge,
organise and facilitate workshops.
• Cross-border aspects could include mini-twinnings among youth groups, but also
among community projects involving youth groups CSOs, local self-governance
bodies and other service providers from Kyrgyzstan, Uzbekistan, Tajikistan.
4. The United Nations Country Team in Kyrgyzstan should streamline pilot initiatives into
systemic, peacebuilding partnerships with key duty bearers.
Rationale of the recommendation: This project has made many inroads into, and
built bridges between, social and ethnic integration, conflict management, youth
civic participation, access to justice and public services. This multiplicity of initiatives
and promising experiments now need to be weeded out and streamlined into fewer
components that focus on key priorities. In addition, this project has elicited support and
started partnerships for ad hoc grassroot actions. The stakeholders of this project were
well identified, and their involvement should be continued or consolidated: State Youth
Agency, Ministry of Education and Science, State Agency for Local Self Governance and
interethnic relations, Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Ministry of Labour and Social Protection,
Ministry of Justice. These nascent or growing partnerships between the United Nations
PROMOTING KYRGYZSTAN’S YOUTH COHESION AND INTERACTION TOWARDS UZBEKISTAN 99
agencies, CSOs, and duty bearers need to mature into issue-focused alliances welded by
clear, long term, systemic objectives: this way, grassroot initiatives will be connected to
systemic reform issues through the most relevant duty bearers accompanied by CSOs.
The follow up programme (preferably within a regional programme as described above)
should therefore enable UNICEF, UNFPA and UNDP (and any other United Nations agency
relevant to the follow up project, such as UN Women) to negotiate common strategic
objectives and roadmaps with the key duty bearers. This process should allow, in turn,
to mainstream inclusion and diversity (gender, ethnic, social…) into the efforts of these
select public services, identified as most crucial for social cohesion – which in turn will
contribute to peacebuilding.
Operational suggestions:
• Pool the UPSHIFT, LIA and other grassroot youth empowerment initiatives as the
common core of the project, and engage CSOs, local self-governance bodies and
the State Agency for Local Self Government and Interethnic Relations into a formal
partnership (MoU-type) containing a “menu” of tools and activities, from which each
community will be able to select the most suitable blend of activities.
• Invest in priority into a strategic partnership with the Ministry of Education as the
other key relay (beside local self-governance bodies and the State Agency for Local
Self Government) between the grassroot and systemic levels. A joint strategy should
particularly focus on making small and politically acceptable, yet tactical and carefully
crafted contributions to the curricula in order to mainstream the life skills supported
by UPSHIFT and LIA (including tolerance); on capacity building for teachers on these
skills; on facilitation of the relationships between school administrations and CSOs/
local self-governance bodies/youth groups towards local mini-projects that support
inclusion and empowerment. The experience of UNICEF in Albania could be a source
of inspiration. The Memorandum of Understanding between the Ministry of Education
and Youth of Osh, valid until November 2021, also offers a good precedent.
• The legal aid experiment run by this project should inspire a more systemic approach.
The structure put in place with the memorandums between universities, local councils
and legal aid clinics (whereby law students could put their studies in practice with non-
judicial redress) could be multiplied, but will also require a more systemic approach
jointly with the Ministry of Justice and the other actors of the judicial system.
• A module on civil society institutional development support should be created,
targeting implementing partners and other potential facilitators from among civil
society organisations.
• The common core and modules should all include a strong gender component, based
on module-specific gender analysis. The gender components should go beyond
participation of women and girls to the project and discussion of gender as a topic: it
should target gender transformative results for the common core and for each module.
• The one-stop shop initiative, while very promising from a decentralised public
administration reform standpoint, would require an entire, long-term, public
administration reform support project with very serious funding, which clearly goes
well beyond the scope of a peacebuilding project. If pursued, it should not be within a
PBF-funded project.
100 EVALUATION OF THE UNICEF / UNFPA / UNDP PROJECT PROMOTING KYRGYZSTAN’S YOUTH COHESION AND INTERACTION TOWARDS UZBEKISTAN
5. The United Nations Country Team in Kyrgyzstan should introduce gender
transformative results to the successor project, based on gender analysis and in
consultation or cooperation with UN Women.
Rationale for the recommendation: The project put a lot of emphasis on women
participation and on putting gender issues on the discussion table with the youth. It had
some encouraging gender transformative results, in terms of empowerment of girls in
particular. However, the project did not conduct full-fledged gender analysis, of its various
components (what specific roles and interests women and girls have in a given dynamic
situation as opposed to men and boys; how the problems being addressed affect women
and girls, and men and boys respectively, perhaps differently from each other). Neither
did it set specific gender transformative results as a part of its results framework.
Operational suggestions:
• Any follow up project should at least consult with UN Women in Kyrgyzstan, to
conduct gender analysis on the various aspects of the project, and plan for gender
transformative results.
• UN Women and other agencies should consider joint implementation of this follow
up project, with UN Women contributing, in particular, expertise regarding women in
conflict and peacebuilding.
• The GYPI guidelines and UN SWAP can serve as guiding tools to target gender
transformative results in an inclusive fashion from the project design phase.
6. The United Nations Country Team in Kyrgyzstan should re-define target age groups of
youth empowerment programmes in border areas towards adolescents and very young
adults (up to 20 years) in addition to the original target group (up to 28 years), with
emphasis on women/girls and vulnerable groups, and tailor activities accordingly.
Rationale of the recommendation: Owing to widespread labour migration of young adults
in the targeted communities, the project encountered difficulties finding young adults
(initially the core target group, up to 28 years old), and had to refocus on adolescents
and very young adults. Follow up projects in the border areas should take this factor into
account, by refocusing the bulk of activities towards adolescents and very young adults
(up to 20 years old), while offering some activities to young adults (20 to 28 years old)
Operational suggestion:
• For the youngest target group (up to 20 years old): focus on life skills, diversity
management and conflict in the school and extra-curricular environment. Adjust the
content of UPSHIFT and LIA programmes to the capacities of the target group.
• For young adults, maintain the existing offer of activities, with stronger focus on
employability, self-entrepreneurship, management of diversity at work, and legal aid.
• Place particular emphasis on youth belonging to national minorities, youth who
dropped out of schools, and women and girls in all target groups and sub-groups,
especially in terms of identification and mobilisation. This applies first and foremost
to girls who dropped out of school, and who are subject to/at risk of early marriage.
CSOs, community leaders (especially participants of past programmes) and service
providers beyond school (e.g. medical and para-medical professional, social workers,
civil registry officers) could be instrumental for outreach to these groups.
7. The United Nations Country Team in Kyrgyzstan should maintain selected activities
online beyond the COVID-19 crisis.
Rationale of the recommendation: The transfer of most activities online was swift and
efficient within this project. While some online activities offered less opportunities for
PROMOTING KYRGYZSTAN’S YOUTH COHESION AND INTERACTION TOWARDS UZBEKISTAN 101
genuine interaction among youth of diverse ethnicities, gender, social background or
across the border, others increased the ability of implementing partners and youth to work
together on a more regular basis, with a larger number of participants, across borders
and provinces at a lower cost, and with more acceptance from the side of parents and
public officials. For instance, some persons belonging to ethnic minorities may feel safer
to participate online than in person. Besides, the COVID-19-related restrictions will most
likely last for the foreseeable future, which requires the maintenance of online activities.
• The follow up project should maintain those online activities which implementing
partners consider are most worthwhile, such as some LIA and UPSHIFT events, videos,
debate competitions, etc.
• In order to ensure equity in access to the project, the United Nations agencies and
implementing partners should continue to support internet access for the beneficiaries
in the pragmatic ways explored during the project (e.g. top-up of mobile phone internet
access), and by prioritizing youth initiatives that increase internet coverage. Those
in need of support could be identified with the help of mentors, youth from the first
iteration of the project, and teachers.
8. The United Nations Country Team in Kyrgyzstan should anticipate and accelerate joint
procurement and other administrative processes linked to joint implementation
Rationale of the recommendation: this project pioneered, within the United Nations Office
in Kyrgyzstan, genuine joint implementation among UNICEF, UNDP and UNFPA. This
experience showed that this deep cooperation does pool assets and expertise, which in
turn contributes to the quality of outputs, solidity of results, and likelihood of impact.
However, this came at the cost of lengthy and demanding adjustment of procedures and
negotiation, was particularly visible as regards tendering for implementing partners, and
led to significant delays.
Operational suggestions:
• Learning from this experience, such delays can be avoided in the future by anticipating
the most cumbersome administrative processes and involving/consulting the support
services (finance, human resource, procurement, communication) in the project design
process : they could help predict possible bottlenecks and preempt them for the future
preparation of terms of reference for experts, service providers and implementing
partners, agreement on the bid/proposal assessment and selection criteria, definition of
selection modalities, and division of labor within the United Nations for the procedure.
• Support services (human resources, finance, procurement, communication within
the United Nations Office in Kyrgyzstan) can create and maintain a small step-by-step
guide on how to approach such procedures when they are co-implemented by several
agencies (e.g.: How to conduct a joint tender procedure?)
7.3 Duty bearers: Government of the Kyrgyz Republic, Municipalities and
Service Providers
9. The Government of the Kyrgyz Republic, in particular the State Agency for Regional
Development should support the efforts of the State Registry Service of Kyrgyzstan and
Ombudsperson’s office.
Rationale of the recommendation: In the frame of the legal aid component of the project,
the State Registry Service of Kyrgyzstan and Ombudsperson’s office demonstrated
readiness to enhance the identification of persons, including those belonging to minority
groups, who lack access to rights, entitlements and services due to civil registration issues.
Through the legal aid component of the project, they have deepened their understanding
102 EVALUATION OF THE UNICEF / UNFPA / UNDP PROJECT PROMOTING KYRGYZSTAN’S YOUTH COHESION AND INTERACTION TOWARDS UZBEKISTAN
of rights holders’ needs, and their outreach. They now require encouragement and the
means to follow through.
Operational suggestions:
• Both offices should carry on identifying rights holders deprived of their rights due to
registration issues in the border areas, including from among ethnic minorities.
• The State Agency for Regional Development should support their work by intensifying
its cooperation with United Nations peacebuilding projects, supporting legal aid
initiatives locally (who could in turn refer rights holders to the Registry Service and
Ombudsperson’s Office).
10. The Government of Kyrgyzstan, the Presidential Office, and Ministry of Education
should facilitate and support systematic involvement of educational institutions in
peacebuilding initiatives and youth empowerment, especially in border areas.
Rationale of the recommendation: The commitment of the State Youth agency to the
project was exemplary. In contrast, and partly because of the project design, the role of
the education system was modest, although their participation is essential to entrench
acceptance of diversity. The prevalence of labour migration and youth unemployment
prove that the participation of school and university students in this sort of project
activities is relevant and beneficial, particularly in border regions – however, it needs to
be facilitated systemically by the education system. The effects of such projects can also
be multiplied by the introduction of the relevant skillset within the schools.
Operational suggestions:
• Consider a memorandum of understanding and associated roadmap on cooperation
towards youth empowerment and peacebuilding between the Ministry of Education
and Science and the United Nations Country Team (or a recipient agency).
• A scholarship scheme could pave the way: the State could create an incentive by
subsidising young people’s studies in relevant disciplines for public administration,
in return for which the students commit to taking up a posting in an underserved
community for a fixed amount of time after they graduate.
11. The Government of Kyrgyzstan should consider the creation of a peacebuilding
national platform.
Rationale for the recommendation: the Project Steering Group (composed of representatives
of the State Agency on Youth, the State Agency on Inter-Ethnic Relations and Local Self-
Governance, now the newly formed State Agency for Regional Development, and the
Ministry of Culture, Information, Sports and Youth Policy of the Kyrgyz Republic, Osh,
Jalal-Abad and Batken Province Administrations, Assembly of the Peoples of Kyrgyzstan,
civil society experts and others) offers a shell to establish an informal dialogue platform
on peacebuilding, which would encourage ministries who missed past opportunities to
join in, contribute with their expertise and fulfil their respective mandate. Such platform
could also attract further donor funding for peacebuilding initiatives.
Operational suggestions:
• Convey a permanent peacebuilding platform based on the composition of the late
Project Steering Group, including also the Ministry of Education and Science, State
Agency for Regional Development,, Ministry of Culture, Information, Sports and Youth
Policy of the Kyrgyz Republic, Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Ministry of Labour and Social
Protection, Ministry of Justice, and any other relevant Ministry.
• The platform could report progress and strategic suggestions to the Presidential Office
and the United Nations Resident Coordinator on a regular basis.
PROMOTING KYRGYZSTAN’S YOUTH COHESION AND INTERACTION TOWARDS UZBEKISTAN 103
• The Ministry of Culture, Information, Sports and Youth Policy of the Kyrgyz Republic
should keep up the relations with its Uzbek counterpart, based on the Memorandum
of Understanding. It should establish a similar memorandum with the Youth Agency in
Tajikistan, and consider stepping up to a tripartite memorandum at medium term, to
normalise cross-border activities in the region.
• State Agency for Regional Development, in support of the efforts of the State Registry
Service of Kyrgyzstan and Ombudsperson’s office, should strengthen regional
cooperation.
• Bilateral interactions, whenever relevant, should not be isolated but involve all
relevant entities of the Kyrgyz State. This points at a high cooperation between the
Youth agency and Ministry of Education, and to ensure a coordinated peacebuilding
effort, with catalytic effects on both sides of the border.
7.4 CSOs and other implementing partners
12. Implementing partners should continue to develop their capacity to reach out to
remote, vulnerable groups in border areas.
Rationale for the recommendation: the project was a great opportunity for implementing
partners to explore the needs and aspiration of remote, underserved border
communities, particularly their youth. Implementing partners also appreciated the
benefits in terms of outreach, enrichment of their portfolio of activities and expertise,
and funding opportunities. These benefits should be further invested in the most remote
communities in border areas, and continuously documented.
• Implementing partners should target particularly hard-to-reach and vulnerable
groups such as girls and young women in remote location and/or exposed to early
marriage, youth who dropped out of school, representatives of national minorities,
foreign citizens, persons lacking basic documentation to access their rights, persons
with disabilities, and intersections of these vulnerabilities.
• They should identify and collaborate with other CSOs representing some of these
groups or advocating for relevant issues, if any. Such stakeholders would help
prioritise and proactively maintain specific diversity and vulnerability issues on the
agenda of future projects.
• Improve monitoring framework by collecting disaggregated data by age, gender and
majority/minority background, and checking against double entries. This will serve
for future project design and fundraising, as well as monitoring and evaluation.
104 EVALUATION OF THE UNICEF / UNFPA / UNDP PROJECT PROMOTING KYRGYZSTAN’S YOUTH COHESION AND INTERACTION TOWARDS UZBEKISTAN
8. REFERENCES
1. Altiok, Ali and Irena Grizelj, We Are Here: An integrated approach to youth-inclusive
peace processes, UN Global Policy Paper on Youth Participation in Peace Processes,
April 2019.
2. Berman, Gabrielle, Ethical Considerations for Evidence Generation Involving
Children on the COVID-19 Pandemic, Office of Research – Innocenti Discussion
Paper, 2020 <https://alliancecpha.org/en/system/tdf/library/attachments/ethical_
considerations_for_evidence_generation_involving_children_innocenti_unicef.
pdf?file=1&type=node&id=38087> [10/10/2020].
3. Berman, Gabrielle, James Powell, and Manuel Garcia Herranz, Ethical Considerations
When Using Social Media for Evidence Generation, Innocenti Research Briefs No.
2018-20, UNICEF Office of Research – Innocenti, 2018.
4. Conflict Sensitivity Consortium, How to guide to conflict sensitivity, London: The
Conflict Sensitivity Consortium, 2012.
5. Development Programme of the Kyrgyz Republic for the period 2018-2022 <www.
donors.kg/images/DEVELOPMENT_PROGRAM_OF_KR_Unity_trust_creation.pdf>
[10/10/2020].
6. de Weijer, Frauke / PeaceNexus Foundation, Review of PBF Cross-border Cooperation
for Sustainable Peace and Development in the Border Area of Kyrgyzstan & Tajikistan,
20-11-2017.
7. Dhungana, Shiva K, Rahat Ismanbaeva and Aizharkyn Aisakhunova / Search for
Common Ground Kyrgyzstan, ReducingViolent Religious Extremism and Preventing
Conflict in Kyrgyzstan and Central Asia 2013-2016, April 2016, <www.sfcg.org/
wp-content/uploads/2017/02/CSSF_KGZ501-Review_Final_Report_13052016.pdf>
[27/01/2021].
8. Eshenalieva, Ainura, Ruslan Rahimov, Begaim Usenova, and Anna Vorobeva, Study
of media literacy level in Kyrgyzstan, Soros Foundation, 2017 <http://media.kg/
wp-content/uploads/2018/02/Study-of-media-literacy-level-in-Kyrgyzstan_Eng.pdf>
[10/10/2020].
9. First International Symposium on Youth Participation in Peace Processes; 5-6 March
2019, Helsinki, Summary Report.
10. Graham, A., Powell, M., Taylor, N., Anderson, D. & Fitzgerald, R., Ethical Research
Involving Children. Florence: UNICEF Office of Research – Innocenti, 2013.
11. Herbert, S. Conflict analysis: Topic guide. Birmingham, UK: GSDRC, University of
Birmingham, 2017 <www.un.org/peacebuilding/fund/documents/investments>
[10/10/2020].
12. Human Rights Watch, Kyrgyzstan: Justice Elusive 10 Years On, 9 June 2020, <www.
hrw.org/news/2020/06/09/kyrgyzstan-justice-elusive-10-years> [27/01/2021].
13. Ismailbekova, Aksana and Philipp Lottholz, The Conflict in South Kyrgyzstan Ten Years
on: Perspectives, Consequences, Actions. George Washington University, Central
Asia Program, 2020
14. <https://centralasiaprogram.org/archives/16380>, <https://capgwu.b-cdn.net/
PROMOTING KYRGYZSTAN’S YOUTH COHESION AND INTERACTION TOWARDS UZBEKISTAN 105
wp-content/uploads/2020/06/The-Conflict-in-South-Kyrgyzstan-Ten-Years-on-
Perspectives-Consequences-Actions.pdf> [05/01/2020].
15. Ismailbekova, Aksana, From Endogamous Marriage to Ethnicity: Uzbek Community
Survival Strategy After the 2010 Conflict in Osh, Anthropology & Archeology of
Eurasia 58:3 (2019), 134-154.
16. Jantzi, Terrence, Fernanda Faria, and Anara Alymkulova, Evaluation of the
Peacebuilding Fund (PBF) Project Portfolio In Kyrgyzstan, Evaluation Report, 31
August 2017, <http://kg.one.un.org/content/dam/unct/kyrgyzstan/docs/General/
UNPBF%20Kyrgyzstan%20ER%20Final%20-%2031%20August%202017.pdf>
[29/12/2020].
17. Kuehnast, K., Nora Dudwick, Mari Clarke, Anna O’Donnell, and Sheetal Rana, Whose
Rules Rule? Everyday Border and Water Conflicts in Central Asia, The World Bank
Group, Social Development Department, May 2008.
18. Larionov, Konstantin, Why Kyrgyzstan Won’t Gain from the Protracted Border Dispute
with Tajikistan and Uzbekistan?, Central Asian Bureau for Analytical Reporting,
<https://cabar.asia/en/why-kyrgyzstan-won-t-gain-from-the-protracted-border-dispute-
with-tajikistan-and-uzbekistan>, 17.11.2020 [27/01/2021].
19. Megoran, Nick, John Heathershaw and Alisher Khamidov, Bottom-up Peacekeeping
in Southern Kyrgyzstan: How Local Actors Managed to Prevent the Spread of
Violence from Osh/Jalal-Abad to Aravan, June 2010, Nationalities Papers, Routledge,
2017 <https://doi.org/10.1080/00905992.2017.1335695>.
20. Murzakulova, Asel, Rural Migration in Kyrgyzstan: Drivers, Impact and
Governance, University of Central Asia, MSRI Research paper # 7, DOI:
10.13140/RG.2.2.35258.21442, June 2020, <https://www.researchgate.net/
publication/344362648_Rural_Migration_in_Kyrgyzstan_Drivers_Impact_and_
Governance> [12/12/2020].
21. Murzakulova, Asel, Gulbara Omorova and Evgenii Shibkov, Reconsidering the
meaning of neighbourship: the transformation of Uzbekistan-Kyrgyzstan border
areas after 2016, MSRI Brief, DOI: 10.13140/RG.2.2.19225.98406, May 2019 <https://
www.researchgate.net/publication/335161251_Reconsidering_the_meaning_of_
neighbourship_the_transformation_of_Uzbekistan-Kyrgyzstan_border_areas_
after_2016> [12/12/2020].
22. Murzakulova, Asel, Contextual Factors of conflict in Border Communities in Batken
Province, Kyrgyzstan, Technical Report, DOI: 10.13140/RG.2.2.24353.024, September
2017 <https://www.researchgate.net/publication/320014772_Contextual_Factors_of_
conflict_in_Border_Communities_in_Batken_Province_Kyrgyzstan> [12/12/2020].
23. National Development Strategy of the Kyrgyz Republic for 2018-2040 <http://
donors.kg/en/strategy/5174-national-development-strategy-of-the-kyrgyz-republic-
for-2018-2040> [10/10/2020].
24. Nogoibaev, Ulan, Report on the analysis for the selection of target communities
Osh, Jalal-Abad and Batken provinces, UNICEF / UNFPA / UNDP project ‘Promoting
Kyrgyzstan’s youth cohesion and interaction towards Uzbekistan’ (2019-2020)”, 2019
(project document).
25. OECD, Guidance on Evaluating Conflict Prevention and Peacebuilding Activities –
Working Draft for Application Period, Development Assistance Committee (DAC),
OECD, Paris, 2008.
26. OECD, Quality Standards for Development Evaluation, DAC Guidelines and Reference
Series, Development Assistance Committee (DAC), OECD, Paris, 2010.
106 EVALUATION OF THE UNICEF / UNFPA / UNDP PROJECT PROMOTING KYRGYZSTAN’S YOUTH COHESION AND INTERACTION TOWARDS UZBEKISTAN
27. OECD, Evaluating Development Co-operation: Summary of Key Norms and
Standards, OECD, Paris, 2011 <www.oecd/org/dac/evaluation> [10/10/2020].
28. Omurkulova-Ozierska, Elnura, and Chinara Esengul, Youth, Peace and Security
in Kyrgyzstan: a contribution to the Progress Study on Youth, Peace and Security
mandated by UNSCR 2250, October 2017. <https://peacenexus.org/wp-content/
uploads/2019/07/YPS-Kyrgyzstan-FINAL1-CM-_-blitz.pdf> [10/11/2020].
29. OSCE, Report of the Independent International Commission of Inquiry into the Events
in the Southern Kyrgyzstan in June 2010, OSCE, 2020 <https://reliefweb.int/sites/
reliefweb.int/files/resources/Full_Report_490.pdf> [10/10/2020].
30. Peace Nexus Foundation, Conflict and Peace Analysis Kyrgyzstan, April 2019.
31. Powell, Mary Ann, Nicola Taylor, Robyn Fitzgerald, Ann Graham, and Donnah
Anderson, Ethical Research Involving Children, Innocenti PublicationsUNICEF Office
of Research – Innocenti, 2013.
32. Sagynbekova, Lira, Environment, Rural Livelihoods, and Labor Migration: A Case
Study in Central Kyrgyzstan, Mountain Research and Development 37.4 (2017): 456-
463.
33. Search for Common Ground, #JashStan: Youth as agents of peace and stability in
Kyrgyzstan, <www.sfcg.org/jashstan-youth-as-agents-of-peace-and-stability-in-
kyrgyzstan/> [27/01/2021].
34. Soros Foundation in Kyrgyzstan, Media Preferences of the Population of Kyrgyzstan
(МЕДИА ПРЕДПОЧТЕНИЯ НАСЕЛЕНИЯ КЫРГЫЗСТАНА (8 ВОЛНА), 2017 <https://
soros.kg/wp-content/uploads/2017/12/Otchet-Mediapredpochteniya-naseleniya-KR-8-
volna.pdf> [10/10/2020].
35. Starr, S. Frederick, ed., Ferghana Valley: The Heart of Central Asia (Studies of Central
Asia and the Caucasus, Routledge, 2011.
36. Tilekeyev, Kanat, Productivity Implications of Participation in Export Activities:
The Case of Farmers in Talas Oblast of Kyrgyzstan, Institute of Public Policy and
Administration Working Paper 17 (2013) <https://ucentralasia.org/Content/downloads/
UCA-IPPA-WP17-BeanKR-Eng.pdf> [05/01/2021].
37. Toktogulov, Beishenbek, The Failure of Settlement on Kyrgyz-Uzbek Border Issues: a
Lack of Diplomacy? Bilge Strateji 10 (19), Autumn 2018, p. 85-106.
38. Tricot O’Farrell, Kloé, Kanat Abdiev and Alastair Carr / Saferworld / Foundation for
Tolerance International, Young people’s voices on peace and security in Kyrgyzstan,
August 2019, <https://www.saferworld.org.uk/
39. resources/publications/1219-young-peopleas-voices-on-peace-and-security-in-
kyrgyzstan> [12/12/2020].
40. United Nations Children’s Fund / The Ministry of Youth Aff¬airs in the Kyrgyz Republic,
Youth, Livelihoods and Peace Promotion: A Knowledge, Attitudes and Practice Study
among Youth aged 15-28 in Osh and Jalal-Abad provinces, Kyrgyzstan 2011.
41. United Nations Children’s Fund, Procedure for Ethical Standards in Research,
Evaluation, Data Collection and Analysis, CF/PD/DRP/2015-001, UNICEF, 2015.
42. United Nations Children’s Fund, Country Office Annual Report 2017, Republic of
Kyrgyzstan.
43. United Nations Children’s Fund, Country Office Annual Report 2018, Republic of
Kyrgyzstan.
44. United Nations Children’s Fund, “Strategic Plan 2018-2021”, UNICEF, New York, 2018
PROMOTING KYRGYZSTAN’S YOUTH COHESION AND INTERACTION TOWARDS UZBEKISTAN 107
<https://www.unicef.org/media/48126/file/UNICEF_Strategic_Plan_2018-2021-ENG.
pdf> [10/10/2020].
45. United Nations Children’s Fund, Country Office Annual Report 2019, Republic of
Kyrgyzstan.
46. United Nations Country Team, UN Common Country Analysis Update Kyrgyz
Republic, Bishkek, December 2019 <https://kyrgyzstan.un.org/sites/default/
files/2020-06/1%20OON_en_0.pdf> [10/10/2020].
47. United Nations Children’s Fund, Policy on Personal Data Protection, POLICY/
DFAM/2020/001, UNICEF, 2020.
48. United Nations Children’s Fund, Formative Evaluation of UNICEF Engagement with
Young People in Peacebuilding, New York, January 2020.
49. UN Committee on the Rights of the Child (CRC), Consideration of reports submitted
by States parties under article 44 of the Convention: Convention on the Rights of the
Child : 3rd and 4th periodic reports of States parties due in 2010: Kyrgyzstan, 6 June
2012, CRC/C/KGZ/3-4, <https://www.refworld.org/docid/528217244.html> [10/10/2020].
50. United Nations Evaluation Group, Norms and Standards for Evaluation, UNEG, New
York, 2016.
51. UN General Assembly, The missing peace: independent progress study on youth and
peace and security, Seventy-second session, Agenda item 65 on Peacebuilding and
sustaining peace, 2 March 2018, A/72/761–S/2018/86.
52. UN Human Rights Council, National report submitted in accordance with paragraph 5
of the annex to Human Rights Council resolution 16/21: Kyrgyzstan, 5 December 2014,
A/HRC/WG.6/21/KGZ/1 <https://www.refworld.org/docid/54c0b4d94.html> [10/10/
2020].
53. UN Peace Building Fund, Project on “Cross-border Cooperation for Sustainable Peace
and Development” (2015-2017), (project document).
54. UN Peacebuilding Priority Plan Kyrgyzstan (2017-2020), <https://kyrgyzstan.un.org/
en/31253-peacebuilding-priority-plan-ppp> [13/10/2020].
55. UN Peacebuilding / Katinka Patscher-Hellbeck, Strategic Peacebuilding Review. PBF
Portfolio in Kyrgyzstan 2018-2020, July 2020 <https://www.un.org/peacebuilding/sites/
www.un.org.peacebuilding/files/documents/synthesis_review_kyrgyzstan_2018-2020.
pdf> [10/12/2020].
56. UN Peacebuilding, Assessing Readiness for Remote Evaluation for PBF, internal
guideline in the context of COVID-19, 2020.
57. UN Security Council, Security Council resolution 2250 (2015) [on youth, peace
and security], 18 March 2016, S/RES/2250 (2015), <https://www.refworld.org/
docid/56ebfd654.html> [15/10/2020].
58. UN Security Council, Security Council resolution 2419 (2018), 6 June 2018, S/
RES/2419 (2018), <https://undocs.org/en/S/RES/2419(2018)> [15/10/2020].
59. UN Sustainable Development Group, What does “sustaining peace” mean?
January 2017, <https://unsdg.un.org/resources/what-does-sustaining-peace-mean>
[12/12/2020].
60. Youth, Livelihoods and Peace Promotion: A Knowledge, Attitudes and Practice study
among Youth aged 15 -28 in Osh and Jalal-Abad provinces, Kyrgyzstan, 2011.
61. Zenn, Jacob, and Kathleen Kuehnast. Preventing Violent Extremism in Kyrgyzstan. US
Institute of Peace, 2014, <www.jstor.org/stable/resrep12429>, [10.11.2020].
108 EVALUATION OF THE UNICEF / UNFPA / UNDP PROJECT PROMOTING KYRGYZSTAN’S YOUTH COHESION AND INTERACTION TOWARDS UZBEKISTAN
PROMOTING
KYRGYZSTAN’S
YOUTH
COHESION
AND
INTERACTION
TOWARDS
UZBEKISTAN
109
9. ANNEXES
ANNEX 1: Evaluation Matrix
Evaluation Evaluation Data collec-
Sub-questions Indicators Data sources
Criteria Questions tion methods
Relevance 1. To what ex- To what ex- Extent to which insights from conflict Document Publications/guiding documents of
tent were the tent were the analysis are reflected in the theory of review UNICEF, UNDP, UNFPA, PBF
project results design and ob- change of the project
Social media UNSC Resolutions
relevant to the jectives of the
Number of people from vulnerable analysis
needs and pri- project based Other UN publications on peacebuilding
groups, foremost young women,
orities of the on solid conflict Semi-struc-
were consulted on or associated with Social media in Kyrgyzstan, in particular
beneficiaries, analysis? tured inter-
the drafting and design of the project. in the regions targeted by the project
especially of views
To what extent
the young Extent to which the beneficiaries feel Interviews with UN agencies involved in
and how have Focus group
women and the project activities were relevant the project, PBF, beneficiaries, experts
the issue of with benefi-
men? and accessible to them and others
equity, gender ciaries Interviews with complementary infor-
(Accessibility, Child/Youth sensitive-
and human mants (CSO project partners, parents,
ness) Local case
rights been community members)
studies
integrated into Correspondences between the issues
Country reports, shadow reports (OSCE,
the design, and needs raised by direct and indi-
Human Rights Watch, Amnesty Interna-
planning and rect beneficiaries, and the logic of the
tional, International Crisis Group)
implementation project
of the project Programming documents
activities?
Monitoring of international obligations
(UPR, UNCRC report)
110
EVALUATION
OF
THE
UNICEF
/
UNFPA
/
UNDP
PROJECT
PROMOTING
KYRGYZSTAN’S
YOUTH
COHESION
AND
INTERACTION
TOWARDS
UZBEKISTAN
2. To what To what extent Extent to which the theory of change UNICEF, UNFPA, UNDP, PBF, and UN-wide
extent is the was the proj- mobilized peacebuilding expertise publications, reports and guidelines
project based ect’s theory of
Incidences of integration of new National strategic documents
on a logical change inter-
factors and trends throughout action
Theory of nally coherent United Nations Security Council Resolu-
implementation, into the theory of
Change and and consistent tion 2250 (2015) and UNSCR 2419 (2018)
change
how coherent with strategic and further UN documents on youth and
was it in prac- approach of Number of adaptations to the theory peace building
tice? PBF to conflict? of change and intervention tech-
Programme documents
niques in response to the COVID19
How has the
situation Interview and brainstorming with UNICEF
project’s the-
and other UN staff (project team in par-
ory of change
ticular)
evolved over
time?
Effective- 3. To what Have the young Number and variety of youth-led Document Project documentation
ness extent have men and wom- initiatives involving cooperation review
Project website
the expected en in the KY between youth of Kyrgyzstan and Uz-
Focus groups
results of the border areas bekistan (disaggregated by gender) Proceeds of events organized by the
project been become influ- Semi-struc- projects
Share of interviewed youth, parents
achieved on encers, civic tured inter-
and local communities who display Social media in Kyrgyzstan, in particular
the output activists and views
support towards diversity and youth- in the regions targeted by the project
level? entrepreneurs?
led initiatives Local case
Interviews with UN agencies involved in
Have the studies
Extent to which stakeholders experi- the project, beneficiaries, experts
young men
ence an increase in services provided
and women in Interviews with complementary infor-
by the local institutions (disaggregat-
border areas, mants (Ombudsman’s office, prosecution
ed by gender)
their parents office, territorial divisions of the State
and commu- Number of people from vulnerable or Registry Service, law enforcement, legal
nity members hard-to-reach groups, (people be- aid, CSO project partners, parents, com-
increased their longing to national minorities, young munity members)
understanding women), who were able to participate
Annual municipal plans and budgets in
of, and support in the project initiatives (disaggregat-
local case studies
for diversity? ed)
Have local and Number and tone of mentions of
central govern- concrete applications of leadership,
ments analytical thinking, legal, media
PROMOTING
KYRGYZSTAN’S
YOUTH
COHESION
AND
INTERACTION
TOWARDS
UZBEKISTAN
111
enhanced literacy, conflict management and
people’s access teambuilding skills (gender)
to services and
Examples of priority issues raised by
justice, and
youth before the local government
trust-building
transferred into projects/plans/bud-
initiatives? (eq-
getary commitments by LSG bodies
uity, gender)
Efficiency 4. To what ex- To what extent Degree of satisfaction of implement- Document Project documents, reports and products
tent have the did the peace- ing staff and cooperation partners review
Agreement documents with stakeholders
project imple- building ap- about coordination among project
Local case
menters op- proach enable implementers and partners Programme documents from the UN
studies
timized their UNDP, UNFPA, Peacebuilding Funds’ (PBF) Gender and
Level of clarity of the distribution of
assets and UNICEF and the Semi-struc- Youth Promotion Initiative
project areas between the UN agen-
comparative PBF to ensure tured inter-
cies according to specific competence Interview responses
advantages? coherence, views
and mandate
synergies and Working plan of the project
Budget as-
joint operation Occurrences of mentions of duplica-
sessment Project reports
in design and tion in interviews and documents
implementation Financial data of the project
Extent to which project indicators
of the project?
coincide with the ToC of the project
To what ex-
Share of activities implemented with-
tent does the
in planned timeframe
management
structure of the Number of examples of reaction and
project support adaptation of action according to
efficiency for monitoring findings
programme
implementation
and achieve-
ment of re-
sults?
To what extent
are the moni-
toring mecha-
nisms in
112
EVALUATION
OF
THE
UNICEF
/
UNFPA
/ UNDP
PROJECT
PROMOTING
KYRGYZSTAN’S
YOUTH
COHESION
AND
INTERACTION
TOWARDS
UZBEKISTAN
place effective
in measuring
and informing
management
of the project
performance
and progress
towards the
targets?
5. To what To what extent Extent to which the project’s theory of Document Strategic documents: Joint action plan
extent were is the project change and project documents over- review 2017-2019; Respective province action
interventions coherent with lap with Kyrgyz strategic documents plan of cooperation (cf. ToR, p. 1-2); State
Focus groups
under this key national Agency for Youth and Sport: Memoran-
Extent to which the project’s theory
project com- development Semi-struc- dum of Understanding (joint action plan
of change and project documents
plementary, strategies, tured inter- with UZ counterpart)
overlap with CSOs’ objectives and
harmonized, including in the views
activities Interviews with complementary infor-
coordinat- area of peace-
Local case mants (CSO project partners, parents,
ed with the building, and Share of stakeholders consider-
studies community members)
government’s youth empow- ing that the project enabled and/or
and other erment? expanded other peacebuilding activi- Programming documents
peacebuilding ties (in particular concerning gender,
How has the Project progress reports
actors’ inter- human rights and equity)
project coordi-
ventions? Internal notes
nated with key
conflict and Correspondence
peacebuilding
Peacebuilding strategic documents
actors?
CSOs project reports
RUNO & CSOs cooperation projects in
Peacebuilding Fund in Kyrgyzstan under
the Gender and Youth Promotion Initia-
tive
Impact 6. How ef- How did young Extent to which an inclusive (gender, Local case Informants’ responses and experiences
fective have women and interethnic) dialogue within KY and studies (especially in sampled municipalities,
the project men contribute across the KY-UZ border is mentioned and at national level)
Document
strategies and to social cohe- by interviewees and in which terms
review
approaches sion and (qualitative)
PROMOTING
KYRGYZSTAN’S
YOUTH
COHESION
AND
INTERACTION
TOWARDS
UZBEKISTAN
113
been in peacebuilding Degree of satisfaction of the benefi- Social media Media coverage of the project and of the
contributing in their com- ciaries concerning the possibility to analysis regions concerned
to peace and munities or channel their complaints and griev-
Semi-struc-
stability in beyond? ances linked with the quality of the
tured inter-
border areas? services provided by the local institu-
Do Kyrgyz views
tions (disaggregated by gender)
youth and rel-
Focus groups
evant govern- Instances of established business
ment agencies processes, and partnerships (disag-
collaborate and gregated by gender)
further develop
List of most significant changes re-
cooperation
ported by interviewees
plans to im-
prove positive Positive tone of social media entries
interactions regarding cross-border and intereth-
with their nic interactions
Uzbek counter-
parts?
How has the
intervention
contributed to
economic and
social stability
and prosperity
in Kyrgyz bor-
der areas?
Sustainabil- 7. How like- Do the youth Financial sustainability of partner Local case Policy framework of the Government of
ity ly is it that have the means CSOs (self-reported) studies Kyrgyzstan, and relevant legislation, if
UNICEF’s con- to implement any
Level of consensus on principles of Document
tribution to change in their
diversity, inclusion, interethnic and review Public reports of relevant CSOs, NHRIs,
peacebuilding community af-
cross-border cooperation among in- international organisations, as well as
at the Kyrgyz/ ter the closure Social media
terviewed stakeholders and in social reports and shadow reports pertaining to
Uzbek borders of the project? analysis
media peacebuilding, social peace in the border
will last in the
How effectively Semi-struc- areas, and youth-led actions
long run? Instances of plans expressed by in-
has the proj- tured inter-
terviewed change agents to continue Interviews with UN staff, CSO project part-
ect generated views
cooperation plans towards UZ Youth ners, local government representatives
national and
114
EVALUATION
OF
THE
UNICEF
/
UNFPA
/
UNDP
PROJECT
PROMOTING
KYRGYZSTAN’S
YOUTH
COHESION
AND
INTERACTION
TOWARDS
UZBEKISTAN
local ownership and UZ government agencies Focus groups Social media in Kyrgyzstan, in particular
of the results in the regions targeted by the project, in
achieved? Kyrgyz language and Russian
To what extent
do the project
partners have
institutional
capacity to car-
ry on with the
core activities
and outputs of
the project?
PROMOTING
KYRGYZSTAN’S
YOUTH
COHESION
AND
INTERACTION
TOWARDS
UZBEKISTAN
115
ANNEX 2: Stakeholder Analysis
Stakeholders Involvement in the project Interest in the evaluation Potential role in peacebuilding
Donor: PBF Funding, Summative and formative Funding
project evaluation for the as-
Participation in design and monitoring Network
sessment of the investment and
and evaluation
future follow-up funding Guidance
Theoretical framework
Implementing agencies
UNICEF The leading implementing agency of Hiring agency, evaluation man- Implement the Peacebuilding Priority
the project and the lead agency for the agement, logistical support, con- Plan for 2017-2020. The new PPP defines
coordination, organizing the process of tact point for evaluation team, three interlinked outcomes, recognized
joint planning of the project as well as interviews of project staff, focus as building blocks of interventions for
joint monitoring and reporting. UNICEF group discussion, participation in preventing violent extremism in the
organized systematic coordination Evaluation Reference Group. Kyrgyz Republic. The three outcomes
meetings with participation of the Re- will be implemented through six UN
Project assessment (summative
cipient UN Organizations (RUNOs). agencies (UNDP, UNICEF, UN Women,
evaluation)
UNODC, UNFPA and UN OHCHR). The
UNICEF used UPSHIFT methodology
organisational learning six agencies have a comparative advan-
for youth empowerment and capacity
tage in addressing the risks of radical-
development purposes. In addition to recommendations for future
ization and violent extremism.
youth, UNICEF has trained Youth State projects (formative evaluation)
Agency staff at national and local levels Outcome 1: Justice and security sector
cf. evaluation purpose
on Results Based management as well institutions, national and local author-
as youth-centred planning and budget- ities apply socially inclusive approach-
ing. es, participatory decision-making and
guarantee increased civic space (UNDP,
To support two-way dialogue between
UNICEF, OHCHR, UN Women).
Kyrgyz and Uzbek youth, UNICEF has
led the national level events and activ- Outcome 2. Penitentiary and probation
ities with participation of youth from officers, as well as the police and foren-
both countries. sic experts, are able to
UNDP The implementing agency. Launched Project assessment (summative prevent and address radicalization to
Community Service Centres; delivered evaluation) violence by ensuring adequate safe-
trainings for law enforcement on gen- guards respecting national and interna-
organisational learning
der and age-sensitive human rights; tional standards (UNODC, UNDP).
116
EVALUATION
OF
THE
UNICEF
/
UNFPA
/
UNDP
PROJECT
PROMOTING
KYRGYZSTAN’S
YOUTH
COHESION
AND
INTERACTION
TOWARDS
UZBEKISTAN
coordinated Youth-to-Youth primary recommendations for future Outcome 3: Women and men, boys and
legal support based on the memoran- projects (formative evaluation) girls in target communities take a more
dums between the Association of legal critical stance on ideologies instigat-
clinics, LSGs &Universities; coordi- ing violence and have a better sense
nated and build capacity of commu- of belonging to their communities and
nity-based lawyers, set up referral participate in local development and
mechanisms for municipal services; dialogues over PVE. (UNICEF, UNFPA,
Police training; supported development UN Women).
of the COVID-19-related human rights
monitoring tools for Ombudsman’s
office; youth activities related to the
development of the critical /design
thinking, Peace MediaLab, youth legal
awareness activities allowing to pro-
mote legal ways to address grievances
UNFPA The implementing agency. Capacity Project assessment (summative
building of youth, Leadership and Inno- evaluation)
vation Academy, Online Make-a-thon,
organisational learning
parenting programme (trainings for
parents), mentorship programme, in- recommendations for future
formational work on social allowances projects (formative evaluation)
Government decision-makers and duty bearers
State Agency for Youth and The main project partner. The project Good practices, lessons learned The goal of the Agency is to develop
Sports of Kyrgyzstan was drawn from the State Agency of and recommendations for further and realize the potential of youth, de-
Youth’s suggestions and developed youth and peace-building activ- velop physical culture and sports in the
based on their inputs ities Kyrgyz Republic. The Agency develops
and implements state polices in the
areas of youth development, physical
culture and sports.
State Agency for Youth of Project partner Good practices, lessons learned The goal of the Agency is to develop
Uzbekistan (officially estab- and recommendations for further and realize the potential of youth in
lished in August 2020) youth and peace-building activ- Uzbekistan. The Agency develops and
ities implements state polices in the areas of
youth development
PROMOTING
KYRGYZSTAN’S
YOUTH
COHESION
AND
INTERACTION
TOWARDS
UZBEKISTAN
117
The Youth Unity of Uzbeki- Project partner Good practices, lessons learned The main goal of the Unity is empow-
stan and recommendations for further ering the young people to take an
youth and peace-building activ- active part in democratic, political and
ities economic reforms carried out in the
country, in strengthening peace and
harmony in society; in contributing to
the process of Uzbekistan's joining the
number of developed countries of the
world; in ensuring effective protection
of the rights, legitimate interests and
freedoms of the young generation,
increasing the spiritual and profession-
al culture of young men and women,
providing support in the embodiment of
their intellectual and creative potential.
Presidential Administration The relevant office of the Presidential Insight in the role of political Some of the roles: organization of the
Administration had been regularly in- lead and impulse for sustainable activities of the President of the Kyrgyz
formed about the project development youth and peace-building areas Republic to consolidate and preserve
process and project implementation the unity of the people of the Kyrgyz
Recommendations
process Republic, to develop interethnic and
civil tolerance.
National State Registry Good practices, lessons learned The aim of the service is the implemen-
Service and recommendations for access tation of the state registration policy,
to their services for youth and as well as the policy in the field of
vulnerable groups in border electronic digital signature. Provides a
regions broad range of services to population
from the issue of birth certificates, pass-
ports, registration of vehicles etc. One
of the support function of the service
is to participate in the process of de-
limitation and demarcation of the state
border line of the Kyrgyz Republic with
neighbouring states (from the Statute
of the NSRS).
118
EVALUATION
OF
THE
UNICEF
/
UNFPA
/
UNDP
PROJECT
PROMOTING
KYRGYZSTAN’S
YOUTH
COHESION
AND
INTERACTION
TOWARDS
UZBEKISTAN
Ombudsperson’ institu- The office of Ombudsman and its Good practices, lessons learned Control over execution of the constitu-
tion, Central Apparatus in regional offices supported the project and recommendations for access tional human and civil rights and free-
Bishkek (Department of to develop mini guide for lawyers who to justice, to complaint mech- doms in the territory of the Kyrgyz
Protection of rights of chil- serve at community level, delivered anisms, and equity issues con-
Republic to the extent of its jurisdic-
dren, women and families, consultations, etc. cerning youth and vulnerable
tion is exercised by the Ombudsman
Department of protection groups in border regions
(Akyikatchy) of the Kyrgyz Republic
of the social, economic and
cultural rights) who is guided by the Constitution, as
well as other laws of the Kyrgyz Repub-
lic,
international agreements and treaties
ratified by the Kyrgyz Republic, as well
as universally recognized principles and
standards of the international law.
Prosecutor’s Office Informed about the progress of the Good practices, lessons learned The prosecutor’s office of the Kyrgyz
project, were consulted throughout the and recommendations for access Republic is the state body designed to
project to justice and equity issues provide rule of law, unity and strength-
concerning youth within their ening of legality, and protection of the
jurisdiction interests of the people, society and
state protected by the law.
Ministry of Justice Informed about the progress of the Good practices, lessons learned The Ministry of Justice of the Kyrgyz
project, were consulted throughout the and recommendations for equity develops and implements the state
project issues concerning youth in bor- policy in the field of legal regulation,
der regions forensic expertise, advocacy, notarial
and probationary activities, ensuring
registration within the granted powers
and developing a unified state policy in
the field of archival affairs, registration
of the population, etc.
Ministry of Foreign Affairs Informed about the progress of the Good practices, lessons learned Some the duties of the Ministry is to
project, were consulted throughout the and recommendations for provide assistance in maintaining inter-
project further cross-border youth and national peace, global and regional se-
peace-building activities curity based on the principles of equal-
ity and security for all; participation in
the development and expansion
PROMOTING
KYRGYZSTAN’S
YOUTH
COHESION
AND
INTERACTION
TOWARDS
UZBEKISTAN
119
of foreign economic and trade relations
of the Kyrgyz Republic with foreign
states, promoting exports and tourism
opportunities of the Kyrgyz Republic,
attracting foreign investment, new tech-
nologies and innovations in the econo-
my of the Kyrgyz Republic, expanding
humanitarian and technical cooperation
with foreign states and international
organizations, as well as participation
in the implementation of economic and
social policy of the Kyrgyz Republic.
Duty bearers at the local level
Municipal and district level The main partners in project imple- Good practices, lessons learned As above
representatives involved mentation, recipients of the capacity and recommendations concern-
with youth issues. building activities ing youth participation
National State Registry Informed about the progress of the Good practices, lessons learned
Service, Service Centres in project, were consulted throughout the and recommendations for access
Osh and provinces project to their services and the needs of
youth and vulnerable groups in
border regions
Law enforcement bodies Capacity building, Informed about the Good practices, lessons learned
progress of the project, were consulted and recommendations as duty
throughout the project bearers in border regions
Community service centres Capacity building, Informed about the Good practices, lessons learned
(free consultative legal aid) progress of the project, were consulted and recommendations for access
throughout the project to their services and the needs of
youth and vulnerable groups in
border regions
Prosecutor office, territorial Informed about the progress of the Good practices, lessons learned
prosecutor offices in each project, were consulted throughout the and recommendations for access
rayon (district) and in Osh project to justice and equity issues
city concerning youth within their
jurisdiction
120
EVALUATION
OF
THE
UNICEF
/
UNFPA
/
UNDP
PROJECT
PROMOTING
KYRGYZSTAN’S
YOUTH
COHESION
AND
INTERACTION
TOWARDS
UZBEKISTAN
Authorized Representative Informed about the progress of the Good practices, lessons learned
of Ombudsman in each project, were consulted throughout the and recommendations for access
province project, capacity building to justice, to complaint mecha-
nisms,
and equity issues concerning
youth and vulnerable groups
within their jurisdiction
State Agency for Youth and Recipients of the capacity building ac- Good practices, lessons learned
Sports, Provincial Depart- tivities, Informed about the progress of and recommendations for further
ments the project, were consulted throughout youth and peace-building activi-
the project ties at local level
CSO project partners and activists
Public Association “Youth Capacity building training for mentors, Summative evaluation of their CSOs implement different initiatives to
of Osh” workshops on leadership and tolerance activities within the project, support the peacebuilding processes in
to youth, Youth Peace online dialogue, the county.
learning opportunity about youth
implementation of youth initiatives
and peace-building concepts
Accelerate Prosperity Bootcamp, implementation of youth
Recommendations for further
initiatives
activities and participation
"International Debate One of the project partners, delivered
Education Association in - Training on (1) leadership, (2) civic
Central Asia" (IDEA CA) activism, (3) participatory research and
data analysis, (4) debating, (5) develop-
ment of social initiatives; Public hear-
ings; Participation in budget hearings;
Best practices meetings between
initiative groups and LSG; Social make-
a-thon; Mentorship
Association of legal clinics Legal support to population
of Kyrgyzstan
Public Fund “Tvoe pravo” Partners of RUNOs in implementing
local events and activities at municipal
John Galt VC
level
"Women's Peace Bank" PF
PROMOTING
KYRGYZSTAN’S
YOUTH
COHESION
AND
INTERACTION
TOWARDS
UZBEKISTAN
121
Other UPSHIFT programme UPSHIFT methodology empowers
stakeholders, if any young people to identify challenges in
their communities and create entrepre-
neurial solutions to address them
Other Leadership and Inno- The goal of the Leadership and Inno-
vation Academy stakehold- vation Academy is to increase civic
ers, if any engagement, knowledge, skills and
abilities to interact with representatives
of government agencies and youth
among young people from border re-
gions with Uzbekistan
Experts involved in the Various roles – providing technical
project (peace building, assistance
youth, legal aid, trainers,
consultants; for example
Design Thinking Workshops,
Camps, etc.);
Final Beneficiaries
Young people who have Extensive capacity building of the Summative evaluation of the Meaningful participation of young
participated in project ac- young people involved in the project, project (transparency and ac- women and men in political institutions
tivities developed innovative projects and countability) and peace processes.
initiatives
Consolidation of perception of
Parents, teachers, mentors, Capacity building milestones and benefits
community members in the
Awareness raising about exist-
municipalities targeted by
ing participation and initiative
the project
opportunities
Community members Participated at various project events
(hearings, presentations) and capacity
building initiatives
Participating law students Received training, delivered legal ser-
vices to community members
ANNEX 3: Social Media Analysis
There are several factors we need to consider when interpreting social media activity by using
relevant keywords. The first is uneven access to internet across locations in the three southern
provinces of Osh, Batken, and Jalal-Abad. Some locations in Osh province have stable internet
connection, which is a prerequisite for users to start displaying more of their views online. While
some remote villages in Batken province have unreliable internet connection, which was a problem
already when the project implementation had to switch to online format due to COVID-19-related
restrictions on offline events. The general logic is that as long as internet remains a sporadic and
thus unexplored phenomenon, its users take time to start integrating it into their regular lives and
to shift more regular activities to online.
The second factor is divergent interethnic baseline in the target locations in three provinces. One
collateral marker of this is that Batken did not experienced an interethnic conflict as did Osh and
Jalal-Abad in 2010. Moreover, Osh city and Osh province in general have a higher percentage of
ethnic Uzbek population, compared to the two other southern provinces. Studies have highlighted
ways in which ethnic Uzbek population of the city of Osh (who used to constitute a majority in
business and trade in Osh, while ethnic Kyrgyz population did so in state bodies) has been adjusting
to post conflict landscape by moving their shops to Uzbek neighbourhoods (mahalla) from the
main market.85 Average population density also varies: in 2015 it was 1228.4 people per km2 in Osh
province, 28.2 persons per km2 in Batken province, 34.6 persons per km2 in Jalal-Abad province.
This affects access to natural resources (land, irrigation water) and other social factors. Batken
also hosts all six enclaves of the Kyrgyz Republic. Thus, to be able to track progress in interethnic
relations in the project locations, we need an individual baseline measures for each village/town.
The third issue surfaced when we consulted an expert on border issues with Uzbekistan and
Tadjikistan, political scientist Asel Murzakulova. Dr. Murzakulova states it is problematic for an
outsider to access informative discussions on interethnic issues, since those take place in closed
online communities that accept only those whom administrators know personally. Moreover, these
discussions are in Uzbek or Tadjik language, and tend to activate during escalations or around
spring, when irrigation starts.
The fourth factor is connected to the previous: most applications for monitoring and analysing
social media activity mainly work with widely disseminated languages, thus finding posts in Kyrgyz,
Uzbek, or Tadjik language is hardly possible.
This point is partly confirmed by the basic search through Facebook and Instagram using the
Brand24 application:
85 Ismailbekova 2020, <https://centralasiaprogram.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/06/Konflikt-Na-Yuge-Kysgyzstana-Desyat-Let-Spustya-by-Aksa-
na-I-Philip-L.pdf> [05/01/2020].
122 EVALUATION OF THE UNICEF / UNFPA / UNDP PROJECT PROMOTING KYRGYZSTAN’S YOUTH COHESION AND INTERACTION TOWARDS UZBEKISTAN
For the project-related online activity, there is some evidence on Instagram. During consultation
with the Evaluation Reference Groups, a CSO implementing partner suggested Instagram as a
social network that is widely used by young people in the Southern regions of Kyrgyzstan.
The key word to be explored in Instagram is the title of the project in Kyrgyz that was often mentioned
by the participants in interviews – “Cheksiz dostuk” (borderless friendship).
There are 1,393 Instagram posts produced with the hashtag “cheksiz dostuk” in Kyrgyz
(#чексиздостук). A share of posts (163) was made by the NGO “Youth of Osh” that was charged
with implementing trainings for the youth in border communities. It was posting regular updates
of the project activities, guest speakers, and also initiated challenges and streams. “Youth of Osh”
posts were getting 400-600 views per post.
Individual project participants – youth in border communities made 173 posts from their private
accounts. These were photos from the project activities with other project participants and mentors.
Private posts were receiving around 30 views per post.
Several mentors were posting privately about the project activities too: there were 35 posts with
the #чексиздостук (“cheksiz dostuk”) hashtag. These were getting about 50 views.
There is a number of pages of youth border communities on Instagram, such as
• jashtar__padysha_ata
• jashtar_aravan
• jashtar_karatokoi
• young_aidarken
• jashtar_karasuu
• karasuu_jashtar_birimdigi
• jashtar_mamay
• aigul_too_jashtary_batken
All of these communities contain the word “youth” (jashtar in Kyrgyz) and geographical attachment,
such as Aidarken, Karasuu, Aravan, Padysha-Ata. Some of these pages were set up during the
project and subdued their activity after the project finalisation. Most continued their online activity.
Over 300 posts were posted by the border community pages about the project. The posts were
receiving about 30 views per post, which indicates a rather low online visibility, mostly among own
personal network.
PROMOTING KYRGYZSTAN’S YOUTH COHESION AND INTERACTION TOWARDS UZBEKISTAN 123
ANNEX 4: Sampling
The project took place in three provinces: Osh, Jalal-Abad and Batken. The target municipalities
were selected through a separate evaluation and identification of pilot communities through
consultations with heads and representatives of local self-government bodies, local residents, youth
activists, local councils, state administrations, independent experts, donor organisations and other
relevant structures at the national, provincial and regional levels. As a result, nine communities
bordering with Uzbekistan were selected as target sites:
• Osh province (population: 1,263,400 as of 1 January 2020)86
• Kara-Suu, Kara-Suu rayon, population of Kara-Suu city 27,100 people (as of 1 January
2020). Kara-Suu city’s population 60.7% are ethnically Uzbek and 30.8% are ethnic Kyrgyz
(according to the network of CSOs “For reforms and results”).
• Kashkar-Kyshtak, Kara-Suu rayon, population of 16.280 people (as of 2009).
• Tepe-Korgon, Aravan rayon, population of 7,556 people (2009 census)87. Aravan rayon’s
population is 83.53% Uzbek (2009 census).
• Jalal-Abad province (population: 1,167,500 as of 1 January 2020)88
• Kerben is the centre of the Aksy rayon, population of 28,300 people (as of 1 January 2017).89
Ethnic composition of population is 89% Kyrgyz, 8.9% Uzbek, and other groups.90
• Kashka-Suu village also belongs to the Aksy rayon.
• Kok-Serek village belongs to the Ala-Buka rayon.
• Batken province (population: 488,900 as of 1 January 2020)91 – the youngest and the most
remote province of the KR.
• Aidarken town, Kadamjay rayon, population of 10,331 (2009 census).
• Birlik village, Kadamjay rayon.
• Suu-Bashy, Leilek rayon, population of 503 individuals (as of 2009 census).
These regions have borders with the Uzbek territories and experience ongoing border related
conflicts.
The main recipients and partners of the project are the State and Municipal institutions, Civil Society
Organisations that have the mandate and functional tasks to work with youth in the border area.
The sample of municipalities for the evaluation was done according to the following criteria:
• All three provinces were covered; it was agreed that the fourth municipality should be from
Jalal-Abad province because there are very few other projects working there;
• Representative level of coverage/service by the project and CSOs;
• Geographic spread;
• Representativeness of urban settlements (rural/urban);
• Logistical feasibility (sufficient internet connexion and digital literacy of interviewees).
The sampled municipalities were Kashkar-Kyshtak (Osh, rural), Aidarken (Batken, urban) and Kok-
Serek (Jalalabad, rural) and Kerben (Jalalabad, urban).
86 National Statistics Committee: <http://stat.kg/ru/statistics/naselenie/> [20/10/2020].
87 <https://web.archive.org/web/20110810173811/http://212.42.101.100:8088/nacstat/sites/default/files/%D0%9E%D1%88%D1%81%D0%BA%D0%B
0%D1%8F%20%D0%BE%D0%B1%D0%BB%D0%B0%D1%81%D1%82%D1%8C.pdf> [20/10/2020].
88 National Statistics Committee: <http://stat.kg/ru/statistics/naselenie/> [20/10/2020].
89 <www.stat.kg/ru/news/chislennost-naseleniya-kyrgyzskoj-respubliki-na-1-yanvarya-2017-goda/> [20/10/2020].
90 <https://ru.wikipedia.org/wiki/%D0%9A%D0%B5%D1%80%D0%B1%D0%B5%D0%BD_(%D0%9A%D0%B8%D1%80%D0%B3%D0%B8%D0%B7
%D0%B8%D1%8F)> [20/10/2020] (probably 2009 census).
91 National Statistics Committee: <http://stat.kg/ru/statistics/naselenie/> [20/10/2020].
124 EVALUATION OF THE UNICEF / UNFPA / UNDP PROJECT PROMOTING KYRGYZSTAN’S YOUTH COHESION AND INTERACTION TOWARDS UZBEKISTAN
ANNEX 5: List of Interviewee categories
• Staff of the UN agencies involved in the project, and other international stakeholders (PBF, UN
Regional Office); data collected by the international and national consultant. The data informed
the evaluation on the theory of change of the project and its potential evolutions, the drafting
and implementing of the project, the challenges and adaptations in the course of the project.
• National duty bearers: State Agency for Youth and Sports of Kyrgyzstan, national youth-related
government agencies of Kyrgyzstan and Uzbekistan, Presidential Administration, Ministry
of Foreign Affairs, Ministry of Justice, Ombudsperson institution Central Apparatus (e.g.
Department of Protection of rights of children, women and families, Department of protection
of the social, economic and cultural rights), and the Prosecutor’s Office. This data was collected
by the national consultant with the participation of the international consultant on a need basis.
The data provided insight into the political will regarding peacebuilding actions, the changes
induced by the project regarding youth participation and collaboration with Uzbek counterparts,
perception of capacity-building measures provided by the project, and possible medium to
long-term effects of the project (ownership).
• Duty bearers in the Provinces: State Agency for Youth and Sports in KR (Provincial Departments),
Authorized Representative of Ombudsman in each province, Prosecutor offices in each rayon
(district) and in Osh city. Municipal-level representatives in the sampled municipalities, in
particular those involved with the implementation of the action plan of cooperation between
Batken, Osh and Jalalabad regions in Kyrgyzstan with respective neighbour regions in
Uzbekistan. Local service providers in sampled municipalities: territorial divisions of the
State Registry Service, law enforcement bodies, Community service centres (free consultative
legal aid), etc. This data was collected by the national consultant. The data pertained to youth
participation, inclusion of youth-led activities in local agendas, support of these initiatives by
local self-government structures, perception and results of capacity building measures, and
ownership at local level.
• CSO project partners and activists:
• Public Association “Youth of Osh”
• Accelerate Prosperity
• “International Debate Education Association in Central Asia” (IDEA CA)
• Association of legal clinics of Kyrgyzstan
• Public Fund “Tvoe pravo”
• John Galt VC
• “Women’s Peace Bank” PF
• Other UPSHIFT programme stakeholders: implementing partners and mentors
• Other Leadership and Innovation Academy stakeholders: implementing partners and
mentors
• Rights holders on local level:
• Participating youths in the sampled municipalities (with attention to representativeness
regarding gender, age and type of activity within the project);
• Parents, teachers, mentors, community members in the sampled municipalities;
• Parents involved in the parenting programme.
PROMOTING KYRGYZSTAN’S YOUTH COHESION AND INTERACTION TOWARDS UZBEKISTAN 125
ANNEX 6: Inception Report
https://www.unicef.org/kyrgyzstan/reports/promoting-kyrgyzstans-youth-cohesion-and-
interaction-towards-uzbekistan-2019-2020
126 EVALUATION OF THE UNICEF / UNFPA / UNDP PROJECT PROMOTING KYRGYZSTAN’S YOUTH COHESION AND INTERACTION TOWARDS UZBEKISTAN
ANNEX 7: List of Project Documents
UNFPA
1. Activity reports
LIA 1 Activity report 2019
LIA 2 Activity report 2019
LIA 3 Activity report 2019
Общественные слушания - отчет 2019
LIA 4 Activity report 2020
LIA 5 Activity report 2020
2. Media reports
Media report for Q 4 2019
Communication plan UNFPA 2019
Communication guideline 2019
Media report for Q 1 2020
Media report for Q 2 2020
media report online makeathon 2020
media report for PBF 2020
3. Travel reports
Travel report Osh March, 2019
Travel report Osh April, 2019
Schedule of presentations April, 2019
Travel report Osh June, 2019
Agenda of meeting in Jalal-Abad June, 2019
Agenda of meeting in Toktogul June, 2019
Travel report Osh July, 2019
Monitoring report July, 2019
Travel report JA Sep, 2019
Travel report Osh - JA Sep, 2019
Travel report Osh Sep, 2019
Travel report Osh Oct, 2019
Monitoring report Oct, 2019
Travel report Osh Nov, 2019
Travel report Batken Nov, 2019
Schedule of community talks Nov, 2019
Travel report Osh Dec, 2019
Agenda of training Dec, 2019
Travel report Jan, 2020
Agenda of training Jan, 2020
Agenda of training Jan, 2020
Agenda of trainings Jan, 2020
Travel report Batken Feb, 2020
Travel report JA Feb, 2020
Travel report Osh March, 2020
PROMOTING KYRGYZSTAN’S YOUTH COHESION AND INTERACTION TOWARDS UZBEKISTAN 127
4. Workplan progress report
WPR June, 2019
WPR Oct, 2019
WPR Jan, 2020
WPR April, 2020
WPR June, 2020
5. Stories (2020)
1. История Айзады Эркинбаевой
2. История Икболжона
3. История менторов
4. История МИГ
5. Статья №1_1
6. Статья №1_2
7. Статья №1_3
8. Статья №1_4
9. Карточки Чексиз Достук
10. Список историй успеха
6. Workplans
Workplan June, 2019
Workplan July, 2019
Workplan Aug, 2019
Workplan Sep. 2019
Workplan Oct. 2019
Workplan Nov, 2019
Workplan Dec, 2019
Workplan Jan, 2020
Workplan Feb, 2020
Workplan March, 2020
Workplan April, 2020
Workplan May, 2020
Workplan June, 2020
Workplan July, 2020
Workplan Aug, 2020
Workplan Sep. 2020
GPS Workplan KGZ04IDE_Rev4 Jan, 2020
GPS Workplan KGZ04IDE_Rev 3 July, 2020
GPS Workplan KGZ04YPI_Rev 2 2019
GPS Workplan KGZ04YPI_Rev 2 2020
128 EVALUATION OF THE UNICEF / UNFPA / UNDP PROJECT PROMOTING KYRGYZSTAN’S YOUTH COHESION AND INTERACTION TOWARDS UZBEKISTAN
7. Media plans (2019)
Медиаплан по ЮНФПА
Updated workplan.
UNDP (and Implementing Partners)
1. Annual Working Plan (Jan.2019)
2. Annual Working Plan (Jan.2020)
3. Meeting minutes, UNDP Peace and Development Staff with the Director of the Center for
Coordination of FLAC under the MoJ (March 2019)
4. Meeting minutes, discussion of the project implementation strategies (March 2019)
5. Mini-guide for community-based lawyers (2019)
6. Report, desk-research (2019)
7. Report on improving complaining mechanisms (2019)
8. Interim report on provided legal support (2019)
9. Interim report on provided legal support (Aug.2019)
10. Report on youth legal needs assessment (2019)
11. Report on content for video reels on complaint mechanisms for youth (2019)
12. Report on youth-to-youth legal aid support mechanisms (Aug.2019)
13. Report on Law school (Sept.2019)
14. Report on provided trainings for local and foreign students (Feb.2020)
15. Report on the results of the online Law school “Ukuktuk Mektep” for youth (May 2020)
16. Report on support to the development of the inclusive Roadmaps in Southern Universities
(June 2020)
17. Report on results of the activities for youth (Aug.2019)
18. Visual FAQ on FAQ by youth living in border area (Nov.2019)
19. Report on conducting short-term trainings on effective gender and age sensitive criminal
investigative procedures for young men and women living in border areas and for law
enforcement (Nov.2019)
20. Final report on conducting short-term trainings on effective gender and age sensitive criminal
investigative procedures for young men and women living in border areas and for law
enforcement (Dec.2019)
21. Action plan Youth Diplomacy Week- Action Plan (June 2020)
Back to the Office Reports:
• 01.2_Список участников
• BoR Nargiza Jenisheva
• BoR Nargiza Tashtemirova
• BoR Subanov_Pratova
• BTOR - Osh-Batken Jan 2020
• BTOR_Kaldarov
• Онлайн мониторинговый отчет
• Отчет мониторинга_Жалал-Абад
PROMOTING KYRGYZSTAN’S YOUTH COHESION AND INTERACTION TOWARDS UZBEKISTAN 129
• Отчет по поездке Ж-А, Ош, Баткен_2019
• Отчет по поездке_25-27 фев 2020 ЖА
• Фото_информационные встречи_2019
Implementing Partners’ Reports:
• IC reports-NT
• Desk research Report 113115_14.03.2019
• Interim Report on provided legal support 2019
• Interim Report on provided legal support_august 2019
• mini guide for lawyers обложка
• miniguide for lawyers UNDP
• PoA_IC_Nargiza Tashtemirova
• Report on implementation of legal aid support for youth living in border areas. 2019
• Report on improving complaint mechanisms
• Рег лист_ориентационный тренинг
• IC-Sabyr Samidin u
• Информационный бюллетень 2
• Информационный бюллетень 3
• Информационный бюллетень
• Календарный план на июль_Сабыр
• Календарный план на май_Сабыр
• Календарный план на октябрь_Сабыр
• Календарный план на сентябрь_Сабыр (1)
• Календарный план работы на октябрь_Самидин уулу Сабыр
• Отчет об оценке потенциала
• Предложения относительно механизма подачи жалоб
• Проект Плана действий
• IP-Association of legal clinics
• меморандумы с ОМСУ-и планы действий (for all 9 target locations)
• A4_UKUKTUK_AYMAK
• Report ALC_Aug.2019
• Report ALC_content for video reelson complaint mechanisms 2019
• Report ALC_Feb.2020
• Report ALC_Sept.2019
• Report ALC-January 2020
• report ALC-needs assessment 2019
• Report kyrg (Jashtar)
• report on Inclusive Roadmaps in Universities_ALC
• Баткен список участников ФГД май 2019
• Жалал-Абад список участников ФГД май 2019
130 EVALUATION OF THE UNICEF / UNFPA / UNDP PROJECT PROMOTING KYRGYZSTAN’S YOUTH COHESION AND INTERACTION TOWARDS UZBEKISTAN
• Календарь мероприятий АЮКК-Inclusive Roadmaps
• Описание_проект плана мероприятий_образовательный контент для молодежи_
АЮКК
• отчет Ассоциации юридических клиник Кыргызстана_ПРООН
• Отчет АЮКК_июль 2019
• отчет по итогам Укуктук мектеп онлайн АЮКК. 2020
• отчет по результатам анкетирования школьников октябрь 2019
• письмо с МОиН КР
• ПЛАН МЕРОПРИЯТИЙ ИЮЛЬ (1)
• ПЛАН МЕРОПРИЯТИЙ ПРОЕКТА ПРООН 1
• План мероприятий_РМ19166_АЮКК
• Программа выездных встреч (1)
• Программа выездных встреч_2019
• Программа конференции 26 сентября
• Регистрационные листы Ош ФГД май 2019
• Список участников конференции на 26 сентября (1)
• справочник на русском (1)
• форма обратной связи с клиентом
• Ход урока гражданство КР_ Салыжанова Э.
• ход урока Миграция _ Женишева Н.
• ход урока Права Человека_Женишева Н.
• Ход урока семейного права_Салыжанова Э.
• электр.рег лист участников
• IP-IDEA CA
• Проект _Консенсус_ (ПРООН) - финал
• IP-Infocom
• 05062020_Отчет по Истребованию
• KY_19 June Infokom-online briefing
• LOA Infocom eng
• LOA Infocom rus
• IP-Kosh-Araket
• Отчет сем, рег.лист_Кашкар-Кыштак АО_12 авг
• Отчет сем, рег.лист_Кок-Серек АО_21авг
• Отчет сем, рег.лист_мэрия г.Кара-Суу_13 авг
• Отчет сем, рег.лист_Тепе-Коргон АО_14 авг
• Отчет сем,рег.лист_мэрия г.Кербен_20авг
• Отчет сем,реглист_Кашка-Суу АО_19авг
• План действий_Кош-Аракет
• Рабсеминар_Айдаркен_24082020
• Рабсеминар_Бирлик АО_25082020
PROMOTING KYRGYZSTAN’S YOUTH COHESION AND INTERACTION TOWARDS UZBEKISTAN 131
• Рабсеминар_Суу-Башы_26082020
• IP-Set prigranichnoi molodezhi
• Детальный_план_Айдаркен СПМ
• IP-Tvoe pravo Public Fund
• Final report_Tvoe Pravo
• Детальный план работы
• Отчет о проделанной работе_Твое право
• План работ пособия для УЦ ГП
• IP-Youth of Osh
• KY_Action-plan-UNDP-MediaLab
• KY_narrative_progress_report#1_signed
• KY_narrative_progress_report#2_signed
• KY_Youth Diplomacy Week_action plan
Legal cases success stories
• Анализ сводной статистики
• Положение о ЦПУ АО_кырг.яз.
• Приложение 3 _Успешные истории (4 stories)
Media reports:
• 2018116 PBF Leaflet - Current UN Peacebuilding Fund Projects
• bayan#4_rus
• List of links to media posts
• poster and programme ВИРТУАЛЬНЫЙ КРУГЛЫЙ СТОЛ
• project update presentation
• Лифлет КЫРГ
• Медиаплан UNDP_113115
• photos, videos and visual material
National Stakeholders (correspondence)
• 07.2_Second Letter from SRS
• 31207 Batken Department of Youth Affairs requests for support of Youth Forum in Kadamjay in
August 2019
• 31208 Batken oblast requests for support of Youth Forum in Kadamjay in August 2019
• letter from GAMSUMO
• Letter_7371_to SRS_26.11.2019
• письмо АПППКР_ГАМФКС
• Письмо Молодежного комитета г.Ош
• письмо от МЮ КР 07.05.2019
132 EVALUATION OF THE UNICEF / UNFPA / UNDP PROJECT PROMOTING KYRGYZSTAN’S YOUTH COHESION AND INTERACTION TOWARDS UZBEKISTAN
Plans:
• AWP_00113115_2019
• AWP_113115_Youth cohesion UZB_2020
Resolutions – Round Tables:
• 01.1_Отчет фасилитатора
• 01.1_Программа_Форум в Оше
• 01.2_LOP
• final resolution_Virtual round table 24.04.2020
• final resolution_Virtual round table 24.04.2020_ENG
• Poster & Programme ВИРТУАЛЬНЫЙ КРУГЛЫЙ СТОЛ
RUNO meetings and minutes:
• Comms session agenda&LoP 12 July
Storytelling:
• История Камила и Бекназар
• История Муслима и Даниил
• История_Жанара_Мыктыбек_Айдаркен
• История_Икболжон_Рабия_Кара-Суу
UNICEF (and Implementing Partners)
Quarterly reports Q1 (14.11.2019), Q2 (November 2019 – February 2020) and Q3 (undated).
Report: ОТЧЕТ, Тема тренинга : Управление и бюджетирование ориентированные на
результат (Dec. 2019)
Workplan July-November 2020
2019 06 30 Media report
2019_Annual report_final
2020 06 15 Annex C_Media report_UNDP
2020 06 15 Annex D_ Media report UNFPA
2020 06 30 Annual Financial Report_IRF_final
181106_GYPI_Kyrgyzstan_UNICEF_ProDoc_Gateway
Annual Financial Report_IRF_final
Information on UPSHIFT methodology
Kyrgyzstan_NCE_Promoting Kyrgyzstan’s youth cohesion_113043_GW
Online UPSHIFT report_AP_YoO May 2020
UNICEF Template for Call for Expression of Interest CSOs
Отчет тренинга ГАМФСК
PROMOTING KYRGYZSTAN’S YOUTH COHESION AND INTERACTION TOWARDS UZBEKISTAN 133
Accelerate Prosperity:
Q1 Narrative Report under UNICEF “Cheksiz Dostuk” Project
Q2 Narrative Report under UNICEF “Cheksiz Dostuk” Project
Q3 Narrative Report under UNICEF “Cheksiz Dostuk” Project
Список_команд_Баткен_Ж-А_Ош (1)_list of 56 NEW project participants
Youth of Osh:
Q1 Narrative report and related files:
• Annex C -1 Quarterly report
• List of recruited mentors
• Locations list
• Media Clipping Report 1
• Media Clipping Report 2
• Outreach results_KY
• Pre - Post Test Results_KY
• Report on locations_Aidarken
• Report on locations_Aravan
• Report on locations_Birlik
• Report on locations_Kara-Suu
• Report on locations_Kashkar-Kyshtak
• Report on locations_Kashka-Suu
• Report on locations_Kerben
• Report on locations_Kok-Serek
• Report on locations_Suu-Bashy
• Stakeholders meeting
• ToT participants list
• Отчет по проведенному воркшопу
Q2 Narrative report and related files:
• Agenda of bootcamp Osh
• Agenda Pitching all locations
• Annex C -1 Quarterly report
• final list of UPSHIFT participants_KY
Q3 Narrative report and related files:
• Annex C -3 Quarterly report
• Narrative report on Online UPSHIFT
• online_Pitching_minutes_23042020_signed
• Social Media clipping Report (quarterly)
• БЭМС_доп инициатива в г.Кербен
134 EVALUATION OF THE UNICEF / UNFPA / UNDP PROJECT PROMOTING KYRGYZSTAN’S YOUTH COHESION AND INTERACTION TOWARDS UZBEKISTAN
• Жоодонбеков_отчет
• Критерии оценки инициатив
• Отчет по онлайн UPSHIFT
• Результаты оценки онлайн питчинга
• ФИО новых команд и проблемы (1)
Common files to all three RUNOs
Baseline datasets
• Baseline report (both English and Russian, Nov. 2019)
• 1_Анкета количественный опрос_РУС (1)
• обработка (2)
• correspondence regarding Данные по базовой оценке
• Финал база данных_UNICEF_900
Final site selection report with annexes
• Selected target locations_jointly YOO & IDEA CA
• Locations list
• Report on locations_Aravan
• Report on locations_Birlik
• Report on locations_Kerben
• Report Attachments_border_list
• Report_questionnaire_infographics
• Report_UNICEF_edited_25.02.19 by Ulan Nogoibaev
• анкета_UNDP_PBF
• анкета_UNFPA
• Население по югу в разрезе АА
• Список локаций и школ
Kyrgyz-Uzbek plans
• Memorandum
• Мероприятия - между приграничными областями КР и РУз на 2017-2022 гг
• План сотрудничества Баткен Фергана
• совместный план КР и РУз - joint plan of the Kyrgyz Republic and the Republic of Uzbekistan
Other PBO projects (preventing violent extremism, PVE)
• Selected 11 municipalities on PVE projects
• Correspondence regarding the mapping of communities involved in PBF projects
PROMOTING KYRGYZSTAN’S YOUTH COHESION AND INTERACTION TOWARDS UZBEKISTAN 135
Peacebuilding Priority Plans
• UNPBF in Kyrgyzstan_PVE PPP_2017-2020 SIGNED
• UNPBF_Kyrgyzstan-Priority-Plan-2013-2016-and-PBSO-approval-letter (1)
• Peace Nexus Foundation, Conflict and Peace Analysis Kyrgyzstan, April 2019
Project documents
• Final YPI Project Document Signed (Sep 2018)
• 1_PBF_project_document_Signed Final YPI Project Document 2018 KYR
• 2_Final M&E frame
• 3_Baseline report_final_rus
• 4_Baseline report_eng
• 113043_PD_YPI_Amendment 2020_FINAL
• Work plan_EN for RC
PBF project progress report and annexes (June 2020)
• Annex A_Youth initiatives and LSG contribution_UNICEF
• Annex B_Youth initiatives and LSG contribution_UNFPA
• Annex C_Media report_UNDP
• Annex D_ Media report UNFPA
• Annex E_Positive Human impact
• Annex F_Social Media Clipping Report_UNICEF
• Annex G_Mass Media Clipping Report__UNICEF
• Annex H_Human impact_parents_UNICEF
• Annual Financial Report_IRF_final
• YPI report_June 2020
PBF project progress report and annexes (November 2019)
• Concept of LIA_UNFPA_24.05.2019
• Concept of parenting program_draft
• Information on UPSHIFT methodology
• List of selected municipalities
• PBF project progress report _ June 2019_final 19062019
136 EVALUATION OF THE UNICEF / UNFPA / UNDP PROJECT PROMOTING KYRGYZSTAN’S YOUTH COHESION AND INTERACTION TOWARDS UZBEKISTAN
ANNEX 8: Information about the Evaluators
• Camille Massey, International Consultant, Team leader <camille.massey.pro@gmail.com>
• Team management
• Methodology
• Data collection: UN interviews on par with National Consultant
• Responsible for drafting and quality assurance of all deliverables
• Gulnara Asilbekova, National Consultant <gulnara.asilbekova@yahoo.com>
• Data collection: documents, interviews (duty bearers, UN jointly with International
Consultant)
• Review, analysis, support and advice
• Input for reports, review of Russian translation
• Human interest story
• Aiganysh Isaeva, National Expert <aiganysh.isaeva@gmail.com>
• Data collection:
• social media research (collection, analysis and input for final report)
• interviews (right holders)
• Human interest stories
PROMOTING KYRGYZSTAN’S YOUTH COHESION AND INTERACTION TOWARDS UZBEKISTAN 137