Center for Evaluation and Development, C4ED
Alexandra Avdeenko, Markus Frölich and Atika Pasha
Improving Adolescent Lives
in India (2015-2019)
An Impact Evaluation
March 2022

Improving Adolescent Lives in India
An Impact Evaluation
This evaluation is conducted
at
the Center for Evaluation and Development
by
Alexandra Avdeenko, Markus Frölich and Atika Pasha
(principal investigators and authors).
The evaluation has been commissioned by
United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF) Regional Office for South Asia
This version is from:
March 10, 2022.
Please do not cite or circulate without permission.

2
Executive Summary
Objective of the Adolescent Empowerment Program (AEP)
The AEP operated in four districts
of four states (Sibsagar in Assam, Visakhapatanam in Andhra Pradesh, Purulia in West Bengal
and East Singbhum in Jharkhand) and set out to cover 50% of the adolescent population in each
of these districts. The program’s goal was to empower adolescents and make them “agents of
change” for themselves and their communities, simultaneously making their surrounding aware of
and responsive to their rights and needs. For the same, the program worked along three pillars.
The goal of Pillar I was to empower adolescents through activities, including the formation of
adolescent groups, that increased their knowledge and encouraged dialogue with their peers to
enable an understanding of issues particular to their age group, and to remove barriers to their
agency and confidence. Depending on the activity, male and female adolescents within the ages of
10 to 19 were to be reached, both in and out of school. Pillar II was targeted more broadly towards
communities, especially influential community members and leaders, and parents of adolescents.
These adults were understood as the foundation that frames the knowledge, agency and confidence
of these adolescents, and targeting them would ensure a modification in the social norms and
traditions that hold adolescents back. Lastly, measures under Pillar III, focused on public services
and authorities. The knowledge of and access to services would enhance adolescents’ physical
and mental well-being, and help them overcome any external barriers to their empowerment. The
program was active from 2015 to 2019, with activities intensively implemented from 2017 to 2019,
by one or several UNICEF implementing partners in each district.
Objective of the Evaluation
In order to assess the impact of the AEP, an independent mixed-
methods evaluation of the program was undertaken. The evaluation aimed to answer questions
related to implementation fidelity, as well as relevance, effectiveness, and impact of the program
on adolescents’ lives in India. It assessed whether or not the program improved adolescent lives,
eventually increasing school retention or enrollment, prompting later marriages and delaying early
pregnancy. Of particular interest for the impact evaluation were the intermediate outcomes which
outlined the potential channels through which the desired changes were to occur. These were
developed following the Theory of Change (ToC), according to which, the program was to raise
awareness and knowledge on adolescents’ rights and strengthen supportive community structures to
facilitate their empowerment. The program’s effectiveness for key stakeholders such as adolescents,

3
parents and communities as a whole was to be tested through its effects on attitudes towards
adolescent’ empowerment and gender norms, changes in social norms and practices within the
community, as well as improved provision, access to, and enforcement of services and rights.
With this being a flagship program, with the eventual aim to scale up the intervention, the lessons
learned from this evaluation are to inform future programming, and to alleviate the barriers that the
implementation of future programs might face.
Evaluation Methodology
The evaluation followed a mixed-methods design, leveraging and com-
bining quantitative and qualitative data to answer evaluation questions. The quantitative component
was designed as a randomized control trial. Out of 82 program-eligible blocks in the sample, 42
(treatment) blocks were allocated to receive a set of foundational interventions, including adoles-
cent girls groups, or the Basic Package. The remaining 40 blocks served as a comparison (or
control) group, that received no intervention. In a second-stage of randomization, 480 villages
in the program blocks were equally divided into 4 groups, and assigned into the Plus Package,
which included additional activities on top of the Basic Package. As part of the Plus Package,
villages where assigned to (a) additional parents groups, (b) additional adolescent boys groups, or
(c) additional parents and adolescents boys groups. The last set of group of villages were assigned
to no additional activities besides the Basic Package, to serve as a comparison point to the villages
with additional boys and parents groups.
This evaluation relied on census data as a baseline, and on data collected between March and
October 2021 in 72 sampling blocks as the endline. While the program included 82 blocks, the
endline sample dropped 7 blocks because of their small relative size and 3 blocks because they were
entirely urban. All of these 10 blocks were from Andhra Pradesh. The data for the analysis were
acquired with the help of face-to-face surveys with adolescents, parents and community leaders. A
total of 6,787 interviews were conducted with the three actors mentioned above, in 699 villages.
The respondents stemmed from 419 villages in program areas and 280 villages in control areas.
Within the mixed-method set up of the AEP endline evaluation, the qualitative component com-
plemented the larger quantitative component, providing additional in-depth qualitative insights to
answer particular evaluation questions. In this line, the qualitative component focused on questions
related to implementation fidelity, relevance, and effectiveness, while the quantitative component
largely addressed the questions on effectiveness and impact. The qualitative component used a
detailed desk review of primary documents, in addition to key informant interviews, in-depth in-

4
terviews, and focus group discussions with key stakeholders, as well as with intended beneficiaries
(e.g., adolescents and parents) to answer the key evaluation questions. It followed a dual approach
for collecting data, where 32 implementing partners, United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF) staff
at state and country level, district officials and other key informants were interviewed remotely (via
Phone, Microsoft Teams and Skype), while 56 adolescent boys and girls aged 16 to 21, 45 frontline
workers and 29 parents were interviewed face-to-face, in four villages per state.
Findings and Implications
Implementation fidelity: The AEP evaluation leveraged endline survey
data, project monitoring data and project documentation to assess the reach and scope of activities
implemented as part of the AEP.
Based on the endline survey data, implementation reach in
treatment areas was modest: in 46% of villages none of the respondents reported awareness of
the implementation of any AEP activities within their villages. However, triangulating information
from both project monitoring data and endline survey data, the AEP reached a much larger share of
treatment villages (94%). Project monitoring data also reveals that the reach and scope of program
implementation varied considerably by state.
All in all, program awareness among respondents was low. Only 16% of respondents (including
adolescent, parents and community leaders) were aware of any AEP activity, and remember the
name of the implementing organization, within their villages. Low levels of awareness among
respondents also hint that the intensity of program implementation was modest, although recall
bias could have reduced reported levels of program awareness if respondents forgot about specific
activities implemented in their villages in the past four years. Among those who were aware of the
implementation of AEP activities in their village, a majority participated in these activities (86%)
and all (100%) participants reported they were satisfied with the activities.
Overall impact and final outcomes: The evaluation results show that at the aggregate program
level, the AEP had very limited impact on all final outcomes. At the state-level, however, program
effects present an assorted picture.
For the program on the whole, there is no evidence that the AEP led to a reduction in the incidence
of child marriage or early pregnancy. The small sample size for early pregnancy might explain the
absence of findings in this outcome. Qualitative evidence points in the same direction. Respondents
in qualitative interviews reported a general decrease in child marriage rates over the past decade.
However, in line with quantitative evidence, they mentioned this may not have been necessarily

5
associated with the AEP. Despite these declines in child marriages, participants felt that a longer
program duration - particularly in Assam’s tea gardens - could have yielded additional decreases
in child marriage rates. A few participants stated that the government’s (Kanyashree) scheme also
helped motivate and encourage parents to delay arranging marriages for their daughters. Financial
reasons emerged as an important factor driving child marriage in both qualitative and quantitative
evidence.
For education outcomes, the AEP led to a small increase in current school attendance for adolescent
girls aged 10 to 19 (90%), when compared to adolescent girls aged 10 to 19 in the control group
(88.3%). Likewise, the AEP is associated with a 2.1 percentage point (pp) increase in current
school attendance among older adolescent boys and girls (aged 15 to 23) (81.2%), when compared
to adolescent boys and girls of the same age in control areas (79.1%). The share of adolescent
girls aged 10 to 14 who reported to attend secondary education was also 3.1pp higher in treatment
areas, when compared to the share of adolescent girls of the same age in control areas. Finally,
the program also had positive effects when considering formal years of education. An increase in
0.3 years of formal education is found among adolescent boys and girls in treatment areas, when
considering results from all states combined. This increase is statistically significant for both girls
and boys. At the state level, more significant results are found:
Final outcomes at state level: The AEP adopted differing program modalities to fit the context in
which it was operating. Therefore, it is useful to examine the impact of the AEP on each state
separately. The program led to positive effects in several outcomes for the states of Andhra Pradesh
and Jharkhand. Given low levels of reported early pregnancies, results for early pregnancies at the
state level are not reported because of small sample sizes.
In treatment areas of Andhra Pradesh, the AEP is associated with a statistically significant reduction
in child marriage rates among adolescent girls and boys aged 10 to 19(2.9pp lower). This reduction
was stronger for adolescent girls aged 10 to 19 than for adolescent boys, at 4.2pp and 1.6pp,
respectively. In terms of education effects, no statistically significant effects on school attendance
rates were found for adolescent girls in any age group within treatment areas of the state. It is
important to consider these results with caution since Andhra Pradesh was the state with the largest
deviations from evaluation design.
In Assam, the AEP is associated with a higher incidence of child marriage among adolescent girls
aged 10 to 19, when compared to adolescent girls of the same age in control areas. On average,

6
4.3% girls in program areas reported being married of early, compared to 1.5% in non-program
(a difference of 2.8pp). Among adolescent girls aged 18 to 21 in treatment areas, the program is
also associated with higher child marriage rates (7.2pp). The overall low rates of reported child
marriage in Assam, in both treatment and control areas, may have influenced these results. In terms
of schooling, the AEP had a positive impact on school attendance rates among adolescent boys
and girls in treatment areas. Attendance was 3.8pp higher in program areas, compared to school
attendance rates of adolescent boys and girls of the same age in control areas (∼88%). Focusing
only on adolescent girls aged 10 to 19, the increase in school attendance is smaller (3.2pp) and only
weakly significant.
In Jharkhand, the AEP is associated with a 2.5pp lower incidence of child marriage rates among
adolescent boys and girls aged 10 to 19 (2.7%), when compared to adolescent boys and girls of
the same age in non-program areas (5.2%). This reduction is not statistically significant when
considering program effects on adolescent girls alone. The program is also associated with a
considerable, statistically significant, increase in schooling rates for adolescent girls aged 10 to
19 (6.2pp). That is, while 81.9% of adolescent girls in non-program areas reported they attended
primary or secondary education, 88.1% did so in program areas.
West Bengal was the state where the AEP presented a lower impact. Overall the AEP is not associated
with any impact in terms of reduced child marriage and early pregnancy or in terms of improved
schooling.
“Basic” versus “Plus” program activities At an aggregate level, increasing program intensity
through Plus package activities did not have any additional impact on child marriage, early preg-
nancy and school enrollment. However, when disaggregating the results by the three treatment
arms (boy group, parents group or boys and parent groups), villages with parents group in addition
to the Basic package showed positive effects on reduced marriage for adolescent girls (reduction of
1.7pp).
Intermediate outcomes: Adolescent empowerment, social norms, communication, and service
provision Intermediate outcomes were envisioned in the Theory of Change of the AEP as impact
pathways to shape final outcomes. All in all, the evaluation finds the AEP increased awareness of
child rights among respondents in treatment areas, while the impact on other intermediate outcomes
was more limited.
In relation to adolescent empowerment, the AEP shows positive effects in terms of supporting

7
awareness of child rights among adolescents, parents and community service providers. The share
of respondents in program areas that were aware of child rights was 25.1%, relative to 17.7%
in comparison areas - a 7.4pp improvement.
This improvement was even more notable when
comparing very poor respondents in program versus non-program blocks (+9.7%).
However,
improvements in other areas of adolescent empowerment were very limited or non-existent. In this
sense, improvements in terms of confidence were only observed among adolescent girls in Andhra
Pradesh. In the state program areas, 59.3% of adolescent girls reported they felt confident in doing
daily activities by themselves, while 46.7% did so in non-program areas. No impact is observed
in terms of improved well-being, self-efficacy or active support when comparing adolescents in
treatment and control areas.
Overall, the AEP had a limited effect in supporting communication outcomes. The program had
a small, positive effect (2.2pp) on the share of situations involving intergenerational dialogue that
adolescent boys and girls engaged in. This positive effect was stronger when focusing on adolescent
girls alone (2.8pp) and on older adolescent girls in particular (4.2pp). Likewise, intragenerational
dialogue increased among older adolescent girls (2.2pp). Qualitative evidence supports positive
program effects in terms of improved communication among adolescents and parents that partici-
pated in them.
At the aggregate level, evidence from quantitative data hints that the program did not significantly
shape social norms surrounding child marriage or equal opportunities for girls and boys. Only
when looking at program effects on male respondents, a small decrease in agreement with child
marriage is observed (2pp). In qualitative interviews, respondents who took part in the program
noted positive changes in regards to their attitudes about equality. This includes learning about
treating girls and boys equally in relation to their educational pursuits and becoming more aware
of the importance of providing girls the opportunity to attend school for the same length of time as
boys. However, respondents felt equality between girls and boys was something “people just say”
and that, “in real life, it’s not true”. All in all, it seems like increase awareness of adolescent rights
and equality principles were not enough to shape social norms.
Impacts for service provision reflect changes under the Pillar III of the program. Considering
results from all states, community leaders in program villages were slightly more likely to report
an improvement in access to community services (4.7pp). Likewise, access to Child Protection
Committees (CPCs) was improved in program areas (8.4pp). However results differ by state and
a large majority, namely 78.7% of community leaders, reported that CPCs were not present in

8
their village. Finally, the AEP is associated with a small increase in the government services that
adolescent girls were aware of (2.0pp) and could access (+2.1pp), when compared to adolescent
girls in comparison areas. This increase was higher when considering adolescent girls in Andhra
Pradesh, who showed an increase of 6.4pp in the share of government services they knew and of
5.0pp in the share of services they could access.
The change in some of the intermediate outcomes, especially at the community level, suggest that
the program activities did push adolescents towards the path of becoming “agents of change”,
although this effort did not translate at the last mile, within the impact level outcomes.
Relevance, key informants frequently reported a strong integration and explicit alignment of AEP
programming with existing government goals, schemes and initiatives. In addition to ensuring
the AEP’s alignment with international frameworks such as the United Nations Convention on the
Rights of the Child (UNCRC), they emphasized that the AEP had been well integrated with existing
government activities. However, in spite of the apparently close integration and ownership by the
government, many study participants felt they were incapable of continuing program activities in
the absence of Non-Governmental Organisations (NGOs) and/or UNICEF support and guidance.
According to them, this was due to lacking financial support, lack of knowledge and training as
well as limited motivation among facilitators and group members. Together with this, the wide
variety of contexts and conditions that the intervention needed to adapt to may have lowered
its impact. In many cases, the adaptations eventually undertaken were dependent on individual
initiative and responsiveness to feedback and good monitoring. As discussed below, this was not
always optimal. The local factors that required adaptation related to language, culture, religion,
security situation, need for inclusiveness and much more. This means that apart from increased
responsiveness, greater participation in program design and flexibility of intervention may help
provide the necessary adaptability to account for the immense diversity of local contexts.Finally,
despite generally positive assessments of the monitoring mechanisms in place throughout the AEP,
one District Officer requested stronger coordination and more regular meetings between AEP and
other service providers in order to ensure transparency in data sharing, for instance in relation to
adolescent healthcare seeking behavior, in the absence of which service providers “are missing the
opportunity of giving the service to those adolescents who are actually referred or who actually
need the service” (District Officer 2, West Bengal).

9
Recommendations
The recommendations in the report are based on the main lessons learned the
evaluation process, the implementation data, and finally, the quantitative and qualitative findings.
All recommendations are targeted at UNICEF country and regional office, but also can be directed
at a more general audience that plan to conduct a similar evaluation or roll out a program similar
to the AEP.
The recommendations are as follows:
• Create a communication strategy for child marriage and education programs that includes
a variety of methods for outreach, e.g., engaging with digital media outreach as well as
collaboration with the private sector.
• Create a strategy for the effective engagement of parents and adolescent boys in child marriage
prevention programs.
This should include strategies and recommendations to overcome
gender and availability barriers for the participation of boys and parents in child prevention
programs.
• To avoid variation in reporting, the evaluation team recommends the development of a
toolkit for programs targeting child marriage of (qualitative and) quantitative research tools,
techniques and standardized indicators for monitoring changes in knowledge, practices and
gender equitable attitudes.
• Embedding sustainability of programs as a key aspect of future programming is important, for
instance, by embedding programmatic approaches into existing government schemes based
on representative and rigorous evidence. It is also important to develop and implement an
exit strategy to be rolled out at least a year before the end of the program.
• A workshop targeted a building capacity of UNICEF program staff at country and regional
level, and potentially key Implementing Partner (IP) would ensure the understanding and
use of highly rigorous evaluation approaches, such as randomized control trial and quasi-
experimental methods.
Limitations
It is worth noting that the evaluation of the program started right before the COVID-
19 worldwide outbreak at the end of 2019, and experienced several hardships due the prolonged
lockdowns that followed. Even though the evaluation process successfully adapted to the new

10
conditions, data was collected a significant time after the end of the program. COVID-19 could
thus have diluted some of the effects between the end of program implementation and September
2021, particularly due to recall bias. This is particularly relevant for the implementation reporting
from respondents. Likewise, the pandemic has been shown to have significant adverse impacts
on the schooling, health and well-being of adolescents, affecting the intended outcomes of the
program. As a mitigation strategy, the evaluation has assessed impact on education outcomes from
different angles, including changes in current and past school attendance or in attitudes towards
education
Another deviation is that program implementation focused on a small subset of treatment blocks
in Andhra Pradesh. In this state, adolescent and parent groups, and mid-media activities were only
implemented in five states, two of which are included in the sample. Since implementation in these
blocks was decided for strategic reasons, it is hard to disentangle the reasons for this selection into
treatment. Moreover, seven blocks were dropped from the endline during sampling, because of
their relative small size. Since these blocks represent 0.5% of the overall number of villages in
Andhra Pradesh, results for the state are likely to be unaffected by this change. However, given
the deviations in the sample on top of the significant changes in program implementation, results
in Andhra Pradesh should thus be considered with caution. It is difficult to measure the extent of
bias in the results, and if it leads to lower or higher effects for the outcomes. To account for the
implications of these changes on results at the aggregate level, main outcomes were also calculated
excluding Andhra Pradesh, as a robustness checks. All in all, evaluation results for final outcomes
hold when excluding from the analysis treatment and control areas of Andhra Pradesh.
Finally, the program was implemented by several local implementing partners across and within
states, with differing approaches. Together with this, implementation intensity varied during the
time the program was implemented. In this line, program intensity varied between and within states,
and over time. The multiplicity of implementation approaches pose complications to accurately
assess the aspects of the AEP that ,ay have led to changes, or lack thereof, in outcomes of interest
of the evaluation.

11
List of Acronyms
𝑇0 Treatment arm 0
A adolescent
AEP Adolescent Empowerment Program
ag. against
agr. agrees
AQ adolescent questionnaires
ASHA Accredited Health Activist
AWW Anganwadi Worker
B boy
AGG Adolescent Girls Group
ABG Adolescent Boys Group
BPL Below Poverty Line
bro. brother
C4ED Center for Evaluation and Development
CCT Conditional Cash Transfer
CL community leader
CLQ community leader questionnaire
CM child marriage
comm. community
conf. confident
corp. corporal
pn. punishment
CP Child Protection
CPC Child Protection Committee
CR child right
dau. daughter
DCPO District Child Protection Officer
dec. decision
DHS Demographic and Health Surveys
disc. discussed
educ. education
FGD Focus Group Discussion
G girl
GG Adolescent Girls Group
gov. government
GP Gram Panchayat
HH household
i.l.3m. in the last 3 months
i.l.y. in the last year
ICC Interpersonal Communication Compe-
tence
IDA Intensity Data on Activities
IDI In-Depth Interview
IKEAF IKEA Foundation
imp. important
INR Indian rupee
intergen. intergenerational
intragen. intragenerational
IP Implementing Partner
IPC Inter-Personal Communication
IRB Institutional Review Board
ITT Intention-to-Treat Effect
KII Key Informant Interview
KK Kishoree Kontha
KP Kanyashree Prakalpa
KPI Key Performance Indicator
LASSO Least Absolute Shrinkage and Selec-
tion Operator
LATE Local Average Treatment Effect
m.c. multiple choice
mar. marriage
MDES Minimum Detectable Effect Size
mem. members
MIS Monitoring Information System
NFHS-5 National Family and Health Survey
NGO Non-Governmental Organisation
no. number of
NSS National Service Scheme
o.l.2w. over the last 2 weeks
o.l.4y. over the last 4 years
OLS Ordinarly Least Squares
P parent
PAP Pre-analysis Plan
PG Parents Group
PHFI Public Health Foundation of India
pp percentage point
ppl. people
PQ parent questionnaire
PRI Panchayati Raj Institution
QPMS Quarterly Progress Monitoring System
RBSK Rashtriya Bal Swasthya Karyakram
RCT Randomized Control Trial
rea. reason
rgd. regarding
RKSK Rashtriya Kishor Swasthya Karyakram
RKSK Rashtriya Kishor Swasthya Karyakram
SAG Scheme for Adolescent Girls
SDG Sustainable Development Goal
SED Secondary Education
SHG Self Help Group
SI summary indicator
sis. sister
SMC School Management Committee
STI Sexually Transmitted Infection
ToC Theory of Change
UN United Nations
UNCRC United Nations Convention on the
Rights of the Child
UNFPA United Nations Population’s Fund
UNICEF United Nations Children’s Fund
viol. violence
W women
w/o without
WDCW Women Development and Child Wel-
fare
WHO World Health Organization