EVALUATION REPORT 
December 2021 
 
 
 
 
Evaluation of Southeast Asia- 
Primary Learning Metrics 
  
 
SEA PLM  Evaluation 

 
 
 
EVALUATION REPORT 
December 2021 
 
 
 
 
Evaluation of Southeast Asia- 
Primary Learning Metrics 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
SEA PLM  Evaluation 

 
 
 
Issue and Revision Record 
Revision 
Date 
Originator 
Checker 
Approver 
Description 
1 
12 Nov 
2021 
Fergal Turner 
and Rachel 
Outhred 
Zeynep Ozcan 
and Jeffrey 
Marshall 
Emma Mba 
Draft evaluation report 
2 
6 Dec 
2021 
Fergal Turner 
and Rachel 
Outhred 
Zeynep Ozcan 
and Jeffrey 
Marshall 
Emma Mba 
Final evaluation report 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Document reference: R67 - UNICEF TP LTA1 43315402 | D4 | 2 
 
Information class: 
Standard 
 
 
Cambridge Education 
22 Station Road 
Cambridge CB1 2JD 
United Kingdom 
 
T +44 (0)1223 463500 
camb-ed.com 
Mott MacDonald Limited trading as Cambridge 
Education. Registered in England and Wales 
no. 1243967.  
 
 
Registered office: Mott MacDonald House, 8-10 
Sydenham Road, Croydon CR0 2EE, United 
Kingdom 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This document is issued for the party which commissioned it and for specific purposes connected with the above-captioned 
project only. It should not be relied upon by any other party or used for any other purpose. 
We accept no responsibility for the consequences of this document being relied upon by any other party, or being used for 
any other purpose, or containing any error or omission which is due to an error or omission in data supplied to us by other 
parties. 
This document contains confidential information and proprietary intellectual property. It should not be shown to other parties 
without consent from us and from the party which commissioned it. 
This report has been pr epared sol ely for use by the party which commissi oned it (the ‘Client’) i n connecti on with the capti oned proj ect. It should not be used for any other purpose. N o person other than the Client or any party who has expressly agreed terms of r eliance with us (the ‘Reci pient(s)’) may rely on the content, i nformati on or any vi ews expressed i n the repor t. W e accept no duty of care, responsi bility or liability to any other r eci pient of thi s document. This r eport is confi denti al and contains pr opri etary intell ectual property.

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The purpose of publishing evaluation reports produced by the UNICEF Evaluation Function is to fulfil a 
corporate commitment to transparency through the publication of all completed evaluations. The reports are 
designed to stimulate a free exchange of ideas amongst those interested in the topic and to assure those 
supporting the work of UNICEF that it rigorously examines it strengths, results, and overall effectiveness. 
The content of the report does not necessarily reflect the policies or views of UNICEF. 
 
The text has not been edited to official publication standards and UNICEF accepts no responsibility for error. 
 
Designations in this publication do not imply an opinion on the legal status of any country or territory, 
or of its authorities, or the delimitation of frontiers. 
 
The copyright for the support is held by the United Nations Children’s Fund.  Permission is required 
to reprint/reproduce/photocopy or any other way to cite or quote from this report written form. 
UNICEF has a formal permission policy that requires a written request to be submitted. For non-commercial 
uses, the permission will normally be granted free of charge. Please write to the UNICEF-EAPRO at the address 
below (or email) to initiate a permission request. 
 
Copyright:  
 
United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF) 
East Asia and the Pacific Regional Office 
Evaluation Section 
 
Date of Final Version:  
10 December 2021 
 
Published by:  
 
UNICEF East Asia and Pacific Regional Office 
19 Phra Atit Road Bangkok 10200 Thailand 
Tel: (66 2) 356-9499 Fax: (66 2) 280-3563 
E-mail: eapro@unicef.org or asia.pacific.evaluate@unicef.org 
www.unicef.org/eapro 

Cambridge Education | Evaluation of Southeast Asia-Primary Learning Metrics 
Evaluation Report 
 
i 
 
Executive Summary 
Background 
The Southeast Asian Primary Learning Metrics Programme (SEA-PLM) focuses on supporting 
the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) and the Southeast Asian Ministers of 
Education Organisation (SEAMEO) member countries to better understand the status of student 
learning achievement, in order to improve the quality of their education systems (UNICEF, 
2019). The programme assesses reading, writing, Mathematics and global citizenship, and 
administers questionnaires contextualised to the regional context (UNICEF, 2019, p. 9).  
The overall goal of SEA-PLM is that by 2025, all Southeast Asia countries have regional 
standardised quality measures to assess learning outcomes for Grade 5 students, and 
consistently use these to inform improvement within the education sector (SEA-PLM SEAMEO 
UNICEF, 2019b, p. 16).  
Evaluation purpose and objectives 
In 2020, an evaluation of SEA-PLM was commissioned by UNICEF. UNICEF has been a key 
participant and funder of SEA-PLM. Prior to investing in the longer-term expansion and 
institutionalisation of the survey, UNICEF at the present juncture wishes to take stock of the 
experience to date. The main purpose of this independent evaluation is to draw lessons learned 
and account for results to inform the next phase of the SEA-PLM Programme. The evaluation is 
retrospective (summative), but it is also forward-looking (formative) in providing conclusions and 
recommendations for regional- and country-level programming. The evaluation objectives 
include reviewing the relevance, effectiveness, efficiency, likely impact and sustainability of the 
SEA-PLM programme and identifying strategic approaches that can help better position 
UNICEF and collaborators for the SEA-PLM programme in achieving the Sustainable 
Development Goal agenda.  
The primary audience for the evaluation is UNICEF, EAPRO, SEAMEO, the SEA-PLM 
Secretariat, UNICEF Country Office Management teams and Education teams. The secondary 
audience includes governments, UN agencies, development partners, donors, non-
governmental organisations, and civil society organisations working in education, as well as 
external stakeholders such as contractors and other collaborators. 
Methodology 
The evaluation has assessed the validity of the results chain, as described in the Theory of 
Change (ToC). This included the identification of barriers to delivery, uptake, individual change 
and institutional reform, reviewing how delivery is achieved, identifying the likely mechanisms of 
impact1, and identifying any contextual issues that shape theories of how the intervention works. 
This was done by empirically verifying activities, outputs, and outcomes and assumptions posited 
along the causal chains in the ToC and drawing conclusions about what is working and what is 
not working in SEA-PLM and likely impact. 
The data sources include a desk review of SEA-PLM documentation, a literature review of large-
scale learning assessments, qualitative data collection with stakeholders in three SEA-PLM 
participating countries and with a wide range of regional stakeholders, secondary quantitative 
analysis of education data across Southeast Asia and a survey of stakeholders in SEA-PLM 
participating countries.  
 
1 It is recognised that as the programme has not completed a full cycle yet, impact of student learning cannot be assessed. However, the 
likely mechanisms for impact can be explored by testing the assumptions that exist along the results chain. 

Cambridge Education | Evaluation of Southeast Asia-Primary Learning Metrics 
Evaluation Report 
 
ii 
 
Findings 
The findings for each evaluation question are listed by Development Assistance Committee 
evaluation criteria. 
Relevance 
SEA-PLM alignment to i) the national development policies and priorities of national education 
stakeholders and ii) UNICEF’s national, regional and global objectives and intended impacts 
SEA-PLM objectives align significantly with national development policies and priorities and 
reflects a trend across countries in the region to prioritise learning data.  
SEA-PLM objectives align with UNICEF national, regional and global objectives, but are 
narrower than UNICEF’s broad focus on holistic child development. UNICEF national priorities 
within the area of education focus on, among other priorities, strengthening government 
capacity to improve the quality and relevance of teaching and the learning environment. At the 
regional level, UNICEF focuses on inequity in terms of access to education and learning, which 
aligns with SEA-PLM's stated objectives to improve capacity to analyze learning assessment 
data towards more equitable learning outcomes. 
Programming gaps or unaddressed needs - What could be done better? 
The activities related to the development of the assessment framework and delivery of the first 
round of data collection have been largely successful. However, SEA-PLM has so far missed a 
valuable opportunity to provide tailored technical capacity strengthening to support participating 
countries. The level of capacity and ambition varies significantly across countries in the region, 
a fact that was not well reflected in the approach to training. 
Communication planning and implementation can be improved. A communications plan was 
developed in part and is currently a working document. However, several of the priorities of SEA-
PLM outlined in the plan have not yet been reflected in programme activities.  
Related to this, there is a widely recognised need for a more structured approach to political 
advocacy, both for attracting new countries, as well as for supporting the use of data. A more 
structured forward-looking approach is missing. Ministries of education should be involved in 
setting key questions that they would like SEA-PLM data to answer.  
Regional endorsement activities took place during SEA-PLM’s emergence, however there 
is a need for a longer-term strategy. In addition, while fundraising activities with donors and 
countries have taken place, a long-term funding strategy is missing.  
Effectiveness  
The extent to which objectives and expected outcomes of SEA-PLM have been achieved or are 
likely to be achieved  
There is clear evidence that changes in national assessments are being informed by SEA-PLM. 
There is also unambiguous evidence that SEA-PLM data is supporting increased dialogue 
around learning data, but it is not yet clear how this will inform decision making. 
Participation in SEA-PLM is strengthening capacity of partner institutions but is largely limited to 
the development of tools and the collection of data. While capacity of individuals and units is 
growing, it is not clear whether or how this will translate into systemic change in capacity for 
assessments or the utilisation of data from assessments.  
Major factors influencing the achievement or non-achievement of SEA-PLM objectives and 
activities - Enabling factors, barriers and bottlenecks 

Cambridge Education | Evaluation of Southeast Asia-Primary Learning Metrics 
Evaluation Report 
 
iii 
 
The level of engagement in large-scale assessments (LSAs) has been a key enabling factor for 
participating countries, as has the work of UNICEF at the regional and country levels that has 
enabled the successes seen so far on SEA-PLM. The lack of long-term funding is a barrier to 
success in limiting the ability of the programme to attract and maintain long-term human 
resources. 
UNICEF and partners actions to ensure the objectives of SEA-PLM are met in the future – 
Country and regional level initiatives. 
Flexible, locally rooted support and advice and technical support proved to be a particularly 
effective mechanism for maximising SEA-PLM impact. Collaboration with academia and the 
private sector can help to multiply the amount of analysis of SEA-PLM data. Integration of SEA-
PLM into a broader assessment strategy has benefits both in use of data and in capacity building.  
Efficiency  
Strengths and weaknesses of SEA-PLM management processes - How could management of 
SEA-PLM activities be improved?  
The management structure of the SEA-PLM programme has become stronger over the course 
of the programme so far. Regional ownership of the programme is a key strength for SEA-PLM, 
but the balance between technical and political participation should be considered. More 
engagement from political or planning departments within ministries of education would support 
a stronger link between SEA-PLM data and policy throughout the programme cycle.  
In addition to political participation, ministries of education need greater support in packaging and 
messaging the results of SEA-PLM. Ministries of education in SEA-PLM participating countries 
are struggling to form a common and understandable language around SEA-PLM results, tie the 
results to an intended action and communicate with citizens.  
While the technical support arrangement has allowed for the delivery of the first round of SEA-
PLM data, it presents challenges for future rounds of the programme. Country and regional 
stakeholders do not view the technical support component of the work as value for money. 
Likely impact 
SEA-PLM’s contribution to national education systems and assessment practices and policies 
and discourses thus far - And positive and negative changes SEA-PLM has brought about at 
the regional level 
There are several tentative examples of where SEA-PLM has influenced education dialogue at 
the national level and there are concrete examples of how SEA-PLM is informing decisions for 
national assessments. There is wide ranging vocal commitment to use SEA-PLM data for a range 
of different policy issues across participating countries, however it is important to differentiate 
these conversations from concrete discussions around policy change. The impact of SEA-PLM 
hinges on the ability of the programme to build systemic change in the capacity to use SEA-PLM 
data and engage in the political aspects of policy change and education reform. 
Sustainability  
To what extent SEA-PLM activities, plans and strategies are fully integrated and implemented 
by the government (s), both technically and financially and to what extent are they likely to 
continue  
It is the view of many stakeholders that the SEA-PLM model has room for more cost efficiency, 
and for developing a clearer articulation of purpose. The question of sustainability for SEA-PLM 
is tied to SEA-PLM’s long-term vision for assessment in the region and the affordability of future 

Cambridge Education | Evaluation of Southeast Asia-Primary Learning Metrics 
Evaluation Report 
 
iv 
 
rounds. Funding availability is uncertain for future rounds and is dependent on a more cohesive 
articulation of what it is that SEA-PLM offers.  
Key barriers and bottlenecks towards achieving sustainability of SEA-PLM activities  
The continued existence of SEA-PLM is dependent on maintaining existing engagement, 
expanding to other countries in the region and establishing a clear narrative on what it provides, 
what differentiates it from other International Large-Scale Assessments (ILSAs), and/or how it can 
leverage participation in other ILSAs.  
For technical sustainability, the capacity of SEAMEO to provide technical and political support on 
assessment is a limiting factor.  
How SEA-PLM can attract other countries in Southeast Asia and better link other international 
and regional initiatives 
While the cost of participating is the most obvious barrier to entry, it is only one of the reasons 
identified through this evaluation. The second is technical. It is felt that countries were reluctant 
to participate until they had seen the quality of data and outputs produced from the first round. 
The third is political, worsened by the COVID-19 pandemic. Currently, it is not clear that the SEA-
PLM secretariat has the dedicated human resources to address all these questions. Support to 
political narrative building at the national levels is vital, so it is important to ensure that the team 
has the necessary level of political influence and understanding. 
Equity and Gender Equality 
The extent to which SEA-PLM is conducive to supporting the most marginalised populations 
and genders (including those furthest left-behind) 
Beyond the inclusion of contextual questionnaires for learners, teachers and parents, there is little 
evidence of equity being formally mainstreamed within SEA-PLM programme activities. There is 
evidence that countries are intending to use SEA-PLM learning data to answer equity questions. 
At the regional level, there are ongoing efforts to use SEA-PLM data to answer equity questions, 
including secondary reporting on gender differences in learning across the region, and the World 
Bank’s use of SEA-PLM data for looking at learning poverty.  
Conclusion 
The SEA-PLM Secretariat and partners have delivered a successful first cycle. This has taken 
place despite human and material resource constraints and is a commendable achievement for 
all the stakeholders involved. This has also been achieved despite the significant disruptions 
caused by the COVID-19 pandemic.  
There is evidence that SEA-PLM is relevant to the needs of participating countries. Increasing the 
amount of data available on learning is a priority in most of the countries that participated in SEA-
PLM. What is less clear is what exactly the relevance of SEA-PLM is, whether as a uniquely 
regional learning assessment, or as a compliment to other ILSAs operating in the region.  
The validity of the SEA-PLM Theory of Change from inputs to outputs is strong but can be 
improved. The strong delivery of technical outputs is necessary but not sufficient to deliver on 
SEA-PLM intended outcomes and impact. Overall, the success of SEA-PLM hinges on the ability 
of the programme to move from data delivery to planning for and supporting the uptake of 
evidence to inform decision-making. In addition, a more sustainable delivery model for SEA-PLM 
is needed to ensure the programme remains affordable for countries and attracts additional 
regional funding to support the programme in the future.  

Cambridge Education | Evaluation of Southeast Asia-Primary Learning Metrics 
Evaluation Report 
 
v 
 
SEA-PLM is entering a pivotal phase in 2022. Moving into the second round of data collection, 
SEA-PLM has left the “proof of concept” phase and the programme has proved that it can 
generate data that is robust and trusted by participating and observing governments. Now it must 
build on this and present a long-term strategic vision. 
Recommendations 
Based on the conclusions of this evaluation we propose a number of recommendations 
to be considered for the next round and beyond. Recommendations are divided between 
three strategic areas related to; i) building of regional assessment capacity; ii) strengthening the 
link between data and policy formation and; iii) establishing SEA-PLM’s regional presence. 
Strategic area one: Building Long Term Sustainable Capacity for Assessment in 
Participating Countries 
Recommendation 1.1: Work with countries to develop long term capacity objectives and 
needs. For the next round, SEA-PLM should work individually with countries to define roles and 
responsibilities and capacity gaps. This will also feed into a long-term sustainability plan.  
Recommendation 1.2: Develop a bank of sustainable and transferrable capacity 
development materials. While the first round of SEA-PLM has established a strong and valuable 
dataset, it produced little in the way of transferrable training or capacity building materials. SEA-
PLM should take the opportunity to build a library of resources that can be applied beyond those 
involved directly in training.  
Strategic area two: Strengthening the links between SEA-PLM data and policy decisions 
Recommendation 2.1: Plan strategically for the communication, uptake and use of data by 
policy makers. In the first round of SEA-PLM, data has resulted in countries recognising 
challenges with learning. However, assessment data on its own cannot necessarily influence are 
the policy and politics streams. The theory of change for the next round of SEA-PLM should 
include activities which address the political aspects of policy change.  
Recommendation 2.2: Mainstream equity considerations into SEA-PLM design decisions. 
Equity considerations should be tailored to each country and driven by (1) an education sector 
analysis concerning equity (usually available for GPE member countries) and (2) the research 
questions that Ministries of Education have regarding inequity.  
Strategic Area three: Building SEA-PLM as a sustainable regional body  
Recommendation 3.1: Establish network of technical assistance individuals and 
agencies to support technical teams. In addition to, or as an eventual replacement for, a sole 
technical assistance supplier, SEA-PLM should see itself as having a coordinating and 
networking function for technical assistance. This would potentially be a more cost-effective 
approach to technical assistance, as well as promoting and supporting technical resources 
within the region. 
Recommendation 3.2: Develop a collaboration and networking strategy. In addition to an 
external communications strategy, the strategy for the next round of SEA-PLM should explicitly 
focus on networking and collaboration.  
Recommendation 3.3: Plan strategically for the establishment of SEA-PLM as a regional 
technical hub on learning assessment and education quality. In the long-term, SEA-PLM 
should consider the development of a regional technical agency, housed within SEAMEO. This 
agency would provide technical inputs for SEA-PLM but would also support other assessment 
activities across the region for participating and non-participating countries.  

Cambridge Education | Evaluation of Southeast Asia-Primary Learning Metrics 
Evaluation Report 
 
vi 
 
Contents 
Executive Summary 
i 
Background 
i 
Evaluation purpose and objectives 
i 
Methodology 
i 
Findings 
ii 
Relevance 
ii 
Effectiveness 
ii 
Efficiency iii 
Likely impact 
iii 
Sustainability 
iii 
Equity and Gender Equality 
iv 
Conclusion 
iv 
Recommendations 
v 
List of abbreviations 
xi 
1 
Introduction 
1 
1.1 
Background 
1 
1.2 
Report structure 
1 
1.3 
Colour-Coding scheme used throughout the report 
1 
2 
The Evaluation SEA-PLM Programme in Southeast Asia 
3 
2.1 
Regional and country context 
3 
2.2 
Timeline of intervention and implementation status 
3 
2.2.1 
Emergence of SEA-PLM 
3 
2.2.2 
Institutional arrangements 
4 
2.2.3 
Assessment framework 
5 
2.3 
Reconstructed Theory of Change (ToC) 
6 
3 
Evaluation purpose 
8 
3.1 
Type of evaluation (why being done at this time) 
8 
3.2 
Primary and secondary audiences 
8 
3.3 
Duty bearers and rights holders (and their involvement) 
8 
3.4 
Evaluation objectives 
9 
3.5 
Scope of the evaluation 
9 
3.6 
Any adaptations from the initial ToR 
9 
4 
Methodology 
10 
4.1 
Evaluation criteria and questions 
10 
4.2 
Evaluation framework 
11 

Cambridge Education | Evaluation of Southeast Asia-Primary Learning Metrics 
Evaluation Report 
 
vii 
 
4.3 
Evaluation design and methods 
11 
4.3.1 
Data collection methods 
11 
4.3.2 
Data collection instruments 
12 
4.3.3 
Data collection consistency and quality 
13 
4.4 
Data analysis 
13 
4.4.1 
Qualitative Comparative Analysis 
13 
4.4.2 
Synthesis 
13 
4.4.3 
Triangulation, bias and informed judgements 
13 
4.5 
Equity and gender 
13 
4.6 
Ethics 
13 
4.7 
Gaps and limitations 
14 
5 
Findings 
15 
5.1 
Relevance 
15 
5.1.1 
To what extent is SEA-PLM aligned to i) the national development 
policies and priorities of national education stakeholders and ii) 
UNICEF’s national, regional and global objectives and intended 
impacts? 
15 
5.1.2 
What are the programming gaps or unaddressed needs? What 
could be done better? 
16 
5.2 
Effectiveness and Efficiency 
19 
5.2.1 
What were the strengths and weaknesses of SEA-PLM 
management processes? How could management of SEA-PLM 
activities be improved? 
19 
5.2.2 
To what extent have the objectives and expected outcomes of 
SEA-PLM been achieved or are likely to be achieved? 
22 
5.2.3 
What have been the major factors influencing the achievement or 
non-achievement of SEA-PLM objectives and activities? What 
were the enabling factors, barriers and bottlenecks? 
24 
5.2.4 
What can UNICEF and its partners do to ensure the objectives of 
SEA-PLM are met in the future? What kind of initiatives should 
UNICEF prioritize at the country and regional levels? 
24 
5.3 
Likely Impact 
25 
5.3.1 
How has SEA-PLM contributed to national education systems and 
assessment practices and policies and discourses thus far? And at 
the regional level, what positive and negative changes has SEA-
PLM brought about? 
25 
5.4 
Sustainability 
27 
5.4.1 
To what extent can SEA-PLM activities, plans and strategies be 
fully integrated and implemented by the government (s), both 
technically and financially? To what extent are they likely to 
continue? 
27 
5.4.2 
What are the key barriers and bottlenecks towards achieving 
sustainability of SEA-PLM activities? 
28 
5.4.3 
How can SEA-PLM attract other countries in Southeast Asia and 
better link other international and regional initiatives? 
29 
5.5 
Equity and gender equality 
30 

Cambridge Education | Evaluation of Southeast Asia-Primary Learning Metrics 
Evaluation Report 
 
viii 
 
5.5.1 
To what extent is SEA-PLM conducive to supporting the most 
marginalized populations and genders (including those furthest 
left-behind)? 
30 
6 
Conclusions and lessons learned 
32 
7 
Recommendations 
34 
7.1 
Building Long Term Sustainable Capacity for Assessment in Participating 
Countries 
35 
Unmissable opportunities 
35 
Long term visions 
35 
7.2 
Strengthening the links between SEA-PLM data and policy decisions 
35 
Quick Wins 
35 
Unmissable opportunities 
36 
7.3 
Building SEA-PLM as a sustainable regional body 
36 
Unmissable opportunities 
36 
Long-term visions 
37 
8 
Bibliography 
38 
Annex A Terms of Reference 
40 
Annex B Access, quality and equity of education in SEA 
51 
B.1 
Access and equity across the region 
51 
B.2 
Learning assessment programmes and Southeast Asia 
53 
B.3 
Education System Quality Indicators in SEA-PLM participating countries 
54 
B.4 
Access, retention, survival and equity in SEA-PLM participating countries 
56 
Annex C SEA-PLM logframe 
59 
Annex D Reconstructed ToC evidence 
62 
D.1 
Impact 
62 
D.2 
Longer term and intermediate Outcomes 
62 
D.3 
Outputs 
63 
D.4 
Activities 
64 
D.5 
Inputs 
67 
D.6 
Assumptions to be tested 
67 
Annex E Evaluation matrix 
69 
Annex F Evaluation Framework and Methodology 
75 
F.1 
Conceptual framework 
75 
F.2 
Evaluation approach 
76