Multi-country evaluation of UNICEF’s response to the Venezuela outflow 
crisis (2019-2021) 
 
 
© EAI Tulcán - Julia Durand / DARA 
 
Ecuador Country Case Study 
October 2022 
 
 
Julia Durand – Evaluator 
Daniela Ruegenberg – Data Analyst 
Elsa Brunet – Researcher 
Tim Morris – Editor 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Disclaimer 
 
 
 
 
The views presented in this document are those of the authors and do not necessarily represent the views of  
UNICEF. 
 
The data collection for this country case study was conducted in November and December 2021, and the 
reporting phase was finalised in October 2022. Although findings were not updated, recommendations were 
workshopped with the Ecuador Country Office and regional office in August 2022. 
 
 

 
 
Abbreviations & Acronyms 
 
AAP
Accountability to Affected Populations
AGD 
Age, Gender and Diversity 
CFD 
C4D - Communication for Development 
BPRM
US Bureau of Population, Refugees, and Migration
CBI 
Cash Based Interventions 
CCC 
Core Commitments for Children In Humanitarian Action 
CEAP
Corporate Emergency Activation Procedure 
CEBAF
Centros Binacionales de Atención a la Frontera
CHS 
Core Humanitarian Standards 
CP
Child Protection
CSO 
Civil Society Organisation 
DCF 
Daniëlle Children´s Fund  
DyA
Desarrollo y Autogestión
CWC 
Communicating with Communities 
ECO 
Ecuador Country Office 
EAI
Espacio de Apoyo Integral (Integral Support Space)
ECW 
Education Cannot Wait 
EQ 
Evaluation Question 
FGD
Focus Group Discussion
FO 
UNICEF Field Office 
GAD 
Gobierno Autónomo Descentralizado (Decentralized Autonomous 
Government) 
GBV 
Gender Based Violence 
GoE 
Government of Ecuador 
GTRM
Grupo de Trabajo para Refugiadas y Migrantes (Working Group for Refugees 
and Migrants) 
HPD 
Humanitarian Programme Document 
DTM
Displacement Tracking Matrix
FO 
Field Office 
HAC 
Humanitarian Action for Children appeal 
HPM
Humanitarian Performance Monitoring
IOM 
International Organization for Migration 
IP 
Implementation Partner 
IR
Inception Report
LACRO 
UNICEF Latin America and Caribbean Regional Office 
IUNV 
International United Nations Volunteer 
KI
Key Informant
M&E 
Monitoring and Evaluation 
MIES
Ministerio de Inclusión Económica y Social (Ministry of Economic and Social 
Inclusion) 
MinEduc 
Ministerio de Educación (Ministry of Education) 
MoG 
Ministerio de Gobierno 
NFI
Non-Food Item
NUNV 
National United Nations Volunteer  
OCHA 
UN Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs 

 
 
OECD-DAC 
Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development, Development 
Assistance Committee 
PCA
Project Cooperation Agreement
PSEA 
Prevention of Sexual Exploitation and Abuse  
R4F 
Response for Venezuela 
RCCE
Risk Communication and Community Engagement
RMRP 
Regional Migration Response Plan 
SGBV 
Sexual and Gender-based Violence  
SSA
Special Service Agreements 
ToC 
Theory of Change 
UASC 
Unaccompanied and Separated Children 
UNCCS
United Nations Common Cash Statement 
UNHCR
Office of the UN High Commissioner for Refugees
UNV 
United Nations Volunteer 
R4V
Interagency Coordination Platform for Refugees and Migrants 
VMC 
Venezuela Migration Crisis 
WASH
Water Sanitation and Hygiene
WFP
World Food Programme
 
 
 

 
 
Table of Contents 
 
Executive Summary 
1 
1. 
Background and context of Ecuador’s country response to the Venezuelan Migration Crisis (VMC) 
5 
1.1 Context 
5 
1.2 Object of the evaluation and country case studies 
7 
Overview of UNICEF’s response to the VMC in Ecuador 
7 
Funds mobilisation 
10 
2. 
Purpose, objectives and scope of Ecuador CO case study 
11 
2.1 Purpose 
11 
2.2 Objectives 
12 
2.3 Scope 
12 
2.4 Stakeholders 
13 
3. 
Evaluation criteria and questions 
13 
4. 
Methodology of the Ecuador country case study 
13 
4.1 Document review 
14 
4.2 Context analysis and timeline 
14 
4.3. Country visit 
15 
4.4 Semi-structured key informant interviews 
15 
4.5 Engagement with families of children on the move and host communities 
15 
4.6 Data analysis 
15 
4.7 Feedback loops and validation process of the case study 
16 
5. 
Limitations of the case study 
16 
6. 
Ethical and gender considerations 
17 
7. 
Findings 
18 
7.1 Appropriateness 
18 
7.2 Effectiveness 
25 
7.3 Coverage 
43 
7.4 Coherence and coordination 
45 
7.5 Efficiency 
48 
7.6 Connectedness 
49 
7.7 Cross-cutting: gender, equity and accountability 
51 
8. 
Good practices 
52 
9. 
Conclusions 
53 
10. 
Recommendations 
54 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
List of Tables 
 
Table 1. Humanitarian Funding Needs and Gaps – 2019 Ecuador ............................................................................ 10 
Table 2. Humanitarian Funding Needs and Gaps – 2020 Ecuador ............................................................................ 10 
Table 3. Humanitarian Funding Needs and Gaps – 2021 (Jan- March) Ecuador ...................................................... 10 
Table 4. stakeholder overview .................................................................................................................................. 13 
Table 5. Summary of HAC Health indicators per year............................................................................................... 29 
Table 6. HPM additional indicators related to Health .............................................................................................. 29 
Table 7. Summary of HAC nutrition indicators per year ........................................................................................... 30 
Table 8. Summary of HAC WASH indicators per year ............................................................................................... 31 
Table 9. Summary of HAC Education indicators per year ......................................................................................... 33 
Table 10. HPM additional indicators related to Education ....................................................................................... 34 
Table 11. Summary of HAC Child Protection indicators per year ............................................................................. 35 
Table 12. HPM additional indicators related to Child Protection ............................................................................. 36 
Table 13. Summary of HAC Social inclusion/Protection indicators per year ............................................................ 37 
Table 14. Summary of HAC C4D indicators per year ................................................................................................. 38 

1 
Executive Summary 
Background 
The protracted and ongoing economic, social and political crisis in Venezuela has provoked the greatest exodus in 
the history of the Latin American and Caribbean region. By 2022, more than six million Venezuelans had fled their 
country. The national asylum system of Ecuador, a signatory of the main international treaties and conventions 
relating to migration and refugees, was overwhelmed. By December 2021 it was estimated there were 508,000 
refugees and migrants in Ecuador. As the Venezuelan influx increased and the COVID-19 pandemic engulfed the 
nation, the Government of Ecuador (GoE) progressively tightened entry requirements,  
While before the onset of the Venezuela Migration Crisis (VMC) Venezuelans could enter Ecuador with a valid ID 
card and obtain a tourist visa for 180 days, they are now required to obtain in advance a humanitarian visa from 
an Ecuadorian consulate. Swift policy changes have had a devastating effect on the Venezuelan population, outside 
and inside Ecuador, leading to an upsurge in unauthorised border crossings and concomitant vulnerability to 
abuse, sexual exploitation and human trafficking. Accurate enumeration is impossible due to the extent of 
unauthorised border crossings into and out of Ecuador. 
Humanitarian Response 
At regional level, the Grupo Interagencial sobre Flujos Migratorios Mixtos (Interagency Group on Mixed Migratory 
Flows, GIFMM) was established to coordinate the humanitarian response to the Venezuelan migration outflow 
(rather than classic cluster coordination mechanisms). UNICEF Ecuador played a critical coordination role in the 
Grupo de Trabajo para Refugiadas y Migrantes (GTRM), Ecuador’s national coordination platform. In February 
2019, UNICEF triggered its Level 2 Corporate Emergency Activation Procedure. This was raised to Level 3 in April 
2020 as COVID-19 took hold.  
UNICEF has focused on minimising such consequences for displaced Venezuelan children as food insecurity, 
vulnerability to human trafficking, exposure to violence on the road, poverty and exclusion from education. In 
partnership with other UN agencies, GoE and sub-national actors in a decentralised governance system, UNICEF 
has sought to:  
 
Ensure continuity of health care for migrant families 
 
Support water, sanitation and hygiene (WASH), including by provision of hygiene kits and handwashing 
points  
 
support remote learning made necessary by the pandemic 
 
promote school entry for migrant and refugee children, mitigate high drop-out levels and challenge 
xenophobia 
 
provide child protection, psychosocial support and mental health as well as access to social and justice 
services 
 
roll out innovative and collaborative cash transfer programmes for migrant families 
 
generate evidence for better policy- and decision-making 
 
provide local level support to most affected geographical areas through capacity building. 
UNICEF´s VMC response, both in Ecuador and in other countries studied, has been consistently under-funded, with 
grave consequences in particular sectors.  
Evaluation purpose, objective, intended audience and methodology 
This country case study is one in a series of five which reviews the diverse ways that UNICEF through its 
development and humanitarian interventions has responded to the VMC since February 2019. The evaluation is 
intended to shed light on good practices and lessons learned from the experience of how UNICEF country offices 
have responded to an unexpected and protracted crisis and how the UNICEF Latin America and Caribbean Regional 
Office and UNICEF HQ can better support the Ecuador Country Office (ECO) and other COs in current and future 
responses to mass population movements in the region. It further seeks to analyse the extent to which changes in 
social norms, including those related to gender and xenophobia, are envisioned and strategies are in place and are 

2 
measurable. The primary users of this evaluation are UNICEF staff – in Country Offices (COs) in which country case 
studies were carried out, in the Latin America and Caribbean Regional Office (LACRO) and in New York 
Headquarters (HQ) – as well as IPs, government counterparts and affected populations. 
The evaluation uses criteria of the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development / Development 
Assistance Committee adapted to humanitarian interventions in line with guidelines of the Active Learning 
Network for Accountability and Performance in Humanitarian Action. These are appropriateness, effectiveness, 
efficiency, coherence and coordination, coverage and connectedness. 
The evaluation focused on three main cities/regions, analysing UNICEF´s urban and rural interventions in locations 
for migrants, refugees and host populations, particularly assessing responses to permanent or in-transit 
populations as well as host communities. Semi-structured interviews were carried out (on-site and remotely) with 
key in-country informants (both at national and field level) based on the stakeholder analysis in the Inception 
Report and adapted during the data collection phase in Ecuador. There were sex- and age-disaggregated group 
discussions with Venezuelan migrants on the move, with focus on families with children involved in UNICEF-funded 
programmes. 
This evaluation report was submitted to UNICEF in June 2022 and went through a validation process which included 
a workshop in Quito in August 2022. 
Findings 
Appropriateness 
Overall, UNICEF’s response was appropriate considering the magnitude of VMC. UNICEF ECO, despite obstacles, 
developed and adapted several response strategies and implementations modalities to the different contexts and 
populations entering Ecuador, including adaptation to the COVID-19 pandemic and adaptations to include more 
integration measures to respond to migrants and host communities. However, staffing and short-term contracts 
within UNICEF and with implementing partners (Ips) have limited capacity to appropriately respond to the needs 
of migrant and host communities. 
As will be explored further in the Regional Synthesis report, in Ecuador, as in all five Country Case Studies, the 
evaluation notes a lack of a fully operationalised, overarching regional strategy to address what was a regional 
emergency. In its absence the Humanitarian Action for Children (HAC) appeal has been the main tool for 
harmonising implementation approaches between COs addressing the VMC. 
While the VMC was an unexpected humanitarian situation before 2016, ECO’s lack of emergency capacity and 
tools affected the response from the outset. This was corrected over time, and ECO became a champion in 
preparedness and contingency planning. The response to the VMC has been always articulated as short-term. This 
continues to impact UNICEF’s capacity to transition to the medium to long term. 
In collaboration with partners, UNICEF has gathered information about the migrant population yet learning about 
their needs remains a challenge in terms of incorporating feedback into programming. UNICEF and partners are 
providing migrants with useful information and putting in place feedback mechanisms through IPs. However, the 
operationalization of accountability to the affected population (AAP) and closing the feedback loop remains a 
weakness. UNICEF is implementing actions and efforts to address information gaps around gender-based violence 
(GBV), prevention of sexual exploitation and abuse (PSEA) and human trafficking but these need to be 
strengthened.  
Effectiveness 
The VMC response has been severely underfunded throughout sectors. A lack of strong regional and global 
advocacy impacted funding and informants raised doubts about the R4V as a strong advocacy platform. Despite 
funding challenges, ECO has developed strong capacity-building, training and technical support, particularly in 
WASH, Health, CP, education and social inclusion.  
There have been inconsistencies in monitoring and reporting and setting indicators and targets to measure results. 
Less than 40 per cent of indicators have met the targets each year of the response during 2019-2020. In 2020, 
COVID-19 caused many planned activities to be either cancelled or changed. At the same time some sectors, such 
as CP and WASH, were able to increase their outreach. There have been achievements to protect the human rights 
of children on the move. However, progress on mainstreaming migration and enhancing life opportunities for 
migrant children and their families has been limited.  

3 
ECO has been able to coordinate effectively with other partners such as government, UN agencies and 
nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) to improve the response given to migrants and host communities. 
Coordination was done mainly in data collection, cash-based interventions (CBI), en route responses and capacity 
building with government. 
Coverage 
UNICEF outreach and coverage is limited by the ability to properly identify those in need (given data gaps) and the 
saturation of national services. However, a lot is being done by UNICEF to bridge the gaps left by strained services 
and support national and local services; and UNICEF was able to respond to the needs of the vulnerable groups 
such as unaccompanied and separated children (UASC), victims of GBV, pregnant and lactating women, and 
migrants in transit. In general UNICEF has been able to leverage partnerships with line ministries, IPs and local 
governments to respond to the needs of the most vulnerable. The joint CBI with UNHCR and WFP allowed to 
extend coverage to vulnerable migrants. ECO´s previous experience working with line ministries and civil society 
actors facilitated dialogue to influence high-level decisions in a challenging political environment, notably in 
supporting the development and implementation of the Special Procedure for Children and Adolescents and their 
Families in Contexts of Human Mobility. 
Coherence and coordination 
UNICEF is seen as a main VMC actor in Ecuador by sister UN agencies, NGOs, civil society organization (CSOs) and 
government counterparts. UNICEF was able to strongly coordinate with local and national actors to implement 
innovative structures such as Integral Support Space (Espacio de Apoyo Integral, EAI) and flexible mechanisms such 
as with CBI. ECO has been able to leverage partnerships to build joint communications campaigns to combat 
xenophobia and discrimination. Despite these effective coordination efforts, overall inter-agency coordination is 
not seen as coherent. There has been duplication of coordination mechanisms between the GTRM and the cluster 
system. A changing national context and high impact of COVID-19 made it difficult to align with national priorities. 
There has been lack of structured coordination mechanisms between UNICEF staff across the regions. Improved 
coordination is needed to raise the profile of UNICEF to support advocacy challenges, to coordinate donor support 
and to share good practices and challenges. 
Efficiency 
UNICEF has pursued efficiency by expanding previous relationships with government institutions and IPs to avoid 
overlap. UNICEF is seen as being flexible in funding and programme extensions, making IP work with migrant 
children and their families more efficient. However, UNICEF, like other response agencies, has not been able to 
find efficient solutions to monitor irregular entries. While UNICEF worked in collaboration with organisations to 
bridge the information gap, mainly at border crossings, information management and monitoring of population 
remains a major gap mainly due to irregular cross-border movements. 
Connectedness 
UNICEF has implemented several activities linking the emergency response to longer-term development goals. 
UNICEF worked towards reinforcing national structures and capacities for government and civil society, 
strengthening legal protection and enhance coverage for UASC, and advocating for the inclusion of local 
organisations to empower and build capacity. However, the short-term nature of the response, the nature of 
funding and short-term contractual arrangements affects sustainability of the actions carried out. A lack of a clear 
regional strategy has limited adoption of a whole-of-migration approach. 
Social inclusion, gender and disability 
UNICEF has been working to innovate in social inclusion, particularly being a pilot country for the UN`s Common 
Cash Statement (UNCCS) initiative1 and implementing CBI in coordination with other UN agencies. Although gender 
equality, GBV and PSEA are core aspects of the response, ECO does not have a gender specialist to support the 
response. ECO was able to bridge this gap by regularly requesting support from the LACRO GBV specialist, resulting 
in GBV awareness and prevention training for frontline workers, including civil servants. However, UNICEF should 
monitor the state of activities related to sexual and gender-based violence (SGBV) risk prevention in the EAIs, 
health facilities, the offices of IPs and schools. The capacity of IPs to identify SGBV cases and refer them needs to 
be enhanced. Disabilities are accounted for in all monitoring processes by UNICEF and partners, but the evaluation 
 
1 Launched in 2018 by UNICEF, OCHA, UNHCR and WFP, UNCCS has fostered collaboration on cash and voucher assistance. 

4 
has identified weaknesses in the overall response, such as defining clearer differentiation of disabilities, and 
adapting spaces, such as the EAIs, to persons with disabilities. 
Good practices and lessons learned 
Some relevant lessons can be extracted from UNICEF ECO’s response the VMC  
 
EAI: The EAI in Tulcán has shown how inter-agency coordination exercise has enabled responses to shifting 
priorities and created a space for different agencies to work together. As UNICEF further rolls out the EAI 
model monitoring will be of prime importance.  
 
Staff dedication: Informants, as noted, overwhelmingly praise staff’s availability, transparency, and 
openness. UNICEF has been able to leverage its existing presence and relationships linked to regular 
programming to build programmes and activities for the VMC.  
 
ECO experience piloting UNCCS has shown the possibility of working together to extend cash-based transfers 
and respond to the needs of vulnerable populations. A more detailed analysis can be found in the CBI 
evaluation and assessment.2 
 
On social inclusion: ECA has shown how CBI, if sufficiently funded, can respond to housing, employment, 
education, health and food needs and can be empowering.  
 
The Special Procedure has been a duplicable model of technical support and coordination with government 
institutions. 
Recommendations 
Strategic Recommendation 1 (Global Level and LACRO): Need to establish a LACRO regional strategy for migrant 
children and adapt the Children on the Move framework to the region. 
Strategic Recommendation 2 (UNICEF Ecuador): Further invest in evidence generation and analysis by i) 
mapping key gaps in terms of territorial coverage and performance measurement; ii) understanding what 
evidence decision makers need and when; iii) defining how, when and who does the analysis, and iv) outlining 
how analysis is then used and shared for both operational and advocacy purposes. 
Strategic Recommendation 3 (UNICEF Ecuador): Incorporate migration across sectors in the new 2023-2026 CPD. 
Strategic Recommendation 4 (UNICEF Ecuador, LACRO and HQ): Invest in internal capacity-building, learning 
exercises as well as HR/staff resourcing and staff-care activities  
Strategic Recommendation 5: Further invest in vulnerability assessment to ensure gender equality and disabilities 
are mainstreamed through all sectors. 
 
 
 
 
2 Evaluación de la estrategia de UNICEF Ecuador para la transferencia de efectivo no condicionado. Respuesta a la emergencia migratoria de Venezuela. 
Marilise Turnbull, Lezlie Morinière, Sebastián Serrano. Integrated Risk Management Associates LLC. November 2020 

5 
1. Background and context of Ecuador’s country response to the Venezuelan Migration Crisis (VMC) 
1.1 Context 
The Republic of Ecuador is an upper-middle-income country that experienced substantial economic and social 
progress between 2003 and 2013. The positive economic environment resulted in an average annual growth of 
4.3 per cent in gross domestic product (GDP) and an increase in public social investment that has reduced poverty 
and inequality. Between 2007 and 2017, income poverty fell from 36.7 per cent to 21.5%. Social investment rose 
from 4.2 per cent of GDP in 2006 to 9.4 per cent in 2016.3 
Despite progress, there are several challenges that the Government of Ecuador (Go) has had to face. According to 
UN 2018 Report, Ecuador had substantive numbers of children suffering from chronic malnutrition and increasingly 
also from obesity. A lack of access to safe water and sanitation is one of the barriers to eradicating child 
malnutrition. Additionally, the education system faces major challenges in combating educational exclusion.4 
Coverage of child development services for children under three years of age stood at 20.1 per cent in 2018.5 In 
early education (three and four years of age), the enrolment rate reached only around 23 per cent in 2016.6 Among 
the main barriers to exercising the universal right to education are the lack of culturally relevant education services 
and the shortage of teachers trained in innovative teaching methods. In 2017, more than 900 cases of sexual abuse 
in schools came to light.7 There are several explanatory factors behind violence in the family environment and at 
school. There is a failure to recognise children and adolescents as enjoying rights, a lack of specialisation and 
coverage of services that raise awareness of and address violence, the dismantling of the system of comprehensive 
protection of the rights of children and adolescents and a lack of funding for bodies mandated to prevent and 
address violence. Still, lack of more current research on the national level makes it difficult to know how the 
situation evolved in the period 2018-2021. The socioeconomic situation has deteriorated since mid-2014, when oil 
prices began to fall. The economy began to slump in 2015 and contracted by 1.2 per cent in 2016.8 Due to fiscal 
pressures, the coverage of Ecuador's main conditional cash transfer programme was also reduced,9 to 582,000 
beneficiaries in 2014-2015.10 Working conditions significantly worsened. Unemployment, underemployment, and 
informality rates increased to levels not seen in ten years. Between 2013 and 2018, approximately 66,000 jobs 
were lost.11  
Ecuador is prone to floods, droughts, volcanic eruption, landslides and earthquakes. The GoE integrated disaster 
risk reduction strategies that contain specific plans to manage the impacts of displacement caused by disasters in 
its 2017 Organic Law on Human Mobility.12 However, the increase of migrants, refugees and displaced people in 
the last few years, has stretched the capacities of the government to face the dramatic influx of Venezuelans. 
The Venezuelan Migration Crisis (VMC) 
Ecuador is a signatory of the main international treaties and conventions relating to migration and refugees. 
Ecuador acceded to the 1951 Refugee Convention in 1955 and ratified its 1967 Protocol. It also signed the 
Cartagena Declaration on Refugees in 1984, which defined refugees as: 
Persons who have fled their country because their lives, safety or freedom have been threatened by 
generalized violence, foreign aggression, internal conflicts, massive violation of human rights or other 
circumstances which have seriously disturbed public order. 13  
This definition was incorporated into Ecuador’s national legal framework and was included in both the 2008 
Constitution (CRE) and the 2017 Organic Law on Human Mobility. The 2008 CRE recognised for the first time at a 
constitutional level the rights of asylum and refuge, according to the law and international human rights 
 
3 Ecuador Country Programme Document, United Nations Children's Fund 2018.  
 
 
 
4 UNICEF, based on the 2016 National Employment, Unemployment and Underemployment Survey  
 
 
5 INEC, ENSANUT 2018, Salud, Salud Reproductiva y Nutrición | (ecuadorencifras.gob.ec) 
6 OSE 2018, Situaciòn de la ninas y adolescentes en Ecuador 2019 
7 AAMPETRA Commission Report. 
8 World Bank (2018) 
9 Banco Mundial, Retos y Opportunidades de la migración venezolana en Ecuador. 2020.  
10 Cecchini, Simone & Atuesta, Bernardo. (2017). Programas de transferencias condicionadas en América Latina y el Caribe: tendencias de cobertura e 
inversión 
11 World Bank (2019) 
12 https://www.refworld.org/pdfid/5bc70a384.pdf 
13 Cartagena Declaration on Refugees, Colloquium on the International Protection of Refugees in Central America, Mexico and Panama,” adopted 
November www.oas.org/dil/1984_cartagena_declaration_on_refugees.pdf. 

6 
instruments.14 Under the Organic Law on Human Mobility, individuals with refugee or stateless status received an 
Ecuadorian national ID and temporary resident status, granting them the right to work and study, and the option 
to renew their temporary residency or request permanent residency after two years.15  
Before 2018, Venezuelans could enter Ecuador with just a valid ID card and obtain a tourist visa for 180 days.16 
Once in the country, they could apply for a Unión de Naciones Suramericanas (UNASUR) visa, which granted them 
the right to stay and work up to two years.  
In June 2018, the GoE declared that birth certificates for children and adolescents were no longer valid travel 
documents. In August 2018 Ecuador declared a state of emergency in response to an overwhelming flux of 
Venezuelans. To enter the country any person had to show a valid passport, instead of just an ID. The lack of 
functioning state institutions in Venezuela made this requirement incredibly difficult to be met. In January 2019, 
following an episode of violence in Ibarra, the GoE decreed only people with a legalised certificate confirming lack 
of a criminal record could enter Ecuador. This was followed in July 2019 by Presidential Decree 826 h requiring all 
Venezuelans to pre-obtain a Humanitarian Visa before crossing into Ecuador.17 As a result of advocacy these 
measures were revoked due to incompatibility with the constitution and the Organic Human Mobility Law. 
However, the Presidential Decree that entered into force on 26 August 2019, does not include exceptions for 
children and their families.18 Applying for a Humanitarian Visa is complicated and takes time. Many Venezuelans 
do not have a valid passport and cannot initiate the visa procedures. The process is also very expensive, costing at 
leasts US$250.19 On 13 August 2020, the GoE announced that Venezuelans residing in Ecuador who had not 
regularised their situations may be subject to a fine of US$800.20 A new President, Guillermo Lasso, assumed office 
in May 2021 and in September 2021 announced a plan to regularise the status and integrate some 450,000 
Venezuelans.21 
These swift changes of policies have had a devastating effect on the Venezuelan population, outside and inside 
Ecuador, leading to an upsurge in unauthorized border crossings and concomitant vulnerability to abuse, sexual 
exploitation and human trafficking. The scale of unauthorised border crossings is nearly impossible to monitor. 
Thus it is difficult for humanitarian responders to know the real situation. Venezuelans already in Ecuador who 
had not managed to regularise their situation faced another conundrum: unable to work until they secured a 
longer-term visa, but unable to obtain a visa until they earned enough money to pay for one, Venezuelans were 
often forced to work illegally.22 The lack of reliable data on unauthorised entries hindered the full understanding 
of migrants’ situation and vulnerabilities. This affected particularly children and adolescents. In 2021, based on 
estimations, the Regional Migration Response Plan (RMRP) – a mechanism first developed in 2018 as a strategic 
regional response plan and advocacy tool – reported approximately 150,000 Venezuelan children and adolescents 
in Ecuador in need of some form of assistance.23 Since the public health emergency declaration due to COVID-19 
in March 2020, Ecuador land borders with Colombia and Peru were closed. Still, it has estimated that 500 – 1,000 
people entered the country through irregular border crossings daily.24 In December 2021, the Puente Internacional 
de Rumichaca was reopened, at the border with Colombia, through the Centros Binacionales de Atención a la 
Frontera (CEBAF). To enter Ecuador, any person is required to show proof of vaccination and a negative PCR test. 
Additionally, visa requirements for Venezuelans still stand in 2022. 
The protracted and ongoing economic, social and political crisis in Venezuela has provoked the greatest exodus in 
the history of the Latin American and Caribbean region (LAC). In February 2019, the Office of the UN High 
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) reported 2,000 average daily entries into Ecuador, with peaks of 5,000 per 
 
14 COSTITUCION DE LA REPUBLICA DEL ECUADOR [CRE], 2008. 
15 LEY ORGÁNICA DE MOVILIDAD HUMANA. Presidencia de la República del Ecuador, January 2017.  
16 Reglamento a la Ley Orgánica de Movilidad Humana, Decreto Ejecutivo 111, Lenín Moreno Garcés, Presidente Consti- tucional de la Republica de 
Ecuador, 17 de abril de 2018, https://www.cancilleria.gob.ec/wp-content/uploads/2018/05/regla- 
mento_ley_de_movilidad_humana_reformado_abril_2018.pdf 
17 https://www.migrationportal.org/resource/decree-826-granting-exceptional-temporary-residence-visa-humanitarian-reasons/ 
18 UNICEF ECUADOR- 2020 Action Plan Venezuela Migration Crisis. Summary Response Overview 
19 ACAPS, Crisis Updates, Ecuador Overview. June 2021. Available at: https://www.acaps.org/country/ecuador/crisis/venezuelan-refugees- 
20 Ministry of Government (ex-Ministry of Interior) of Ecuador 2021 
21 Agencia EFE, 9 Sept. 2021, available at: https://www.efe.com/efe/america/sociedad/lasso-dice-que-su-plan-para-los-migrantes-venezolanos-busca-
incorporacion-social/20000013-4626193 
22 Johnny Magdaleno, “Unable to Afford Work Visas, Venezuelans in Ecuador Face Fines,” Al Jazeera, April 26, 
2019. https://www.aljazeera.com/indepth/features/unable-afford-work-visas-venezuelans-ecua- dor-face-fines-190404144511857.html  
23 RMRP 2021  
24 MoFA, March 2021