Final Report 
Itad  4 August 2021 
  
 
 
 
 
 
Final Report  
Strategic Positioning Evaluation of the 
UNICEF Afghanistan Country Programme 
2015–21 
4 August 2021 
Authors: Pierre Townsend, Natalie Hicks, Enrico Leonardi, Katie Tong 
Submitted by Itad 

Final Report 
Itad  4 August 2021 
i 
 
Acknowledgements  
The evaluation team would like to thank all those who have supported and informed this Report on the 
Strategic Positioning Evaluation of the UNICEF Country Programme 2015–21. We are particularly 
grateful to the core UNICEF team members who have been involved in the evaluation – Tom Pellens, 
Esther Kaggwa, Stanley Gwavuya, Ivan Ssenkubuge and Minaa Rayan – the UNICEF Afghanistan Country 
Office, the UNICEF Regional Office for South Asia and the Evaluation Reference Group, which have guided, 
informed and supported the inception phase, provided access to key documents, and facilitated 
discussions with key stakeholders. 
This report was co-written by Pierre Townsend, Evaluation Team Leader; Natalie Hicks, Senior Advisor, 
and Katie Tong and Enrico Leonardi, Core Team Members. The evaluation team would like to thank: David 
Fleming, Quality Assurance Lead, for the Quality Assurance of this report; Becka Kindler, Project Manager; 
and Vince Evans-Gutierrez, Project Officer. 
 
Disclaimer  
The views expressed in this report are those of the evaluators. They do not represent those of UNICEF or 
of any of the individuals and organisations referred to in the report.  
‘Itad’ and the tri-colour triangles icon are a registered trademark of Itad Ltd.  
 
 
 

Final Report 
Itad  4 August 2021 
2 
Contents 
Contents 
2 
List of acronyms 
4 
Executive Summary 
8 
 Introduction 
15 
 
Evaluation Background 
15 
 
Context 
15 
 
Evaluation Timeline 
15 
 
Evaluation Purpose and Intended Use 
15 
 
Evaluation Objectives and Scope 
16 
 Evaluation Methodology 
18 
 
Overall Design, Evaluation Questions and Criteria 
18 
 
Data Collection Methods, Sampling and Analysis 
19 
 
Data Collection Methods 
19 
 
Sampling 
21 
 
Data Analysis Methods 
25 
 
Integration of Gender, Equity and Human Rights in Methods, Sampling and Analysis 26 
 
Ethical Considerations and Quality Assurance 
26 
 
Ethical Considerations 
26 
 
Quality Assurance 
27 
 
Limitations 
27 
 UNICEF’s Country Programme and its Context 
29 
 
The Afghanistan Country Programme 
29 
 
Programme Content and Operational Structure 
29 
 
The 2017 Mid-Term Review 
30 
 
The Evaluation’s Key Focus Areas and their Relevance to the ACP 
31 
 
Context of the Intervention 
32 
 
Developments in the Political and Security Landscape 
32 
 
Changes in National Policy Frameworks During the Period of Study 
33 
 
Impact of the Context on the ACP since 2015 
35 
 
Balancing Strategic Objectives with Escalating Needs 
35 
 
Progress in Implementing the Triple Nexus 
35 
 
Strategy to Achieve Access, Coverage and Equity for Women and Children 
36 
 
Capacity Building 
37 

Final Report 
Itad  4 August 2021 
3 
 
Gender Integration 
37 
 Findings 
38 
 
Focus Area 1: the Nexus 
38 
 
Programme Design and Internal Positioning in Support of the Triple Nexus 
38 
4.1.2  System-Wide Engagement and Positioning in Support of the Nexus 
48 
 
Focus Area 2: Coverage and Access 
51 
 
Equity and Multi-Sectoral Programming for the Welfare of Children 
51 
 
Approaches to Access 
56 
 
Focus Area 3: Partnerships and Capacity Building 
66 
 
Partnerships with Governmental and Non-Governmental Actors 
66 
 
Focus Area 4: Gender Integration 
73 
 
Gender Integration in Programme Planning and Practice 
73 
 
UNICEF Partnerships and System-Wide Positioning to Promote Gender 
80 
 Conclusions, Lessons Learned and Recommendations 
83 
 
Focus Area 1: The Nexus 
84 
 
Focus Area 2: Coverage and Access 
85 
 
Focus Area 3: Partnerships and Capacity Building 
87 
 
Focus Area 4: Gender 
88 
 
Recommendations 
89 
 Annexes 
93 
 
Terms of Reference 
93 
 
Evaluation Matrix 
122 
 
Sampling Principles and Guidelines for the Evaluation 
133 
 
Key Informant Question Guide 
139 
 
List of Key Informant Categories and Interviewees 
157 
 
Survey Questions 
162 
 
Disaggregation of Respondent Sample 
170 
 
Budgetary Categorisation of ACP Outputs 
173 
 
Bibliography 
177 
 
Itad Principles and Values 
180 
 
Overview of Itad’s approach to QA 
181 
 
 
 

Final Report 
Itad  4 August 2021 
4 
List of acronyms 
AAA 
ActionAid Afghanistan  
ACO 
Afghanistan Country Office 
ACP 
Afghanistan Country Programme 
ALNAP 
Active Learning Network for Accountability and Performance 
AMP 
Annual Management Plan 
ANDP 
Afghanistan National Development Strategy 
ANPDF 
Afghanistan National Peace and Development Framework 
AoR 
Area of Responsibility 
A-SDG 
Afghanistan Sustainable Development Goal 
AWLI 
Afghan Women’s Leadership Initiative 
AWP 
Annual Work Plan 
BPHS 
Basic Package of Health Services 
C4D 
Communication for Development 
CAHD 
Community Approaches to Handicap in Development 
CB 
Capacity Building 
CBE 
Community-Based Education 
CBI 
Cash-Based Intervention 
CBS 
Community-Based School 
CCCs 
Core Commitments for Children 
CDC 
Community Development Council 
CEDAW 
Committee on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women 
CEO 
Chief Executive Officer 
CFS 
Child-Friendly School 
CHW 
Community Health Worker 
CLTS 
Community-led Total Sanitation 
CMT 
Country Management Team 
CoAR 
Coordination of Afghan Relief 
CP 
Child Protection 
CPAN 
Child Protection Action Network 
CPAP 
Country Programme Action Plan 
CPD 
Country Programme Document 
CRC 
UN Committee on the Rights of the Child 
CS 
Conflict Sensitivity 
CSO 
Civil Society Organisation 
DACAAR 
Danish Committee for Aid to Afghan Refugees 
DAD 
Development Assistance Database 
DOE 
Department of Education 
DOLSA 
Department of Labour and Social Affairs 
DOPH 
Department of Public Health 
DRRD 
Department of Rural Reconstruction and Development 
ECHO 
European Civil Protection and Humanitarian Aid Operations 
EiE 
Education in Emergencies 
EOC 
Emergency Operations Centre 
EPI 
Expanded Programme of Immunisation 
EPP 
Emergency Preparedness Platform 
ER 
Emergency Response 
ERG 
Evaluation Reference Group 
ET 
Evaluation Team 
EU 
European Union 
EVAW 
End Violence Against Women 

Final Report 
Itad  4 August 2021 
5 
FA 
Focus Area 
FO 
Field Office 
GAP 
Gender Action Plan 
GATE 
Girls’ Access to Teacher’s Education 
GBV 
Gender-Based Violence 
GDP 
Gross Domestic Product 
GDI 
Gender Development Index 
GEM 
Gender Equality Marker 
GIRoA 
The Government of the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan 
GPE 
Global Partnership for Education 
GPR 
Gender Programmatic Review 
GRIP 
Guidance on Risk-Informed Programming 
HNO 
Humanitarian Needs Overview 
HNTPO 
HealthNet Transcultural Social Organisation (NGO) 
HP 
Harmful Practices 
HQ 
Headquarters 
HRDA 
Human Resources Development Agency (NGO) 
IASC 
Inter-Agency Standing Committee 
ICN 
Immunisation Communication Network 
IDP 
Internally Displaced Person 
INGO 
International Non-Governmental Organisation 
IP 
Implementing Partner 
IRC 
International Rescue Committee 
ISAF 
International Security Assistance Force 
JCMB 
Joint Coordination Monitoring Board 
KAP 
Knowledge Attitude Practice Survey 
KEQ 
Key Evaluation Question 
KII 
Key Informant Interview 
KM 
Knowledge Management 
LHD 
Linking Humanitarian and Development 
LoE 
Level of Effort 
LTA 
Long-Term Agreement 
M&E  
Monitoring and Evaluation 
MHM 
Menstrual Health Management 
MNCH 
Maternal, Newborn and Child Health 
MoE 
Ministry of Education 
MoJ 
Ministry of Justice 
MoLSA 
Ministry of Labor and Social Affairs 
MoPH 
Ministry of Public Health 
MRRD 
Ministry of Reconstruction and Rural Development 
MSP 
Multi-Sectoral Programming 
MTR 
Mid-Term Review 
NAP 
National Action Plan 
NESP 
National Education Sector Plan 
NGO 
Non-Governmental Organisation 
NPP 
National Priority Programme 
NTA 
National Technical Advisor 
NUG 
National Unity Government 
ODK 
Open Data Kit 
OCHA 
United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs 

Final Report 
Itad  4 August 2021 
6 
OECD-DAC 
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development’s Development 
Assistance Committee 
OH 
Outcome Harvesting 
OIC 
Organisation of Islamic Cooperation 
OR 
Other Resources 
P&M 
Planning & Monitoring 
PCA 
Project Coordination Agreement 
PIDB 
Programme Information Database 
PO 
Project Officer 
PSEA 
Protection Against Sexual Exploitation and Abuse 
PSN 
Programme Strategy Note 
QA 
Quality Assurance 
RAM 
Results Assessment Module 
RIP 
Risk-Informed Programming 
ROSA 
Regional Office of South Asia 
RR 
Regular Resources 
RWP 
Rolling Workplan 
SDG 
Sustainable Development Goal 
SIDA 
Swedish International Development Agency 
SIGAR 
Special Inspector General for Afghanistan Reconstruction 
SLT 
Saving Lives Together 
SMQ 
Strategic Monitoring Question 
SOP 
Standard Operating Procedure 
SPE 
Strategic Positioning Evaluation 
SPEAR 
Social Policy Evaluation and Research 
SRM 
Security Risk Management 
TA 
Technical Assistant 
ToC 
Theory of Change 
ToR 
Terms of Reference 
TPM 
Third-Party Monitor 
 
UK 
United Kingdom 
UN 
United Nations 
UNAMA 
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan 
UNCT 
United Nations Country Team 
UNDAF 
United Nations Development Assistance Framework 
UNDP 
United Nations Development Programme 
UNDSS 
United Nations Department for Safety and Security 
UNEG 
United Nations Evaluation Group 
UNFPA 
United Nations Population Fund 
UNHCR 
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees 
UNICEF 
United Nations Children's Fund 
UNSCR 
United Nations Security Council Resolution 
US 
United States of America 
USAID 
United States Agency for International Development 
VWO 
Voice of Women Organization 
WADAN 
Welfare Association for the Development of Afghanistan 
WASH 
Water, Sanitation and Hygiene 
WASSA 
Women Activities & Social Service Association 
WCUK 
War Child – United Kingdom (NGO) 
WEE 
Women’s Economic Empowerment 
WoA 
Whole of Afghanistan 

Final Report 
Itad  4 August 2021 
7 
WHO 
World Health Organization 
WFP 
World Food Programme 
 
 

Final Report 
Itad  4 August 2021 
8 
Executive Summary 
Purpose 
The Strategic Positioning Evaluation (SPE) of the United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF) 
Afghanistan Country Programme (ACP) 2015–21 was commissioned by the UNICEF Regional Office of 
South Asia (ROSA) and conducted by Itad. The purpose of this evaluation is threefold. First, it aims to 
inform the design at country level of the next country programme 2022–25. Second, it aims to foster 
organisational learning about what works and does not work within a fragile and conflict-affected 
setting like Afghanistan. Third, the evaluation serves an accountability purpose. The evaluation was 
organised around four focus areas (FAs) in line with the purpose and objectives of the evaluation: (1) 
integration of and positioning for a strengthened humanitarian, development and peace nexus; (2) 
coverage and access to achieve equitable results for children at scale; (3) partnerships and 
institutional strengthening and capacity building (CB); and (4) gender integration into programme 
and advocacy work. 
Methodology 
Data collection for the evaluation was conducted between February and April 2021, and drew on a 
mix of qualitative and quantitative methods, consisting of a document review, key informant 
interviews (KIIs) and online surveys. Data collection on the ground focused on a geographical sample 
comprised of the Southern and Eastern regions of Afghanistan and a sectoral sample consisting of 
Health, Education, Child Protection and Water, Sanitation and Hygiene (WASH), for study at national 
and subnational levels. 
Respondent samples sought to achieve gender balance where possible, and were assembled from 
UNICEF staff and contracted personnel, other UN agency personnel, local and international non-
governmental organisations (NGOs), donors, government representatives, and province-based 
respondents, including frontline workers. 
Summary of Findings and Conclusions 
Focus Area 1: The Triple Nexus 
Internal Positioning in Support of the Triple Nexus 
The evaluation team found that a significant gap exists between nexus policy and planning, which 
are advanced in their development, and nexus implementation at programme level, which is heavily 
constrained by an adverse operating environment. 
In all sectors examined, humanitarian delivery aims to draw on local capabilities which the 
Afghanistan Country Office (ACO) is actively helping to develop. Overall, about the same amount of 
resources is budgeted per sector outcome to development interventions (CB, resilience) as to 
humanitarian ones. This denotes that humanitarian and development outputs are designed to work 
in concert, and to contribute jointly to sector results. Despite the building of local capacities, this 
close integration in programme design does not always cross over to implementation, where 
humanitarian-development linkages are heavily undermined by contextual obstacles outside the 
scope of programming. The nexus is an imperfect paradigm for some of UNICEF’s activities in 
Afghanistan. Nonetheless, in their implementation, development and humanitarian interventions 
can generally complement each other well if the context allows, and the synergistic relationship 
between humanitarian and development activities was generally viewed as self-evident by ACO and 
other United Nations (UN) personnel. 
There are mixed perceptions around the strength of ACO’s practical understanding of peacebuilding 
objectives and how to integrate them at programme level, and, while respondents provided 
examples of the ACP’s contribution to peace, evidence to support this is anecdotal. Further, there is 

Final Report 
Itad  4 August 2021 
9 
limited understanding and use among staff of UNICEF guidance on peacebuilding and conflict 
sensitivity. 
UNICEF Comparative Advantage in Promoting the Nexus 
In Afghanistan, UNICEF’s comparative advantage derives mainly from its dual mandate and its 
sectoral expertise, including in education, child protection, WASH and immunisation. In its work to 
advance the humanitarian-development nexus, ACO has generally used this advantage well, notably 
by building linkages across the two pillars of its country programme. Risk is proactively managed and 
widely understood to be an entry point for furthering humanitarian-development integration. This is 
illustrated well in ACO’s response to the COVID-19 pandemic. 
Risk Management, Risk-informed Programming and Preparedness 
In managing risk and preparing for it, ACO largely complies with formal process requirements. 
However, there is little evidence that this contributes to better risk preparedness and management. 
Rather, alongside its compliance with formal systems and processes, ACO manages risk on a largely 
ad hoc and tactical basis. This approach is better suited to Afghanistan’s operational environment, in 
which risk is widespread, multi-faceted and fast-changing. The formal risk management and 
preparedness systems in place are not agile enough to support appropriate programme responses in 
the local context. They do, however, help to ensure that minimal standards are met in programme 
preparedness. 
Although field offices feed into risk management and context analysis processes, the extent to which 
their inputs is taken up in ACO-wide risk analysis appears limited. Their more active participation in 
these processes would improve the overall quality of analysis used to inform ACO-wide 
programming. 
Leadership in Integrating Humanitarian, Development and Peacebuilding Across the Aid System in 
Afghanistan 
While there is good evidence to show that ACO has proactively engaged with stakeholders in 
support of the nexus, it is equally notable that it has—rightly—resisted pressure to do so when the 
likelihood of success was limited. 
ACO’s presence on sector-specific platforms is prominent and well received. However, advocacy 
work in support of the nexus for the welfare of children is generally viewed as overly cautious by 
partners and donors. There is also a sense that ACO should invest more resources and senior 
management time in stakeholder engagement and outward-facing positioning. 
Focus Area 2: Coverage and Access 
Equity 
Following the Mid-Term Review (MTR) of the ACP conducted in 2017, ACO has largely abandoned its 
approach to prioritising needs on the basis of focus provinces. Since the MTR, it has also acquired 
greater risk appetite in accessing hard-to-reach areas. This has allowed it to be more successful in 
achieving a good balance between addressing the needs of the most vulnerable and expanding the 
surface of its programme coverage. However, the ACO continues to face significant challenges in 
assessing needs in hard-to-reach areas and in its monitoring of results in these areas, and this 
constrains its ability to address equity. 
In the past three years, ACO’s approach to equity has been pragmatic rather than being guided by a 
set prioritisation strategy. This pragmatism has helped it navigate the significant contextual 
challenges to achieving equity in programme coverage. The diversity in approaches can yield 
valuable lessons and can serve to develop good practices around which programme sectors can 
gradually cohere to yield combined equity gains. A pragmatic approach is well suited, and the 
resulting lack of consistency in approaches is not a concern per se. However, it does call for clarity 

Final Report 
Itad  4 August 2021 
10 
on red lines and best practice in expanding coverage, as without guiding principles the multiple 
approaches used in the pursuit of equity in programming may become disparate over time. 
Multi-Sectoral Programming 
Since 2020, ACO’s approach to multi-sectoral programming has become less theoretical and better 
rooted in implementation and practice. ACO has made good use of strategies and guidelines in this 
area. It has also seized opportunities to formalise and consolidate programme convergence, when 
circumstances on the ground had caused programmes to converge spontaneously. But multiple 
obstacles still exist to further progress in multi-sectoral programming, including sector siloes, the 
slow pace of decentralisation, a supply-side approach to programme selection, and the sector-
specific dynamics of cooperation with line ministries. 
Programme Strategy and Implementation in Support of Access 
ACO does not have a formal strategy to access areas outside immediate government control, and 
this gives it some latitude to pursue access pragmatically. Of the multiple approaches used, the most 
successful are: to secure access through local implementing partners or extenders and frontline 
workers; and to leverage acceptance gained among local stakeholders through the delivery of 
programmes at community level. The reliance on partners and contractors to secure access entails 
risks both to these actors and to ACO. While formalising a strategy on access may ultimately prove 
constraining, there is evidence of a need to more clearly spell out red lines and good practices in 
securing access. 
Across the ACP, improvements in programme agility and adaptiveness are closely tied to progress in 
decentralisation and to the provision of increased support and latitude needed by field offices to 
respond more autonomously to changes in their immediate environment (‘Freedom in a 
Framework’), i.e. in the conduct of context analyses and in the staging of the required programme 
responses on the ground. 
Conflict Sensitivity 
With one exception in WASH, conflict sensitivity is currently not applied to ACO programming. ACO 
staff had a very generic understanding of the concept and application of conflict sensitivity, which 
aims to minimise the risk that aid interventions unwittingly fuel conflict or other adverse events. 
Related UNICEF guidance which prescribes conflict sensitivity as a minimum requirement in peace 
programming was not widely known by ACO staff, and there are multiple interpretations of what 
conflict sensitivity means in terms of programming. The fluidity and complexity of the operating 
environment in Afghanistan makes it very difficult to apply conflict sensitivity principles in 
programming, and the high granularity required for this is not typically present in the analysis work 
conducted by ACO. Limited use is made of contextual knowledge held by partners and contractors. 
In addition, the complex interplay between conflict sensitivity, stakeholder engagement and routine 
programme processes is not well understood.  
Utilisation of Extenders and TPMs 
Increasing use has been made of extenders during the current ACP period, primarily to expand 
programme coverage in contested areas. The deployment of female extenders has been constrained 
by cultural barriers, but the use of males to escort them has partly remedied this. 
Although extenders have been key to programme expansion, their increased use has come with new 
risks, including that of blurring the accountability of ACO staff for last-mile programme delivery. New 
standard operating procedures (SOPs) have helped remedy this, but there remains room for 
progress. The monitoring of extenders and the verification of information reported by them are also 
areas in need of improvement. 
The use of third-party monitors (TPMs) is currently limited in the ACP, due to problems encountered 
with contractors. While TPMs are not intended to replace the regular field monitoring of the ACO 

Final Report 
Itad  4 August 2021 
11 
staff, extenders, or the implementing partners, their limited use is causing an over-reliance on these 
other monitoring actors. This is true even as these actors cannot substitute for the independence of 
TPMs, given their active involvement in the monitored programmes. Additionally, a lack of an 
additional verification and validation layer in the overall monitoring architecture of the ACO has led 
to a piecemeal approach that falls below accountability and learning requirements. Further human 
and resource investments are required to institute a comprehensive TPM system that is fit for 
purpose. 
Focus Area 3: Partnerships and Capacity Building 
Cooperation with the Government 
At the technical level, ACO generally enjoys good working relations with governmental counterparts. 
A complex political environment has constrained the application of the partnership strategy 
announced in the ACP document. By default, programme sectors have had to rely on rolling 
workplans (RWPs) to guide their partnerships with the government. Further progress requires 
concerted action across the range of aid actors in Afghanistan. 
Although generally positive, partnerships with line ministries are often constrained by a lack of 
capacity and public resources, which ACO alone cannot resolve. Cultural barriers and sensitivities 
surrounding programme coverage in contested areas inhibit further progress in some partnerships, 
notably in the child protection and education sectors. 
Partnerships with NGOs 
UNICEF is viewed as a reliable partner but there is a perception among NGOs that their relationship 
with ACO is asymmetrical, and would gain from more inclusiveness in programme decisions, as well 
as partnerships set in a multi-year timeframe. In the course of interviews with NGOs, there was a 
sense that, while partnerships do generally yield the intended programme results at output level, 
ACO may have missed opportunities to fully leverage the potential offered by NGOs in terms of their 
knowledge of the local context, and their often better access to community-based leaders and hard-
to-reach area proxies. A broader and more strategic approach to partnerships with NGOs should be 
considered, to encompass joint objectives in non-programme areas, including advocacy and 
engagement. 
In line with the Core Commitments for Children (CCCs), ACO has entered into partnerships with a 
range of national NGOs. However, localisation goals remain distant, as these partners continue to 
lack viable capacity and rely heavily on ACO for support. Revised SOPs have been introduced to 
improve partner selection, but the general view among ACO staff was that they are not taken into 
account in the selection of local NGOs by government counterparts. 
Alignment of Partnerships with Cooperation Frameworks 
The evaluation team found that the ACP aligns with ministerial priorities, but alignment is less clear 
with National Priority Programmes (NPPs). There is a widely held view that the One UN Framework 
does not serve its intended purpose of enabling alignment between the international aid effort and 
the development goals of the Afghan government. Likewise, the Framework has limited use as a 
platform for the convergence of UN and other aid actors around the sustainable development goals 
(SDGs). These limitations severely constrain progress towards capacity-building objectives, and limit 
the role which ACO might play in contributing to intended results. Renewed engagement efforts are 
needed to make up for the limitations of the One UN process, by forging ad hoc alliances with like-
minded stakeholders including UN actors and donors. 
Institutional Strengthening 
The lack of a strategic framework for capacity-building (CB) has given each sector some flexibility to 
develop its own sector-appropriate approach. But this has also come at the cost of a clear long-term