EVALUATION OF THE 
UNICEF RESPONSE TO
THE LEVEL 2 HUMANITARIAN 
CRISIS IN MYANMAR 
EVALUATION REPORT

Cover photo: © UNICEF/UN0697912/Oo
EVALUATION OF THE UNICEF RESPONSE TO THE LEVEL 2 HUMANITARIAN CRISIS IN MYANMAR 
Final Report
© United Nations Children’s Fund, EAPRO, 2023
Final version produced in May 2023
The purpose of publishing evaluation reports produced by the UNICEF Evaluation Office is to fulfil a corporate 
commitment to transparency through the publication of all completed evaluations. The reports are designed to 
stimulate a free exchange of ideas among those interested in the topic and to assure those supporting the work 
of UNICEF that it rigorously examines its strategies, results, and overall effectiveness. 
The contents of the report do not necessarily reflect the policies or views of UNICEF.
The text has not been edited to official publication standards and UNICEF accepts no responsibility for error.
The designations in this publication do not imply an opinion on the legal status of any country or territory, or of its 
authorities, or the delimitation of frontiers.
The copyright for this report is held by the United Nations Children’s Fund. Permission is required to reprint/reproduce/ 
photocopy or in any other way to cite or quote from this report in written form. UNICEF has a formal permission 
policy that requires a written request to be submitted. For non-commercial uses, the permission will normally be 
granted free of charge. Please email the Evaluation Office at the address below to request permission. 
Please cite the work as follows: United Nations Children’s Fund. 2023. Evaluation of the UNICEF Response to the 
Level 2 Humanitarian Crisis in Myanmar. UNICEF Evaluation Office, New York.
For further information, please contact:
UNICEF East Asia and Pacific Regional Office
19 Phra Atit Road Bangkok 10200 Thailand
E-mail: eapro@unicef.org or asia.pacific.evaluate@unicef.org
www.unicef.org/eapro

EVALUATION OF THE 
UNICEF RESPONSE TO
THE LEVEL 2 HUMANITARIAN 
CRISIS IN MYANMAR 
EVALUATION REPORT
May 2023

© Matteo Massimi on Unsplash

CONTENTS
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS	
v
ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS	
vi
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY	
1
1.	
INTRODUCTION	
11
2.	
COUNTRY AND OPERATING CONTEXT	
13
	
	
Country context	
13
	
UNICEF in Myanmar	
18
	
UNICEF’s response to the crisis	
19
	
Funding of the response	
20
	
Timeline of the crisis	
22
3.	
METHODOLOGY	
25
	
	
Evaluation criteria and questions	
25
	
Evaluation phases	
26
	
Management arrangements	
26
	
Data collection, analysis and validation	
26
	
Constraints and limitations	
28
4.	
KEY FINDINGS	
31
	
	
EQ 1: Relevance	
31
	
-	 Alignment with international humanitarian standards	
32
	
-	 Adaptation of UNICEF’s strategies and approach	
32
	
-	 Gender considerations	
34
	
-	 Prioritization of needs and community consultations	
34
	
	
EQ 2: Effectiveness	
35
	
-	 Influence of the context on UNICEF’s response	
37
	
-	 Achievement of targets	
38
	
-	 Influence of the L2 declaration on the response	
41
	
-	 Procurement and logistics	
42
	
- 	 Risk management and mitigation	
43
	
-	 Community feedback	
44
	
-	 Monitoring	
45
	
	
EQ 3: Coherence and connectedness	
46
	
-	 Preparedness measures	
47
	
-	 Integration of the triple Nexus	
47
	
-	 Coherence with the UN Framework	
48
	
-	 UN programmatic engagement guidelines	
48
	
	
EQ 4: Efficiency	
49
	
-	 How timely was the scale-up of the response?	
49	
	
-	 Contribution of emergency preparedness	
50
	
-	 Innovation and adaptation	
50
	
	
EQ 5: Coordination	
51
	
-	 UNICEF role as a cluster lead agency	
52
	
-	 UNICEF external coordination	
53
	
-	 UNICEF internal coordination	
53
	
	
EQ 6: Coverage	
54
	
-	 Coverage of affected communities	
54
	
	
EQ 7: Protection	
57
	
-	 Protection provision	
58
	
-	 Prevention of sexual exploitation and abuse	
59
5.	
LESSONS LEARNED	
61
6.	
CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS	
63
ANNEXES		
	
71

UNITED NATIONS CHILDREN’S FUND
iv
TABLES
	
Table 1.	
UNICEF response strategy for the Myanmar conflict	
19
Table 2.	
Timeline of key milestones as of early December 2022	
22
Table 3.	
Evaluation questions	
25
Table 4.	
Summary of key informants and community discussions	
27
Table 5.	
Constraints, limitations and mitigation strategies	
28
Table 6.	
Qualitative assessment of performance by sector against key objectives	
49
	
FIGURES
	
Figure 1.	
Evaluation subject, purpose and scope	
11
Figure 2.	
Total population and people in need (as of early December 2022)	
13
Figure 3.	
Population earmarked for assistance against actual needs, Myanmar (as of early December 2022)	 14
Figure 4.	
Number of IDPs since May 2021 (as of early December 2022), Myanmar	
15
Figure 5.	
Affected areas and displaced people across Myanmar at the end of 2022	
17
Figure 6.	
Funds received by appeal sector against the 2022 HAC (as of 31 December 2022)	
20
Figure 7.	
Funds received compared with 2022 HAC appeal requirements (as of 31 December 2022)	
21
Figure 8.	
Trends in coordinated Myanmar response plan/appeal requirements	
21
Figure 9.	
UNICEF’s response strategy and objectives reflected policies and standards	
32
Figure 10.	
UNICEF was able to adapt its response to changes in a timely way	
33
Figure 11.	
Number of agreements made with CSOs, 2020–2022	
33
Figure 12.	
Communities were involved in identification of needs, design and implementation	
35
Figure 13.	
UNICEF’s L2 response was timely and of good quality	
37
Figure 14.	
ACAPS humanitarian assessment ratings for Myanmar as of July 2022	
37
Figure 15.	
Performance of the sample of 15 UNICEF projects	
39
Figure 16.	
UNICEF met its response targets described in the HAC appeal	
39
Figure 17.	
Declaration of the L2 emergency significantly improved UNICEF’s response	
41
Figure 18.	
Declaration of the L2 emergency by UNICEF was done at the right time	
42
Figure 19.	
Global and local procurement supply timelines, 2020–2022	
42
Figure 20.	
Value of Purchase Orders received by UNICEF Myanmar, 2019–2022	
43
Figure 21.	
UNICEF and partners have collected and used feedback	
44
Figure 22.	
Community feedback dashboard to strengthen programming	
45
Figure 23.	
UNICEF has integrated relief, recovery and longer-term programming	
48
Figure 24.	
UNICEF was able to quickly scale up its response	
50
Figure 25.	
Preparedness measures, including supplies, allowed UNICEF to quickly scale up	
50
Figure 26.	
Innovative approaches by UNICEF improved the efficiency of the L2 response	
51
Figure 27.	
UNICEF’s resources were adequate to perform as cluster lead/co-lead	
52
Figure 28.	
UNICEF coordinated well with other international actors	
53
Figure 29.	
UNICEF was able to coordinate multisectorial responses without problems	
54
Figure 30.	
UNICEF assistance was accessible to affected populations in different areas	
55
Figure 31.	
Displacement in Myanmar	
56
Figure 32.	
UNICEF assistance was accessible to the most vulnerable	
57
Figure 33.	
UNICEF assistance provided protection in line with its mandate	
58
Figure 34.	
UNICEF adhered to the principles of the Monitoring and Reporting Mechanism	
59
Figure 35.	
UNICEF followed its PSEA, Child Protection and Safeguarding guidelines	
59

EVALUATION OF THE UNICEF RESPONSE TO THE LEVEL 2 HUMANITARIAN CRISIS IN MYANMAR
v
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The evaluation team would like to thank all those who have supported and informed this evaluation.
We are particularly thankful to Alessandra Dentice, Deputy Representative, Fawzia Hoodbhoy, Chief of Planning, 
Monitoring, and Evaluation (PME) and Linn Thant Aung, Monitoring and Evaluation Specialist (M&E), all from 
the UNICEF Myanmar Country Office. Juanita Vasquez, the former Multi-Country Evaluation Specialist (MCES), 
and Peter Leth, the current MCES, Koorosh Raffii, former Regional Evaluation Advisor at UNICEF East Asia and 
Pacific Regional Office (EAPRO); Jane Mwangi, Regional Evaluation Advisor at UNICEF East Asia and Pacific 
Regional Office (EAPRO); and Catalina Salazar Silva, Evaluation Specialist at EAPRO for their support and inputs.
We are also grateful to the full Myanmar Country Office team as well as the Evaluation Reference Group (ERG) 
for their reflective and constructive input during interviews and workshops. Your active and committed 
participation throughout the evaluation process confirms the feasibility and usefulness of our suggested 
participatory methodology for the L2 evaluation. Finally, we want to thank other key stakeholders who dedicated 
time and provided important perceptions of UNICEF response to the L2 emergency in Myanmar.  
Lattanzio KIBS conducted the evaluation. Special thanks to the team leader, Jock Baker, for his leadership, expertise, 
and professionalism, and the rest of the team for their committed efforts throughout the evaluation, including 
Aye Aye Kyuu as National Expert and Manuela Aiello as Research Assistant.
Finally, the effort and unwavering dedication of UNICEF staff in Myanmar need to be commended. Their hard work 
and commitment, even in the face of an incredibly uncertain and demanding environment, have been instrumental 
in carrying out their duties and fulfilling their mission to provide assistance to those in need, particularly vulnerable 
children. Their perseverance and commitment deserve the utmost recognition and appreciation.
Disclaimer:
The opinions expressed are those of the independent evaluator, and do not necessarily reflect those of UNICEF. 
Responsibility for the opinions expressed in this report rests solely with the author. Publication of this document 
does not imply endorsement by UNICEF of the opinions expressed. 
The designations employed and the presentation of material in the maps and other material do not imply the 
expression of any opinion whatsoever on the part of UNICEF concerning the legal or constitutional status of any 
country, territory, or sea area, or concerning the delimitation of frontiers.

UNITED NATIONS CHILDREN’S FUND
vi
AAP
ACAPS
CBO
CCCs
CDM
CSO
DAC
EAPRO
EQ
FGD
GDP
HAC
HCT
HPD
HQ
IASC
IDP
INGO
IT
LTA
MoH
NGO
OCHA
OECD
PD
PSEA
POs
RCO
RRMP
SDG
SOs
SSFA
ToR
TPM
UN
UNCT
UNDAF
UNDP
UNDSS
UNFPA
UNHCR
UNICEF 
WASH
WFP
WHO
Accountability to affected populations
Assessment Capacities Project
Community-based organization
Core Commitments for Children in Humanitarian Action
Civil disobedience movement
Civil society organization
Development Assistance Committee
East Asia and the Pacific Regional Office
Evaluation question
Focus group discussion
Gross domestic product
Humanitarian Action for Children
Humanitarian Country Team
Humanitarian project document
Headquarters
Inter-Agency Standing Committee
Internally displaced person
International non-governmental organization
Information technology
Long-term agreement
Ministry of Health
Non-governmental organization
United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development
Programme document
Prevention of sexual exploitation and abuse
Purchase Orders
Resident Coordinator’s Office
Rapid Response to Movement of Population
Sustainable Development Goal
Sales Orders
Small-Scale Funding Agreement
Terms of reference
Third-party monitoring
United Nations
United Nations Country Team
United Nations Development Assistance Framework
United Nations Development Programme
United Nations Department for Safety and Security
United Nations Population Fund
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
United Nations Children’s Fund
Water, Sanitation and Hygiene
World Food Programme
World Health Organization
ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS

EVALUATION OF THE UNICEF RESPONSE TO THE LEVEL 2 HUMANITARIAN CRISIS IN MYANMAR
1
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
Evaluation purpose and scope
1.	
This evaluation focuses on UNICEF’s programmatic and operational response and preparedness in Myanmar 
after the activation of a Level 2 (L2) Corporate Emergency Procedure in July 2021 following the military 
takeover on 1 February 2021. 
2.	
Building on evidence of how UNICEF responded to this emergency, the evaluation’s purpose is to generate 
clear lessons learned for future preparedness and response efforts for similar crises, while setting forth 
recommendations for planning and directing ongoing recovery efforts in the country.  The evaluation also 
aims to strengthen accountability towards affected populations, implementing partners and stakeholders.
Context
3.	
During the past 50 years, the Republic of the Union of Myanmar has witnessed a sequence of military 
takeovers, a resurgence of violence against minorities and the repression of dissent and democratic 
formations. All this, coupled with Myanmar’s vulnerability to natural disasters – particularly earthquakes, 
floods and cyclones – along with the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, caused a stagnation of the country’s 
economic, health and social conditions despite the progress made since a nationwide ceasefire was 
declared in 2015. In February 2021, Myanmar experienced a military takeover, which placed around 
17.6 million people (32 per cent of the total population), including 5.6 million children, in need of 
humanitarian assistance.
4.	
Following the military takeover, the UNICEF programme in Myanmar transitioned from mainly providing 
upstream support to the Government to a humanitarian response delivered through community-based 
organizations (CBOs) and national and international non-governmental organizations (INGOs). Towards 
the end of 2022, UNICEF revised its Humanitarian Action for Children (HAC) plan for Myanmar, increasing 
its funding and target requirements for 2023 to a total of US$169.6 million with the aim of reaching 
2.8 million people, including 1.9 million children.
Methodology
5.	
	The evaluation team used a mixed-methods approach to answer the evaluation questions. UNICEF 
interventions were assessed using selected evaluative criteria for humanitarian assistance, namely 
relevance, effectiveness, coherence/connectedness, efficiency, coordination, coverage, and protection. 
The assessment also reviewed the operational and working arrangements of the interventions, including 
specific attention to elements of management, strategic partnerships and coordination.  
6.	
Data collection included a desk review of over 300 relevant documents, 110 key informant interviews 
through a purposive sample of UNICEF and external stakeholders, in addition to focus group discussions 
(FGDs) that were conducted with 112 community members by the national expert and local researchers. 
Two online surveys were conducted, one for UNICEF staff and the other for partner organizations. 
Two remote validation workshops involving UNICEF staff were carried out, one following a presentation 
of preliminary findings in October 2022 and the other in March 2023 following circulation of the draft 
evaluation report. 
7.	
The evaluation was managed by the UNICEF East Asia and the Pacific Regional Office (EAPRO) and the 
UNICEF Myanmar Country Office and supported by a Reference Group comprising UNICEF staff from 
Myanmar, EAPRO and Headquarters (HQ), plus one external member from the United Nations (UN) 
Resident Coordinator’s Office (RCO) in Myanmar. 

UNITED NATIONS CHILDREN’S FUND
2
Summary of findings 
The main findings based on each of the evaluation questions are as follows:  
 
1. 	 Relevance
8.	
UNICEF was able to adapt its strategy to the changed context guided by principles in the Core Commitments 
for Children in Humanitarian Action (CCCs) and Inter-Agency Standing Committee (IASC) guidelines, although 
this adjustment took time. A military takeover scenario had not been considered in UNICEF’s preparedness 
planning and the after-effects provoked considerable trauma among staff. UNICEF took a pragmatic and 
flexible approach to shift from a government-led upstream programme to a humanitarian programme led 
by civil society organizations (CSOs), including smaller CBOs, which helped to extend UNICEF’s coverage 
notably in remote areas. 
9.	
UNICEF undertook a series of six rapid needs assessment surveys via telephone interviews to inform its 
programme design and support fundraising efforts. The survey results were shared with the Humanitarian 
Country Team (HCT) and cluster members. Efforts were made to consult with communities but time 
constraints, the limited capacities of national organizations and difficulties in accessing certain areas 
meant that their views were not reflected as much as was hoped. 
2. 	 Effectiveness
10.	
Following the military takeover, UNICEF was faced with a highly constrained humanitarian space that 
negatively affected effectiveness and efficiency, including access to affected communities in many locations, 
and difficulties in obtaining permits to import humanitarian supplies and visas for international staff. UNICEF 
was not sufficiently prepared for the military takeover and its subsequent aftermath, and international agencies 
spent much of the first few weeks focused on ensuring the safety and security of their staff. Family members 
of UNICEF’s international staff were evacuated following the military takeover and around half of the staff 
ended up working outside the country and were eventually transferred. Many staff, particularly national 
staff who remained in Myanmar, were traumatized. 
11.	
Supply timelines for international procurement were around 175–190 days, whereas lead times for local 
freight forwarders were reduced from over 280 days in 2021 to just over 100 days in 2022 by means of 
additional long-term agreements (LTAs) and more selective procurement. Apart from the relatively long 
lead times for procurement, the need to import several key commodities – including vaccines and nutritional 
supplies respecting international standards that UNICEF was required to meet – posed significant challenges 
to UNICEF’s response. Limited funding and difficulty in accessing affected communities also constrained 
UNICEF’s effectiveness. Only 34 per cent of the HAC appeal funding targets were met in 2021 and only 
22 per cent had been raised for 2022 by the end of December 2022. 
12.	
Effectiveness varied by sector and geographical area. Sectoral performance in Water, Sanitation and Hygiene 
(WASH) was reasonably good, whereas Health and Nutrition struggled to gain momentum largely due to their 
dependence on the authorities to facilitate implementation. Education, Social Policy and Child Protection all 
initially faced challenges but subsequently picked up momentum by significantly shifting their modus operandi 
to implementation by CSOs and informal networks using innovative approaches. The achievement of output 
targets in Rakhine and Kachin states, where UNICEF had humanitarian interventions prior to the military 
takeover, has generally been at least two to three times higher than that in other areas. However, UNICEF 
struggled to reach targets in areas where there were significant numbers of new displacements, such as the 
Sagaing Region, due principally to a lack of access.
13.	
The declaration of an L2 emergency was a helpful support in streamlining some processes and obtaining 
additional funding and staffing and it was clear that UNICEF Myanmar felt the benefits of being prioritized by 
the region. However, some delays were still experienced. Partner staff mentioned that some UNICEF sectors
	
demonstrated less flexibility in comparison to other sectors that found it difficult to adapt in a timely way 

EVALUATION OF THE UNICEF RESPONSE TO THE LEVEL 2 HUMANITARIAN CRISIS IN MYANMAR
3
in an environment where needs could rapidly change. Moreover, the declaration of an L2 emergency when 
first requested in March 2021 could have taken advantage of a window of opportunity during the first few 
months to import additional supplies and obtain visas, thus better positioning UNICEF to respond to the crisis.
14.	
UNICEF partners were required to have community feedback systems when they signed humanitarian project 
documents (HPDs). UNICEF itself initially had no systematic way of collecting community feedback directly 
or using feedback received from partners but was in the process of putting these systems in place during this 
evaluation, including more systematic collection of data through third-party monitoring (TPM). 
15.	
UNICEF had already been using TPM prior to the military takeover for Rakhine and Kachin States where access 
was difficult. In the aftermath, UNICEF expanded TPM to other areas as its own access became more limited 
due to conflict, security constraints and difficulties in obtaining travel permits. This was found to be a good 
initiative although some areas for improvement were identified. 
3. 	 Coherence and connectedness
16.	
	Prior to the military takeover, UNICEF’s emergency preparedness focused almost exclusively on natural 
disaster events, and significant unplanned adaptations were required by the new context. Preparedness 
nevertheless came in useful, notably with contingency stocks that were distributed although there were 
insufficient quantities due to restrictions on the import of supplies after May 2021. Following the military 
takeover, emergency preparedness was largely confined to training and the capacity-building of partners 
and communities (through partners). Stand-alone emergency preparedness activities by UNICEF Myanmar 
were limited due to the need to focus on other priorities with limited funds and humanitarian space. 
17.	
The shift to emergency mode happened more rapidly in UNICEF field offices, such as in Rakhine State, that were 
already implementing humanitarian interventions and had the capacity to respond to emergencies. Similarly, 
those sectors that had historically relied more on CSO implementation, like WASH, were able to rapidly adapt.
18.	
UNICEF’s response has greatly expanded capacity-building opportunities for national CSOs and CBOs 
across all UNICEF sectors as part of community workforce readiness. Partners, in turn, have been training 
community members in activities ranging from teacher training to child protection. Interviews with staff 
from UNICEF and partners confirmed that this has the potential to be an invaluable investment for Nexus 
programming once the situation in Myanmar improves. 
4.	
 Efficiency
19.	
	Many inefficiencies were caused by the challenging operating environment, including limited access to 
affected populations; the lack of import permits, visas for international staff and movement permits for staff; 
and security restrictions imposed by the United Nations. UNICEF was nevertheless seen as being able to 
scale up its response relatively rapidly in a difficult operating context. Some prepositioned supplies and 
existing LTAs with local suppliers initially helped to facilitate critical life-saving support to affected communities. 
Most of the surge and newly appointed staff deployed to fill staffing gaps were only able to provide remote 
support. Feedback from national staff about their value-added was mixed and often related to the individual’s 
knowledge of the context. The expanded use of information technology (IT) tools following the COVID-19 
pandemic was an important innovation that increased UNICEF’s efficiency during the response.
20.	
The declaration of an L2 emergency provided UNICEF with more flexible and efficient procedures, but their 
application was reported by partners to be inconsistent between different sections. UNICEF has taken steps 
to adapt its administrative processes to CBOs with limited capacity and experience in managing grants.
21.	
Longer-term programming was included in UNICEF’s response strategy, but significant limitations have 
been imposed by the context. At the same time, partnerships have greatly expanded capacity-building 
opportunities for CSOs and CBOs across all UNICEF sectors. As described above, the increased capacity of 
national actors was an investment that can potentially support UNICEF’s Nexus programming in the future.

UNITED NATIONS CHILDREN’S FUND
4
5. 	 Coordination
22.	
UNICEF’s performance regarding its own programme was more effective than the performance of the 
IASC clusters it was leading, particularly at a regional level, due to the lower priority given to clusters, 
including a lack of funding. By mid-2022, national cluster coordination had reportedly improved but at 
a regional level performance continued to be uneven, in part since several UNICEF staff were double 
hatting with UNICEF and cluster-lead roles. Partners interviewed and surveyed were nevertheless positive 
about the roles UNICEF played in clusters. CBOs, for their part, had difficulty in engaging fully with the 
clusters due to their lack of capacity and experience with international systems. 
23.	
UNICEF coordinated well with other international actors, including peer UN agencies and CSO partners. 
Some donors felt they did not consistently receive enough information from clusters or from the UNICEF 
office, which was of concern given that most donors did not have the option of travelling within Myanmar.
24.	
UNICEF worked with the United Nations Country Team (UNCT) to agree on common approaches and had 
specific partnerships with other UN agencies within the framework of the Humanitarian Response Plan. 
While the UNCT engagement guidelines provided clarity about a common United Nations position on 
engagement with the de facto authorities, the perception among some UNICEF staff was that the guidelines 
hindered humanitarian operations due to UNICEF’s interpretation compared with some peer agencies that 
were reported to have adopted more flexible approaches. At the same time, the 2022 Peer-2-Peer review 
found that the overall low-profile approach taken by the United Nations to negotiating and securing access 
did not result in significantly improved access.
25.	
The Regional Office periodically reviewed and followed up on a work plan of activities to support UNICEF 
Myanmar’s programme after the L2 emergency had been declared. Senior management also organized 
regular town hall meetings with staff to inform and help to manage trauma and stress.
6.	
Coverage
26.	
UNICEF expanded its programme coverage as the conflict intensified so that the HAC appeal target 
population increased from 867,380 people (including 316,164 children) to 1.4 million (including 1.1 million 
children) in 2022. Although survey respondents gave favourable ratings for UNICEF coverage, interviews 
and narrative responses described the difficulties that UNICEF had in delivering assistance to many areas, 
including the Sagaing Region which accounted for almost half of new displacements.
27.	
The extent to which UNICEF met its targets varied significantly between activities, sectors and geographical 
areas. With the exception of WASH, most sectors were only able to reach less than 30 per cent of their 
targets. For areas like the Sagaing Region, where there was ongoing active conflict and large numbers 
of displaced people, coverage was very low (0–16 per cent) because of severely constrained access due 
to security and other factors.
7. 	
Protection
28.	
CSO partners described how UNICEF had been flexible in its approach to extend protection coverage to 
affected populations fleeing armed conflict. UNICEF intervention areas ranged from psychosocial support 
for children and caregivers, support for the prevention and mitigation of gender-based violence and the 
prevention of sexual exploitation to provision of support to victims of explosive ordnance through a broader 
case management mechanism. 
29.	
The prevention of sexual exploitation and abuse (PSEA) was an area of particular focus in UNICEF’s response. 
Two consultants were recruited to assess and build capacity for local partners as some of these partners 
had received high risk ratings due to their low capacity. This was reflected in the survey since almost half 
of UNICEF staff felt that they did not have sufficient information to be able to confirm that PSEA principles 
were being respected.