Real-Time Evaluation (RTE) of the COVID-19 Response in Sao 
Tome and Principe (February-November 2020) 
Country Report  
 
 
 
 
 
December 2020: A doctor looks at her notes before examining a pregnant woman Health 
Center in Praia Gamboa (@UNICEF/2020) 
 
 
 
Evaluation Commissioned by the UNICEF Country Office in Sao Tome 
and Principe  
 
Evaluator: Patricia Carvalho 
January 2021 
 
 
 

1 
 
Foreword  
 
 
This real-time evaluation (RTE) covers the response of UNICEF and other national partners to COVID-19 
in Sao Tome e Principe. It is part of a regional evaluation exercise involving several countries in all 
UNICEF regions. The five other Country Offices (COs) involved include Côte d'Ivoire, Gabon, Democratic 
Republic of Congo, Chad and Mauritania. 
 
The rationale for this exercise is twofold: (i) to take stock and initiate joint reflection by development 
partners on the prospects for adapting approaches and interventions on the ground to the evolving 
crisis and (ii) to use the lessons learned and good practices thus identified to inform the response to the 
pandemic in the future as outlined in the HAC cycle and multi-sectoral work plans.) The UNICEF West 
and Central Africa Regional Office (WCARO) has legitimate expectations to better fulfill its role in 
overseeing the implementation of the PB response to COVID-19. 
 
This evaluation was conducted by a national consultant, Ms. Patricia Carvalho. The evaluator would like 
to thank all those who supported them during their data collection and questionnaire administration 
activities in a particularly difficult context, marked by the early stages of the second wave of the 
pandemic. 
 
The consultants would like to make special mention of the UNICEF Representative and Country Office 
colleagues who provided essential support to the mission by supplying all the necessary documentation 
and answering all their questions clearly and promptly.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

2 
 
List of acronyms  
AFD - Agence Française de Développement  
CNES - Centro Nacional de Educação para a Saúde  
CO – Country Office 
CPD - Country Programme Document 
EMOPS - Office of Emergency Programmes 
GBV - Gender Based Violence  
GPE - Global Partnership for Education  
IMF - International Monetary Fund 
INE – Instituto Nacional de Estatistica  
IPC - Infection Prevention and Control  
PPE - Personal Protective Equipment  
RRCCE - Risk Communication and Community Engagement 
RTE - Real Time Evaluation 
SEIA - Socioeconomic Impact Assessment 
SERP - Socioeconomic Response Plan  
SRP  - Strategic Response Plan  
TVS - Televisão Santomense  
UN -  United Nations 
UN - United Nations 
UNDP - United Nations Development Programme 
UNFPA - United Nations Population Fund 
WASH - Water, Sanitation and Hygiene 
WCARO - UNICEF Regional Office for West and Central Africa  
WFP - World Food Program   
WHO  - World Health Organization 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

3 
 
Table of Contents 
1. Introduction .............................................................................................................. 8 
2. Evaluation Purpose .................................................................................................... 9 
3. Evaluation Objectives ................................................................................................ 9 
4. Evaluation Scope ..................................................................................................... 10 
5. Evaluation Criteria and Questions ............................................................................ 10 
6. Evaluation Methodology .......................................................................................... 12 
7. Key Findings (by criterion) ....................................................................................... 12 
7.1 Adaptability .................................................................................................................. 12 
7.2 
Effectiveness of the UNICEF Response ................................................................... 16 
7.3 
Quality ...................................................................................................................... 21 
8 Emerging Themes/Conclusions ................................................................................ 25 
9 Gender Equality and Women’s Empowerment .......................................................... 27 
10  Lessons Learned ..................................................................................................... 29 
11 Recommendations .................................................................................................. 30 
12 Annexes .................................................................................................................. 31 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

4 
 
Executive Summary  
 
1. Evaluation Object  
This report presents the findings, conclusions and recommendations of the real-time evaluation (RTE) 
focusing on the COVID-19 response mounted by UNICEF and its country partners in Sao Tome e Principe. 
During the last nine months of the year 2020, Sao Tome e Principe, like the rest of the world, was 
confronted with the COVID-19 pandemic with peaks of cases in June and December. Since then, it has 
been facing the negative repercussions of this situation on socio-economic life, especially for the most 
affected groups: women and children. In response, the Government and its partners have implemented 
a multisectoral response plan. UNICEF-supported interventions focused on the areas of 
health/nutrition, infection prevention/control/WASH, child protection, education/distance learning and 
risk communication/community engagement. In order to better understand the achievements of the 
response to this date and as a way to identify strategically and operationally relevant lessons learned 
that could help improve the response in the coming months, UNICEF – in collaboration with the 
Government of Sao Tome- commissioned an independent evaluation of the strategies and interventions 
rolled out to curb the egregious effects of the pandemic. The evaluation was conducted by a Lusophone 
evaluation consultant between November 2020 and January 2021.   
2. Evaluation Purpose and Objectives   
The RTE aims to promote a forward-looking reflection and generate strategically and operationally 
relevant learning on the current implementation of the UNICEF response to COVID-19, specifically in 
Sao Tome and Principe in this case. This is expected, among others, to: (i) improve the adaptations of 
the response based on both the populations’ emerging needs and changes in context; and (ii) increase 
the quality and effectiveness of the response on the ground 
The main RTE objectives are to identify:  
• 
“The effects that the COVID-19 pandemic had on basic services, particularly for the most 
vulnerable population and of activity initiated as a response to COVID-19; 
• 
The implications of the COVID-19 response on UNICEF’s regular/pre-COVID programme 
delivery; and  the quality of the related delivery; while also providing early insights on the 
outcomes achieved”1. 
 
3. Evaluation Scope  
In terms of the thematic scope, the RTE mainly focused on the UNICEF’s public health response and the 
early stages of the socio-economic response. Geographically, this evaluation looked at the COVID-19 
response implemented at the national level. While the program document review and the interviews 
with the key actors of the response at the central level focused on the whole country, the field data 
collection took place in the two purposefully selected districts of Água Grande and Caué2. 
Chronologically, the evaluation focused on all the response activities implemented between February 
and November 2020. 
4. Evaluation Criteria  
 
1 Terms of Reference, RTA COVID19, Sao Tome and Principe, September 2020. 
2 The selection of the districts was supported by the country office and based on the fact that Água Grande is the most central and wealthiest 
district, while Caué is one of the most remote districts and with the highest levels of poverty in the country.   

5 
 
In line with its learning purpose and the evaluation strategy of the response to COVID-19 in the rest of 
the region, the evaluation was guided by the three following criteria: adaptability, effectiveness and 
efficiency of implementation; and quality. Although these criteria are not the OECD-DAC criteria, their 
content de facto overlaps with that of some OCED-DAC criteria.  The relevance of the selected 
evaluation criteria is all the greater as they were agreed upon in a participatory manner by UNICEF and 
the other evaluation’s expected users, namely the Ministry of Health and other line ministries with a 
vested interest in the COVID-19 response, as well as the other development partners.  
5.Methodology 
The RTE relied on a mixed-methods approach consisting in a simultaneous and converging use of 
qualitative and quantitative data collection and analysis methods. The data collection methods included 
a short survey monkey questionnaire aimed at all UNICEF Country Offices in the region, including the 
one in STP; semi-structured interviews at the national level with UNICEF CO staff members, and other 
key informants, namely governmental partners and media and communication partners; semi-
structured interviews and focus groups discussions at the sub-national level with frontline workers, 
professors, school directors, health staff members and health community agents, and community 
members based in the districts of Água Grande and Caué. WASH infrastructures were also observed in 
the visited schools in Água Grande and Caué. Furthermore, a child-focused method (Body Mapping) was 
used with small groups adolescents and youth people in some of the schools visited during the field 
work, in order to explore their experiences with COVID-19 and understand what changes (if any) the 
pandemic had on their lives and those of other children in their respective communities (see annex 5.1 
for complete list of interviews and focus groups carried out). 
 
5. Findings and Conclusions 
In response to the COVID-19 outbreak, the UNICEF Country Office (CO) in STP implemented a host of 
interventions, both at the national and local level, that aimed at curbing the negative socio-economic 
impacts that the epidemic was observed to be producing on the lives of many children and caregivers 
in STP. In the education sector, for instance, 
UNICEF made a specific effort to ensure the 
continuity of education services, by also 
adapting its strategies to the evolving COVID-
19  context, be through  the production of 
distance learning programs on radio and TV or 
the reopening of schools at the conditions 
that 
hand-washing 
points 
as 
well 
as 
psychosocial support for school teachers and 
directors be made available. Likewise, in the 
health sector, the response focused on 
ensuring the continued provision of  essential 
health services, especially for women and 
children, through the supply of vaccines, 
medicines, 
HIV 
tests 
and 
nutritional 
supplements for pre- and post-natal care.  On 
the Risk Communication and Community Engagement (RCCE) front, the STP government developed a 
communication plan and led the dissemination of key COVID prevention messages amongst all families 
and communities nationwide through different communication channels, such as radio, TV, social 
Figure 1. A doctor is a about to examine a pregnant woman to 
follow up with her pregnancy in the Health Centre of Praia 
Gamboa.(@UNICEF/2020) 

6 
 
media, and door-to-door sensitization sessions, in partnership with Centro Nacional de Educação para 
a Saúde (CNES).  
 
While the UNICEF Sitrep data shows that the RCCE-
related targets were fully achieved, those of the 
Water, Sanitation and Hygiene (WASH) and Infection 
Prevention and Control (IPC) pillars were not. 
Likewise, targets were only partially achieved in 
relation to the continuity of provision of health care 
for women and children;  the  access to continuous 
education and, lastly, the provision of child protection 
and Gender Based Violence (GBV) services.  
Beyond the varying degree of achievements of the 
response depending on the sector, one thing is clear: 
UNICEF worked profusely with a variety of response 
implementing partners across the country to ensure 
the equity of  their interventions. In particular, UNICEF worked hard to focus the response on the 
prevention and mitigation of the secondary impacts of the pandemic amongst the most vulnerable 
population groups (boys, girls, adolescents and their caregivers), mainly in the areas of education, WASH 
and social protection.   
The design of UNICEF-supported activities  implemented as part of the COVID-19 response responded 
to the country’s needs. The UNICEF response plan, for instance, was based on the orientations received 
from the UN and the information collected during its consultations with the governmental partners, 
mainly the Ministry of Health. The response was also aligned with the 2020 WHO Global Strategic 
Response Plan (SRP) and the 2020 UNICEF COVID-2019 Humanitarian Action for Children (HAC) appeal,  
which identified a list of key pillars for the response. That said, no contingency plan was developed by 
the Country Office or the UN office in the country at any point. Moreover, the lack of prior  experience 
amongst the Country Office staff in dealing with a humanitarian crisis and the lack of training on 
emergency response procedures represented a challenge during the response planning process.  
Although no specific studies were conducted on the national impact of COVID-19 at the onset of the 
crisis, the CO worked closely with national partners to ensure that their interventions be based on an 
adequate needs and risk assessment. The signalling of street children and adolescents in Sao Tome is a 
good illustration of that.  
The UNICEF response to COVID-19 allowed the country to learn more about how to respond to a crisis 
response and led to capacity development in this area. Learning opportunities included the piloting of 
new emergency response models and approaches, especially in new areas that were not a priority 
before, such as distance learning. 
However, two key challenges  were observed during the implementation of the response: the lack of 
monitoring capacity, which would have been useful to track the effectiveness of the response 
interventions over time (mostly in schools); and the excessive time required to procure essential 
supplies during both the preparedness and response phases. The lack of specialized technical support 
to strengthen some of the sectoral response programs; and the lower-than-expected NGOs capacity in 
Figure 1.. A young girl collects water on a public tap in 
Roça Diogo Vaz (@UNICEF/2020) 

7 
 
the field to respond to the emergency, were some additional  factors hindering the successful 
attainment of the response envisaged results. 
One of the evaluation conclusions is that the positive impact of the COVID-19 response on the lives of 
children and their communities can be enhanced through a closer field monitoring of the health sector 
and schools’ needs. In this vein,  the provision of protective gears and sanitation materials and 
equipment for health professionals; as well as the organization of COVID-19 awareness programmes in 
schools, is particularly desirable. Likewise, the identification of other relevant negative impacts of the 
epidemic (such as  increased violence against children, sexual abuse, early pregnancy) and the 
implementation of mitigation measures are particularly important.  
6. Lessons Learned  
The main lessons learned by the CO include the following: (i) having a contingency plan developed  in 
timely manner proves to be a pre-condition for mounting an effective emergency response; (ii) 
disposing of resources to monitor the progress of the response against its envisaged targets is key to 
adjusting the course of action and enhancing the impact on the ground; (iii) good relationships and 
constant dialogue with the national partners facilitate both planning and implementation of an 
emergency response; (iv) prepositioning critical supplies allows a more effective and timely response to 
emergency and yet predictable needs;  (v) the diversification of implementing partners in an emergency  
can hugely affect the timeliness of an emergency response; (vi) evaluating the communication strategy 
and its reach of an emergency response is relevant to combat misinformation and its harmful effects, 
and promote behaviour change; (vii) promoting ongoing data collection and digitization of information 
is very important to be able to take informed decisions for the emergency response; (viii) close field 
monitoring of response interventions ensures that prevention measures are being implemented and 
correctly enforced at the local level. 
7. Recommendations  
The main action points for the strengthening of the COVID-19 in the future at the CO level, which were 
discussed by the UNICEF CO in Sao Tome and its relevant in-country partners and which will serve as 
the basis for the development of the management response,  include the following: (i) To improve data 
collection in the different health, education and social protection sectors to inform response; (ii) To 
scale up the prevention measures and sensitization already put in place in the education sector; (iii) To 
introduce an emergency preparedness and a contingency plan into Country Program Documents (CDPs) 
and workplans; (iv) To strengthen the CO’s internal capacity in emergency management; (v) To 
strengthen the social protection work, through better identification of the most vulnerable children, 
that are especially affected during the pandemic; (vii) To conduct more rapid evaluations of each 
sectoral program (with a focus on results and process) in order to better understand what the next steps 
of the response should be; (viii) To find alternatives for supplies that comes from abroad, through the 
procurement of  local goods and the recruitment of in-country consultants/resource persons.  
Some action points for both the CO and the country and the Regional Offices include: (i) To increase CO 
capacity for monitoring of COVID indicators through the provision of further tools and training that 
would allow for better sectoral monitoring ; and (ii) To support the CO in identifying  mechanisms for 
pre-positioning of supplies to facilitate the emergency response. 
A more detailed description of the recommendations could be found in the corresponding section 
included in the main body of the report.  
 

8 
 
1.   Introduction  
 
After the outbreak of COVID-19 in Sao Tome and Principe in early 2020, the UNICEF Country Office 
committed to contributing to the national response to prevent the pandemic, in alignment with the UN joint 
multi-sectoral COVID-19 response strategy and the national Ministry of Health contingency plan. The 
objective of such support was to minimize the humanitarian consequences of the pandemic, by 
implementing a two-pronged strategy: 
1. Addressing the emerging health care needs, implementing a new risk communication strategy and 
providing the affected population groups with better access to WASH services in the immediate 
term. Overall, against a total  population of approximately 200,000 people, STP  has recorded 1142 
confirmed cases of COVID-19 with 17 deaths3 and 995 recovered cases between March 2020 and 
January 2021.  
2. Mitigate the socio-economic impacts of the pandemic in the medium and long term. With respect 
to this last point, it is worth noting that, according to the International Monetary Fund (IMF), the 
COVID-19 pandemic had a severe impact on the economy of São Tomé and Príncipe, with GDP 
dropping 6% in 2020 due to weak external demand and containment measures4. It is worth noting 
that the island is highly dependent on external aid and is currently experiencing disruption of 
economic and social activities, such as tourism.   
More specifically, the UNICEF contribution to the COVID-19 response in Sao Tome and Principe included the 
following  interventions in different sectors: (i) supporting the Ministry of Health with the provision of 
protective equipment; (ii) supporting the Ministry of Education in the installation of handwashing facilities 
in schools; (iii) providing technical and financial assistance to enhance the effectiveness and coverage of the 
response; (iv) contributing to the development and dissemination of a national communication strategy 
focusing on COVID-19 prevention messages aimed at all families and communities within the country.  
 
UNICEF was not the only UN agency to response to the pandemic. The United Nations System as a whole, 
through the UN Joint Multi-Sectoral Response to COVID-19 Strategy, has been rather instrumental in 
supporting the government to better face  this crisis. The UN agencies, namely the United Nations 
Development Programme (UNDP), the United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA) and UNICEF, with the 
coordination of the World Health Organization (WHO), led interventions in the field of health and 
contributed to limiting transmission and reduce morbidity and mortality. In addition, the UN system 
supported the mobilization of resources to ensure the implementation of the planned activities to mitigate 
socio-economic impact, in partnership with the government. 
In order to understand how STP managed to respond to the pandemic, the UNICEF Regional Office for West 
and Central Africa (WCARO) commissioned a Real Time Evaluation (RTE) on  the UNICEF ongoing COVID-19 
response. The RTE, funded by UNICEF’s Office of Emergency Programmes (EMOPS), was launched 
simultaneously in 5 other countries in the region (Ivory Coast, Gabon, Mauritania, Democratic Republic of 
Congo and Chad) in October 2020. 
 
Not long after the onset of the COVID-19 in STP  in March 2020, a state of emergency was declared by the 
government on 17th March 2020, enabling the government to take restrictive measures to prevent and 
combat the pandemic. The government then prepared a contingency plan that aimed to “(i) reduce the 
transmission, mortality, and socio-economic impact of COVID-19 nationwide; and (ii) ensure adequate 
protection of both the country’s population and environment5.” The first measures adopted were of  
sanitary and preventive nature and aimed at preventing the virus from entering the country. Subsequently,  
 
3 Source: https://covid19.who.int/region/afro/country/st  
4Source:https://www.lusa.pt/article/LBs1j_HJCybqlv76YYvSAjMSZM5iuSI1/covid-19-pandemia-atrasou-reformas-em-s%C3%A3o-tom%C3%A9-e-
pr%C3%ADncipe-mas-programa-de-ajuda-%C3%A9-est%C3%A1vel-fmi    
5 Terms of Reference, RTA COVID19, Sao Tome and Principe, September 2020. 

9 
 
after confirming the existence of the first few positive cases in the country, the focus shifted towards fighting 
and controlling the spread of the virus within the country’s population.  
 
Testing capacity and technical skills amongst Ministry of Health staff gradually increased, thanks to the roll 
out of ad hoc capacity building activities, the distribution of protection  gears for medical teams and, finally, 
the installation of a field hospital and PCR tests laboratory in the country’s capital.  
 
Such interventions were all the more needed given the country’s health system is rather weak, with 
shortages in both health professionals, and hospital beds6.  Furthermore, structural deficiencies in other 
response key sectors affected the rapidity and effectiveness of the response (e.g., on the WASH front,  the 
majority of schools lacked access to water and basic hygiene conditions, just like the majority of the 
country’s population7).  In addition, some of the other constraints that were identified during the first 
months of pandemic  and that affected the response included the following: the limited capacity of suppliers 
to respond to the increasing demand for medical equipment, testing and prevention and individual 
protection materials, as well as the difficulties in transporting the equipment due to border closures.  
 
As of January 2021, low incidence of COVID-19 has been recorded in the country for several months. 
 
2. Evaluation Purpose    
 
The RTE has a distinct purpose: to promote a forward-looking reflection and generate strategically and 
operationally relevant learning on the current implementation of the UNICEF response to COVID-19, 
specifically in Sao Tome and Principe in this case. This is expected, among others, to: (i) improve the 
adaptations of the response based on both the populations’ emerging needs and changes in context; and 
(ii) increase the quality and effectiveness of the response on the ground. The learning that this evaluation 
is expected to generate aims to inform the decision-making of a variety of users: not only the UNICEF 
Country Office (CO) in Sao Tome and Principe (STP) but also the country’s Ministry of Health and other line 
ministries with a vested interest in the COVID-19 response, as well as other development partners.  
 
3. Evaluation Objectives 
 
The objectives of the RTE include a rapid assessment of the following: 
- 
“The effects that the COVID-19 pandemic had on basic services, particularly for the most vulnerable 
population and of activity initiated as a response to COVID-19; 
- 
The implications of the COVID-19 response on UNICEF’s regular/pre-COVID programme delivery; and  
- 
The quality of the related delivery; while also providing early insights on the outcomes achieved”8. 
 
The RTE identified a few lessons learned during the response, which could also be of benefit to other 
countries in the region. Furthermore, the RTE put forward some action points for the UNICEF CO 
consideration so as to enhance its contribution to the national COVID-19 response in the short- and 
medium-term.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6 UNICEF Sao Tome and Principe Covid-2019 2020 Response Plan.  
7 UNICEF Sao Tome and Principe Covid-2019 2020 Response Plan. 
8 Terms of Reference, RTA COVID19, Sao Tome and Principe, September 2020. 

10 
 
4. Evaluation Scope   
 
4.1. Thematic scope 
The RTE mainly focused on the UNICEF’s public health response and the early stages of the socio-economic 
response.  
 
4.2. Geographic scope 
The RTE looked at the COVID-19 response implemented at the national level. While the program document 
review and the interviews with the key actors of the response at the central level focused on the whole 
country, the field work concentrated on the two purposefully selected districts of Água Grande and Caué9.  
 
4.3 Chronological scope 
The RTE focused on all the response activities implemented between February and November 2020. 
 
5. Evaluation Criteria and Questions   
 
In line with its learning purpose and the evaluation strategy of the response to COVID-19 in the rest of the 
region, the evaluation was guided by the three following criteria: adaptability, effectiveness and efficiency 
of implementation; and quality. Although these criteria are not the OECD-DAC criteria, their content de 
facto overlaps with that of some OCED-DAC criteria (it is the case of the section overarching evaluation 
question that ended up covering, among others relevance and equity questions).  The relevance of the 
selected evaluation criteria is all the greater as they were agreed upon in a participatory manner by UNICEF 
and the other evaluation’s expected users, namely the Ministry of Health and other line ministries with a 
vested interest in the COVID-19 response, as well as the other development partners.  
The evaluation also tried to address four overarching questions spelled out in the ToR (see Annex) that were 
jointly developed by the Evaluation Office and the Regional Office as part of the multi-country evaluation of 
the COVID-19 response in the West and Central African region (WCAR).  Each one of the 4 questions served 
as the basis for the development of other specific evaluation sub-questions. 
 
As a result of all the data collection and analysis, evaluation was also tasked with the identification of 
emerging conclusions/lessons learned and the formulation of tailored recommendations geared towards 
the strengthening of the in-country response to the COVID-19 pandemic.  
 
Three overarching questions 
 
Overarching questions 
Evaluation Criterion 
formally retained  
Sub-questions 
How well is the CO adapting 
to 
the 
needs 
of 
the 
population, 
including 
the 
socio-economic impact of 
the pandemic? How have 
these 
needs 
been 
determined in each country?  
Adaptability 
▪ 
How did the STP CO adapt to the COVID-19 epidemic, 
lockdown and remote working? 
▪ 
How did it adapt to the needs of the population over 
time, including the socio-economic impact of the 
pandemic?  
▪ 
To what extent did it adopt new and different 
approaches, by filling gaps, and seeking local 
solutions? 
How effectively is the CO 
implementing the response 
to COVID-19 so far? How is 
Effectiveness and 
Efficiency of 
Implementation 
▪ 
Effectiveness of the UNICEF response to COVID-19 in 
the country. 
 
9 The selection of the districts was supported by the country office and based on the fact that Água Grande is the most central and wealthiest 
district, while Caué is one of the most remote districts and with the highest levels of poverty in the country.   

11 
 
the quality of the response to 
COVID-19 being affected by 
remote working modalities 
and 
the 
generally 
constrained 
operating 
environment?  
 
o 
Extent to which UNICEF has been able to 
contribute to offsetting the negative effects 
of the pandemic on access to basic services 
[ensuring coverage and scale-up]. 
o 
UNICEF’s success in reaching the most 
vulnerable segments of the population and 
ensuring equity. 
o 
How has UNICEF been able to meet 
programming standards and protocols? 
o 
To what extent has UNICEF been able to 
ensure/sustain 
community 
engagement/AAP mechanisms? 
▪ 
How has the CO utilized preparedness and 
contingency planning during COVID-19 response? 
▪ 
To what extent has the CO revised COVID-19 response 
plan been based on the population’s  evolving needs? 
▪ 
What is known about the needs in the country and 
how did UNICEF CO determine and verify these needs? 
 
Quality 
▪ 
What we know about the quality of the UNICEF 
response to COVID-19 in the country. 
o 
The effects of the crisis and related 
constraints on lockdown and movement 
upon UNICEF’s ability to deliver quality. 
o 
How has the UNICEF CO ensured the quality 
of the response and put in place processes 
and  monitoring systems used to ensure 
quality? 
 
 
Two Additional Questions 
 
What are the early lessons (for 
CO/RO/HQ) that are emerging 
from the implementation of 
the response? What are the 
emerging positives from the 
response? and what have been 
the greatest challenges in 
responding to COVID-19 so far? 
Are there discernable trends 
that are applicable to different 
settings (i.e. urban/rural; low-
resource/high-resource 
settings etc.)? 
Emerging 
Themes/Conclusions 
▪ 
The emerging positives on UNICEF’s performance in 
the COVID-19 response in the country. 
▪ 
The challenges encountered in the country from 
UNICEF’s 
implementation 
of 
the 
COVID-19 
response. 
▪ 
Medium to long-term implications for vulnerable 
children and their communities in focal countries, 
and implications for UNICEF’s strategy and action in 
the medium to long term. 
▪ 
(Re)focusing UNICEF’s programming to reach 
vulnerable children in the medium to long term [e.g. 
to include additional/new opportunities; need to act 
differently or transform, etc).   
 
What more should be done? 
What 
should 
be 
done 
differently to enhance COVID-
19 response programming for 
children 
and 
their 
communities?  
 
Lessons/Suggested 
Action Points 
 
N/A