Multi-country evaluation of UNICEF’s response 
to the Venezuela outflow crisis 
 
 
 
© UNICEF 
 
Trinidad and Tobago 
Country Case Study 
October, 2022 
 
 
 
Virginia Thomas – Team Leader 
Tim Morris – Editor  
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
                
 
 
 
 
 
 
Disclaimer 
 
 
 
 
The views presented in this document are the author’s and do not necessarily represent those of 
UNICEF. 
 
The data collection for this country case study was conducted remotely in December 2021, and the reporting 
phase was finalised in October 2022. Although findings were not updated, recommendations were workshopped 
with the ECA Office and regional office in July 2022. 
 

 
 
 
 
Abbreviations and Acronyms 
 
AAP 
Accountability to Affected Populations 
AMMR 
Archdiocese`s Ministry for Migrants and Refugees  
BID
Best Interests Determination
BPRM
Bureau of Population, Refugees, and Migration
CATT 
Children's Authority of T&T  
CBM 
Catholic Board of Management 
CBI 
Cash Based Interventions 
CCCs 
UNICEF Core Commitments for Children 
C4D 
Communication for Development 
CFS
Child Friendly Space
CFSSWG
Child Friendly Space Sub Working Group
COAR 
Country Office Annual Report 
COM 
Children on the Move 
CP 
Child Protection 
CPD 
Country Programme Document 
CPWG 
Child Protection Working Group 
CSEC
Caribbean Secondary Education Certificate 
CSRP
Caribbean Subregional Coordination Platform 
CWD 
Children with Disabilities 
DTM 
Displacement Tracking Matrix 
ECA 
UNICEF Office for the Eastern Caribbean Area 
ECD 
Early Childhood Development 
EO
Evaluation Office
EMOPS
UNICEF Office of Emergency Programmes
EPP
Emergency Preparedness Platform
ET 
Evaluation Team 
EQ 
Evaluation Question 
EWG 
Education Working Group 
FGD 
Focus Group Discussion 
FO
Field Office
GAP
UNICEF Gender Action Plan
GBV 
Gender Based Violence 
GPF 
Global Proficiency Framework  
GoRTT 
Government of the Republic of Trinidad and Tobago 
HAC 
Humanitarian Action for Children appeal 
HACT 
Harmonised Approach to Cash Transfers 
HPD
Humanitarian Programme Document
HPM
Humanitarian Performance Monitoring

 
 
 
 
IMS
Information Management System
IP 
Implementing Partner 
IYCF 
Infant and young child feeding 
KAP 
Knowledge, Attitude and Practices 
KI 
Key Informant 
KII 
Key Informant Interview 
LACRO
UNICEF Latin America and Caribbean Regional Office 
LWC
Living Water Community
MCPD 
Multi-Country Programme Document 
MHPSS  
Mental Health and Psychosocial Support  
M&E 
Monitoring and Evaluation 
MSDFS 
Ministry of Social Development and Family Services  
OECD-DAC 
Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development- Development Assistance 
Committee 
PAHO
Pan American Health Organization
PCA
Project Cooperation Agreement
PMO
Prime Minister’s Office
PoC 
Persons of Concern 
PSS 
Psychosocial Support 
R4V 
Response for Venezuela (Inter-Agency Coordination Platform for Refugees and 
Migrants from Venezuela) 
RMRP 
Regional Refugee and Migrant Response Plan  
SoPs 
Standard Operating Procedures 
TA
Temporary Appointments 
ToC
Theory of Change 
T&T 
Trinidad and Tobago 
TTFPA 
T&T Family Planning Association 
 TTVSOLNET 
TTV Solidarity Network 
UASC 
Unaccompanied and Separated Children 
UNFPA 
United Nations Population Fund 
UNHCR
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
UNICEF
United Nations Children's Fund 
UNV 
United Nations Volunteer 
VMC 
Venezuela Migration Crisis 
WASH 
Water, Sanitation and Hygiene 
WG 
Working Group 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
Table of Contents 
 
Executive Summary 
1 
1. 
Background and context of UNICEF ECA’s country response to the VMC 
5 
1.1. Rights holders and duty bearers 
5 
1.2. COVID-19 public health restrictions in Trinidad and Tobago 
7 
1.3. Migration within the Caribbean region 
7 
2. 
Object of the evaluation and country case studies 
8 
3. 
Purpose, objectives and scope of the T&T case study 
11 
3.1. Purpose 
11 
3.2. Objectives 
11 
3.3. Scope 
12 
3.4. Stakeholders 
12 
4. 
Evaluation criteria and questions 
12 
5. 
Methodology of the T&T Country case study 
13 
5.1. Document and literature review 
13 
5.2. Semi-structured key informant interviews (KII) 
13 
5.3. Engagement with families of children on the move and host communities 
13 
5.4. Feedback loops and validation process of the cases study 
14 
6. 
Limitations of the case study 
14 
7. 
Ethical and gender considerations 
14 
8. 
Findings 
15 
8.1. Appropriateness 
15 
8.2. Effectiveness 
27 
8.3. Coverage 
52 
8.4. Coherence and coordination 
56 
8.5. Efficiency 
58 
8.6. Connectedness 
60 
9. 
Conclusions, good practices and lessons learned 
61 
10. Recommendations 
64 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
Figures and Tables 
Figure 1 Main entry points of refugee and migrant families arriving in T&T. 
8 
Table 1. Humanitarian Needs and Gaps for T&T 2019 
10 
Table 2. Humanitarian Needs and Gaps for T&T 2020 
10 
Table 3. Secondary Stakeholders 
12 
Table 4. Humanitarian Performance Monitoring (HPM) indicators for CP (2019-2021) 
29 
Table 5. Education indicators and targets (2019, 2020, 2021) 
37 
Table 6. Social Inclusion indicators and targets (2019, 2020, 2021) 
42 
Table 7. Nutrition indicators and targets (2019, 2020, 2021) 
43 
Table 8. C4D indicators and targets (2019, 2020, 2021) 
44 
 
 

 
 
1 
Executive Summary 
In April 2018, the UN Secretary-General directed the International Organization for Migration (IOM) and the Office 
of the High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) to lead and coordinate the regional response to the Venezuelan 
Migrant Crisis (VMC). This led to the establishment of the Response for Venezuela (R4V) Coordination Platform. 
The 17 countries of Latin America and the Caribbean that have joined the R4V Regional Refugee and Migrant 
Response Plan (RMRP) are hosting an estimated 84 per cent of all refugees and migrants from Venezuela, 
amounting to some 5 million people. in November 2021 an estimated 44,000 Venezuelans were in need of 
assistance in Trinidad and Tobago (T&T), 24,500 of them targeted in the RMRP. In a country of 1.4 million people, 
this represented the highest number of Venezuelans any country has received per capita. 
This study explores and analyses how UNICEF simultaneously responded to the Level 2 (L2) VMC emergency and 
the Level 3 (L3) public health emergency caused by the COVID-19 pandemic.  
The regional L2 Response was activated in February 2019 and did not include T&T, despite the fact that the country 
was being significantly impacted by the VMC. The response to the VMC in T&T by the UNICEF Office for the Eastern 
Caribbean Area (ECA) was never officially declared as an emergency by the Government of T&T. The ECA in T&T 
participated in the Regional Humanitarian Action for Children (HAC) appeal to mobilise resources to respond to 
the VMC and received donor humanitarian funds. Informants interviewed for this study, inside and external to 
UNICEF, noted that that the response was constrained by a challenging national policy environment in which 
Venezuelan children on the move were unable to access healthcare, education, birth registration and other 
services available in T&T. 
UNICEF interventions in T&T in response to the VMC have focused on child protection, education, reproductive 
health and family planning services, nutritional screening, vaccination, cash-based interventions (CBIs) and 
Communication for Development (C4D). In the field of child protection, UNICEF has provided mental health and 
psychosocial support (MHPSS) to children and caregivers; trained community actors in providing psychosocial 
support (PSS) and established ten Child Friendly Spaces (CFS). UNICEF has supported Venezuelan children and 
adolescents through working with the Living Water Community (LWC), a long-established Trinidadian 
implementing partner (IP). Technical support was provided to enhance case management of unaccompanied and 
separated children (UASC), to strengthen family and community-based alternative care mechanisms and to protect 
child victims of trafficking by bringing them within the national foster care system. Standard operating processes 
(SoPs) for establishing and maintaining CFS were developed to ensure child protection (CP) mainstreaming, 
feedback mechanisms and strategies for the prevention of sexual abuse and exploitation (PSEA). CP and gender-
based violence (GBV) referral pathways were developed. 
UNICEF’s activities as part of the VMC response were focused primarily in the capital, Port of Spain, with some 
limited activities in Tunapuna, Chaguanas, Couva/Tabaquite/Talparo, Icacos, San Rafael and San Fernando. UNICEF 
provided R4V leadership in education and CP. 
Evaluation purpose, objective, intended audience and methodology 
The purpose of the evaluation and its five country case studies is to account for the results achieved by UNICEF’s 
Response to the L2 activation and draw lessons learned and recommendations to guide future strategic and 
programmatic priorities for children on the move. The primary objective is to provide evidence on whether ECA’s 
response to the VMC has been appropriate, effective, coherent, adequately coordinated, efficient and connected 
and to understand enabling and constraining factors and lessons learned. The primary users of this evaluation are 
UNICEF staff – in Country Offices (COs) in which country case studies were carried out (Brazil, Colombia, Ecuador, 
Peru and T&T), in the ECA in Barbados, in the Latin America and Caribbean Regional Office (LACRO) in Panama and 
in New York Headquarters (HQ) – as well as IPs, government counterparts and affected populations.  
The analytical framework of the evaluation used criteria developed by the Organization for Economic Cooperation 
and Development’s Development Assistance Committee (OECD-DAC)1 with the international human rights 
framework. In terms of quality standards, the evaluation refers to UNICEF’s 2020 Core Commitments for Children 
(CCCS)2 as well as its Six-Point Agenda for Children on the Move. It is utilisation-focused, participatory and forward-
looking, seeking to shed light on results achieved and approaches to enhance UNICEF’s strategic and programmatic 
 
1 https://www.oecd.org/development/evaluation/2755284.pdf 
2 https://www.unicef.org/emergencies/core-commitments-children 

 
 
2 
effectiveness for children on the move. The methodology consisted of mixed methods including document and 
literature review and semi-structured interviews with key informants at national and local level. 
The COVID-19 pandemic was at its height in T&T in November 2021 when field work was to be carried out. Public 
health restrictions involved the closure of offices, CFS and other public spaces. Thus it was necessary for interviews 
and focus group discussions (FGDs) to be carried out remotely with UNICEF field teams, IPs and representatives of 
government, educators, students and other members of the migrant community.  
Key findings and conclusions 
UNICEF´s VMC response in T&T was particularly complex due to the irregular status of many migrant children on 
the move and their families and the context of multiple humanitarian needs and issues, not the least of which has 
been the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic.  
With limited resources and without a clear or supportive policy framework for children on the move from the 
government, the ECA put in place the outline of what has been an appropriately designed response, built around 
UNICEF’s mandate and the core competencies of other UN agencies and civil society. While the operation had 
shortcomings in terms of coverage and addressing of gender issues the key design elements of CP and education 
strategies proved to be effective. Timely efforts to bring key services online proved fortuitous when the L3 COVID-
19 was declared in March 2020. 
In T&T UNICEF has been listening to affected populations and has facilitated focus group discussions (FGDs) and 
surveys to understand and address their needs. Yet despite the interest of staff in being more engaged with 
children on the move and their families, and local investment in direct consultation, it is recognised that UNICEF’s 
broader institutional processes neither promote flexibility nor the flexibility to change programme interventions 
based on beneficiary feedback.  
Despite a long history of migration between T&T and Venezuela, the ECA was unprepared for the onset of the 
VMC. This lack of migration intelligence was commonplace across the region and raises the question of whether 
the Venezuela CO should have sounded the alarm earlier. In terms of preparedness and the Emergency 
Preparedness Platform (EPP), in 2018 the ECA did not identify migration as a key risk factor in T&T and the region. 
Nor did it do so when it updated the EPP in 2021. UNICEF was not appropriately equipped to identify and quickly 
bring on-board IPs with expertise on migration who are trained on CCCs and other minimum requirements. Thus 
the ECA lost some time at a cost to children by not being prepared for the VMC. Subsequently it has lacked a clear 
reading of the government’s attitude and approach to the influx of Venezuelans in T&T.  
The L3 COVID-19 health emergency significantly affected UNICEF’s ability to deliver in the short term. In T&T child 
friendly spaces (CFS) which were a key platform for delivering education and other services to children were closed 
for nearly two years.  
The evaluation team (ET) finds that UNICEF’s work in education in 2018 and 2019 to respond to the needs of 
secondary learners by bringing online curricula that would lead to formal accreditation of achievement and 
attainment of high school leaving certificates constituted good practice. The gap that urgently needs to be 
addressed is that for primary learners who do not always learn well online. Concerning CP, a success has been the 
creation of a network of CFS since 2018 as a platform to integrate multiple programmes. It is considered an 
effective approach to building a supportive community for Venezuelan migrant children and their families. In 2022, 
this was complemented by the addition of Roving CFS to address the needs of children in remote and rural areas. 
UNICEF has had an effective M&E system in place for tracking progress towards HAC targets. However, frequent 
changes in some indicators not strongly linked to sector results complicated assessing progress towards results in 
the short or longer term. M&E could be better used to scale up programmes for children on the move, as well as 
in the operationalisation of the principles enshrined in UNICEF’s Accountability to Affected Populations3 (AAP) 
within the organisation through establishing stronger feedback loops between UNICEF and beneficiaries.  
As in other VMC- impacted countries coverage has been a major challenge in T&T. UNICEF and R4V partners need 
to find the means to bring key services to scale, particularly in terms of coverage of primary school education. 
Coverage is intimately linked with UNICEF fundraising capacity for the VMC and the reality across the response 
countries of insufficient funding for responding to migration crisis of this scale. UNICEF’s role in CP strengthening 
has potential to increase coverage but this requires long-term building of state capacity as well as additional 
partners.  
 
3 https://www.corecommitments.unicef.org/aap 

 
 
3 
The coherence of the response has been enhanced through high quality partnerships with key civil society and 
government partners. The Education Working Group (EWG) and Child Protection Working Group (CPWG), set up 
under the rubric of R4V, meet regularly. However informants told the ET that these mechanisms need to be more 
strategic and solutions oriented. There is a sense that those who participate in these fora lack the kind of sense of 
urgency needed in a humanitarian response, and that UNICEF has not always received sufficient assistance from 
R4V lead agencies. There has been limited training of IPs and other UNICEF partners on humanitarian modalities 
such as the CCCs and the Global Programme Framework on Children on the Move.4 Informants report significant 
gaps in analysis and information sharing as well as lack of information on case counts, out-of-school children and 
how to reach them. UNICEF’s lack of field presence is seen to be a challenge.  
The ECA has sought to use resources efficiently and avoid duplication. Partnerships with UNHCR on education and 
IOM on data collection and analysis on displacement monitoring have respected the mandates of sister agencies. 
Accredited online learning for high school students provides good value for money, providing a scalable solution 
for more students without adding costs of classroom space, building maintenance and transport. The same model 
of blended learning should be applied at primary level. On cash-based intervention (CBIs), UNICEF has pursued and 
should continue to pursue partnership with UNHCR (and IOM, if possible,) to be more efficient. Experience in other 
countries shows that not coordinating with other partners can create a high risk of duplication and other 
inefficiencies. 
As the whole UN system has grappled with integrating responses to migration into its humanitarian architecture 
UNICEF has recognised that the phenomenon of children on the move requires more attention, regardless of the 
national origin of the migrant population. Migration of Venezuelans to T&T, and to other host countries, has 
upended the traditional expectation that migration is a Global South to Global North phenomenon. Many countries 
have been taken by surprise to find themselves a migration destination. The VMC response in T&T has been to 
include all children on the move in response efforts, not only Venezuelans. Within the Caribbean migration is here 
to stay. Increasingly in T&T there are many vulnerable migrants from Cuba, Haiti and Central America who all 
require a rights-based response. It is recommended at a global level that UNICEF move from a nationality-based 
approach to migration to a rights-based approach that addresses the needs of all children on the move.  
Experience in T&T, as in other states hosting Venezuelans, has shown the need for linkage between UNICEF 
advocacy strategies and evidence (generated by Knowledge, Attitude and Practices (KAP) studies so as to combat 
xenophobia and violence against child and other migrants. 
Good practices and lessons learned 
 
UNICEF ECA in T&T has developed a culture of direct consultation with beneficiaries, including children and 
their families and has endeavoured to integrate some of the information gathered directly into both the 
content and form of communications with the migrant community. This is considered a good practice to be 
shared with those COs in the region which seems to have often kept beneficiary communities at arms’ length. 
A lesson learned is that participatory approaches to design of the response need to be included from the outset 
of the emergency should be systematically accompanied by programme staff, not only staff responsible for 
monitoring and evaluation. 
 
Another good practice in 2019 was the opening of ten CFS which provided a much-needed hub for a range of 
programmes, including education, needed by children on the move and their families. A lesson learned has 
been that adequate coordination is required between partners so as to ensure that each partner can be 
effective in working within the shared physical and online spaces of the CFS. 
 
Another good practice has been the inclusion of mental health in face-to-face and online counselling provided 
by Childline, an IP which provided webinars for parents during the pandemic. However, given limited uptake 
in remote and rural areas a lesson learned is that it is needs to be accompanied by sufficient communications, 
awareness and field presence. 
 
Other examples of good practice noted by the ET include: 
o Development of a Best Interests Determination (BID) process, creating a formal structure to address the 
risks to migrant children in detention, at risk of deportation or of family separation generated by the 
deportation of one or both parents.  
o Putting in place of referral pathways and training for foster carers taking Venezuelan children into their 
homes.  
 
4 https://www.unicef.org/documents/global-programme-framework-children-move 

 
 
4 
o Working with the Children's Authority of T&T (CATT) to develop a CP information management system 
(IMS) 
o Using Communication for Development (C4D) to identify communications challenges and creating and 
disseminating messages on topics of use to beneficiaries.  
o Using the MyChild HelpLine app to develop models that have the potential to be highly scalable. 
Recommendations 
Recommendations arising from the evaluation process were elaborated and validated through a participatory 
workshop with UNICEF ECA in August 2022. 
Recommendation 1: LACRO and ECA should invest at the outset of any migratory influx) in direct consultations 
with children on the move, their families, host communities and local governments. As the emergency continues, 
UNICEF should regularly engage in community consultations to support routine programme monitoring and gain 
first-hand information about real needs, vulnerabilities and priorities of children, adolescents and families on the 
move. 
Recommendation 2: As part of emergency preparedness ECA should invest in enhanced planning scenarios, map 
emergency response capacities, identify gaps in training needs of staff and IPs (particularly around the CCCs and 
The Global Programme Framework on Children on the Move), and acknowledge the challenges of staff turnover. 
Recommendation 3: In terms of the new MPCD, UNICEF ECA should review whether migration should be treated 
as a cross-cutting issue. The current positioning of migration within the MCPD could be reviewed in the Annual 
Workplan, taking an intersectoral approach to enhance access of children on the move to key public services. 
Recommendation 4: UNICEF should engage more actively to reduce tensions and build synergies between its IPs 
following the reopening of CFS. 
Recommendation 5: ECA should align emergency response with UNICEF’s Gender Action Plan.5 Given that 
xenophobic attitudes and sexual harassment particularly affect Venezuelan women and girls, it is important to 
work with government and women’s and girls’ organisations in T&T to change social norms and stereotypes 
through a clear gender-focused campaign. 
Recommendation 6: ECA should strengthen advocacy and communication strategies to influence policies and 
attitudes towards children on the move and their families in T&T. These should, address violence against migrants 
and, xenophobia and advocate for rights to healthcare and education for migrant children. 
 
5 https://www.unicef.org/gender-equality/gender-action-plan-2022-2025 

 
 
5 
1. Background and context of UNICEF ECA’s country response to the VMC 
Eleven kilometers off the coast of Venezuela, as of November 2021 T&T, a country of 1.4 million people, has an 
estimated 44,000 Venezuelans in need of assistance according to data from the Office of the UN High 
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR)6, of whom 24,500 are targeted in the 2022 Regional Refugee and Migration 
and Response Plan RMRP.78 The country has significant oil and natural gas resources making it one of the most 
prosperous countries in the region. Venezuelan migration to T&T is not new. It is the rise in numbers within a short 
time span and the arrival of significant numbers of children and adolescents that has attracted both local and 
international attention.9 This case study explores UNICEF’s response to the situation of Venezuelan refugee and 
migrant children and their families in T&T. T&T is one of the eight countries and four overseas territories covered 
by UNICEF’s 2022–2026 Eastern Caribbean Area Multi-country Programme Document (MCPD).10  
In April 2018, the UN Secretary-General provided direction for IOM and UNHCR to lead and coordinate the regional 
response to the situation of refugees and migrants from Venezuela, and the Response for Venezuela (or R4V) 
Coordination Platform was established. The 17 countries of Latin America and the Caribbean that are covered by 
the R4V Regional Refugee and Migrant Response Plan RMRP) are hosting an estimated 84 per cent of all refugees 
and migrants from Venezuela, amounting to some 5.75 million people.11 
This case study explores the ECA response to LACRO’s Regional Level 2 (L2) Venezuela Migration Outflow 
Emergency in T&T. This was activated in February 2019 and expired in June 2020, a period during which the 
number, proportion and profile of Venezuelan children on the move in T&T changed significantly. The case study 
of T&T is part of multi-country evaluations of UNICEF’s regional response to the VMC, also covering case studies 
in Brazil, Colombia, Ecuador and Peru. 
The limited physical presence of UNICEF in T&T should be noted. It should be noted that the response has been 
led via the relatively centralised UNICEF ECA based in Barbados. Of the countries covered by UNICEF’s ECA Office, 
T&T is the southernmost of the Caribbean islands and closest geographically to Venezuela, but is not the only 
Caribbean nation to be affected by the VMC or to see rising numbers of children, not just from Venezuela, on the 
move. 
1.1. Rights holders and duty bearers 
1.1.1. Venezuelan children on the move in Trinidad and Tobago 
As of 2017, the issue of rising migration from Venezuela was already perceived as a concern by UNICEF and other 
UN partners.12 According to UNICEF, about 40,000 Venezuelans were estimated to be living in T&T at the time and 
the figure was expected to increase in 2018 – comprising both earlier and newer migrants. Of the 9,231 new 
arrivals of concern registered by UNHCR by October 2018, Venezuelans accounted for 72 per cent (6,758), of whom 
38 per cent were females and 62 per cent males. Adult males made up the vast majority of migrants at that time, 
many of whom were employed in the informal sector and sending remittances home to their families. Only eight 
per cent were children.13 
The number of Venezuelans formally registered as having arrived in T&T was 25,648 in 2016, 18,571 in 2017, and 
20,287 in 2018. However, formal arrivals only tell part of the story. IOM and UNHCR data confirm that much higher 
numbers have arrived and continue to arrive without any official migration process or documentation.14 
From a gender perspective this situation changed rapidly. In August 2018 there were more than twice as many 
male migrants registered with UNHCR in T&T compared to female migrants. This gap has been closing. The period 
covered by the L2 response (February 2019 to June 2020) saw a shift from a population of predominantly single 
male migrants, many of whom had left Venezuela for employment and economic opportunities, to a situation 
where the families of these male workers began to join them. The decline in the number of persons of concern 
(PoC) registered with UNHCR directly corresponds to March-April 2020 and the start of the COVID-19 pandemic.15 
 
6 UNICEF HPM Monitoring cites UNHCR situation reporting.  
7 R4V: Regional Migration and Refugee Response Plan for 2022, p. 1 https://www.r4v.info/en/document/2022-rmrp-trinidad-tobago-factsheet 
8 These estimates are higher than the number of refugees, asylum-seekers or people of concern registered with UNHCR. See below for number of Venezuelans 
registered with UNHCR.  
9 UNICEF HPM reporting 2018-2021 
10 https://www.unicef.org/executiveboard/media/9011/file/2022-PL7-Eastern_Caribbean_Area_MCPD-EN-ODS.pdf Island states and territories covered by 
the ECA office include Anguilla, Antigua and Barbuda, Barbados, British Virgin Islands, Dominica, Grenada, Montserrat, St. Kitts and Nevis, St. Lucia, St. Vincent 
and the Grenadines, Trinidad and Tobag and the Turks and Caicos Islands. 
11 R4V: 2022 REGIONAL REFUGEE AND MIGRANT RESPONSE PLAN (RMRP) January - December 2022, p. 14 
12 UNICEF ECA: Country Office Annual Report, 2018. 
13 UNICEF ECA: Country Office Annual Report 2018. 
14 UNHCR monthly sit reps, provided by UNICEF M&E  
15 Ibid 

 
 
6 
As a proportion, the number of children has also increased over the period, from only three per cent in 2018 to 19 
per cent of the total migrant population by 2020.16 According to key informants (KIs) interviewed by the evaluation 
team (ET), children on the move are particularly vulnerable. In February 2002 a Venezuelan woman was shot and 
wounded and her nine-month-old baby was killed when the T&T Coast Guard opened fire on a boat carrying 
migrants. Over a hundred Venezuelans have died while making the crossing in overloaded boats.17 Venezuelan 
children and youth in migrant families face multiple challenges, denial of universal child rights such as access to 
health, education, economic security and housing. According to UNICEF ECA’s Annual Report for 2018, only 15 per 
cent of children living in the country for one month to one year had any access to education services, Only 24 per 
cent of those with longer residence in T&T had managed to do so.18 Clearly, a significant proportion of children – 
upwards of 75 per cent – were denied access to education at the outset of the L2 VMC response. 
LACRO’s L2 VMC Emergency was activated in February 2019, but did not cover T&T. At time of the L2 activation 
children were estimated to comprise ten10 per cent of all migrants.19 While capacities to support migrant, 
unaccompanied and asylum-seeking children and families have been strengthened, there are significant gaps in 
full realisation of their rights that need to be addressed. UNICEF and UNHCR have supported children’s access to 
CP, learning, socialisation and psychosocial support (PSS). By the beginning of 2020, it was estimated by UNICEF 
that 53 per cent of refugee and migrant children had received some degree of access to learning support.20 
COVID-19 pandemic restrictions further placed children on the move at increased risk. Closures of hospitality 
venues and building sites – where many Venezuelan migrants had found employment – quickly led to loss of 
income and reduced ability to meet basic family needs. So harsh did their circumstances become that it is reported 
that the pandemic caused Venezuelans to either return to Venezuela or to move elsewhere. It was not possible to 
quantify the extent of these movements as they have not been documented in UNHCR/IOM reporting statistics.21 
1.1. 2. Government of Trinidad and Tobago’s VMC response 
In June 2019, the Government conducted a two-week registration exercise for Venezuelans present in the country, 
including those who had entered irregularly or overstayed and granted them permission to stay and work for up 
to six months. It is reported that through this exercise, 18,944 Venezuelans were registered: 16,523 adults and 
2,421 children. Registered Venezuelans were to be issued with a Minister’s Permit conferring the right to remain 
and work in T&T for six months from issuance of permit. With the onset of the pandemic, renewal of permits 
became problematic as many suffered from administrative shutdowns, closure of offices and stay-at-home 
orders.626 
A re-registration exercise began in March 2021, solely for those previously registered Venezuelans, which granted 
them a further six months stay with a possible extension at least until the first half of 2022. After this exercise, the 
official government figure of Venezuelans allowed to remain decreased. It appears that many previously registered 
Venezuelans may have been fearful to re-register given the hostile environment for migrants and refugees. The 
government has maintained that all non-nationals who were not registered in the June 2019 exercise are to be 
regarded as illegal migrants and deported. Interceptions of asylum-seekers at sea or detention of recent arrivals 
on land became more common during the pandemic, effectively denying asylum-seekers opportunity to seek 
international protection and often resulting in their refoulement.22  
While the registration exercise conducted by the authorities in 2019 promoted integration for some Venezuelan 
migrants and asylum seekers, many Venezuelans who came after the registration exercise or who did not manage 
to be registered continue to struggle to access basic services and livelihoods. Lack of documentation prevents 
Venezuelans from accessing the formal labour market. Many KIs reported that the large number of migrants with 
professional diplomas and certificates – among them qualified judges, doctors and other highly skilled 
professionals – are unable to have qualifications accredited and are thus ineligible to apply for skilled jobs, with 
negative consequences when they apply for work permits. Many work informally in precarious conditions and are 
at risk of exploitation. Lack of valid documentation and legal status also prevents Venezuelans from accessing 
financial services, including bank accounts and loans. The R4V platform is urging the government to extend 
registration to asylum-seekers and refugees of other nationalities and to those Venezuelans who did not have the 
 
16 According to ECA Annual report for 2020, migrant and refugee children in T&T make up 19 per cent of the migrant population, with approximately 3,963 
children, according to UNHCR registration statistics. 
17 https://www.theguardian.com/world/2022/feb/07/venezuela-immigrants-killed-trinidad-tobago-coast-guard 
18 UNICEF ECA: Annual Report 2018.  
19 UNHRC Monthly SitRep, December 2021 
20 See UNICEF ECA Annual Report, 2019, p.2. 
21 See UNHCR reporting on the VMC as taken up in UNICEF monitoring data. 
22 https://www.r4v.info/en/document/study-protection-situation-venezuelan-refugees-and-migrants-caribbean