Multi-Country Evaluation of the UNICEF 
Early Childhood Development response 
to COVID-19 in Europe and Central Asia 
region 
 
 
Draft Country Report: Ukraine 
Volume 1: Main report  
January 2022 
Client: UNICEF 
Consultant: Ecorys Polska Sp. z o.o. 
 
 

/ 2 
 
 
 
 
MULTI-COUNTRY EVALUATION OF THE UNICEF ECD RESPONSE TO  COVID-19 IN THE ECA REGION 
COUNTRY REPORT: UKRAINE 
Note about the Author 
Key Author:  Agnieszka Makulec (ECORYS Polska Sp z o.o) 
The core evaluation team: Dr. Aleksandra Duda (ECORYS Polska Sp z o.o) and Dominika Safin 
(ECORYS Polska Sp z o.o) 
Country Researcher: Dr. Olena Zaplotynska 
 
This is a publication by the independent evaluation team of Ecorys Poland. The analysis and 
recommendations of this report do not necessarily reflect the views of UNICEF. 
 
 
 

/ 3 
 
Table of contents 
Executive Summary ........................................................................................................... 5 
1.0 
Introduction ................................................................................................................ 10 
2.0 Context and purpose of the evaluation ................................................................. 11 
2.1 Evaluation background .............................................................................................................................................................. 11 
2.2 Evaluation purpose, scope, and methodology ....................................................................................................... 18 
3.0 Main findings ............................................................................................................. 28 
3.1 Relevance .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 28 
3.2 Effectiveness .................................................................................................................................................................................... 40 
3.3 Sustainability ....................................................................................................................................................................................52 
4.0 Conclusions and lessons learned ......................................................................... 56 
4.1 Main lessons learned ................................................................................................................................................................ 58 
5.0 Recommendations ................................................................................................... 59 
Bibliography ...................................................................................................................... 62 
 
 
 
 
 

/ 4 
 
 
 
 
MULTI-COUNTRY EVALUATION OF THE UNICEF ECD RESPONSE TO  COVID-19 IN THE ECA REGION 
COUNTRY REPORT: UKRAINE 
Acronyms 
CO 
Country Office 
CPD 
Country Programme Document 
ECA 
Europe and Central Asia 
ECARO 
Europe and Central Asia Region Office 
ECD 
Early childhood development 
ECE 
Early childhood education 
ECI 
Early childhood intervention 
EI 
Early Intervention 
ICT 
Information and communication technology 
IPC 
Infection Prevention and Control 
KII 
Key informant interview 
MoES 
Ministry of Education and Science 
MoH 
Ministry of Health 
NGO 
Non-governmental organization 
PPE 
Personal protective equipment 
RO 
Regional Office 
UPHV 
Universal-progressive home visiting  
WASH 
Water, sanitation and hygiene 

/ 5 
 
MULTI-COUNTRY EVALUATION OF THE UNICEF ECD RESPONSE TO  COVID-19 IN THE ECA REGION 
COUNTRY REPORT: UKRAINE 
Executive Summary 
Evaluation purpose and scope  
Evaluation 
purpose: 
The 
evaluation’s 
overarching purpose was to provide UNICEF 
Country Offices (COs), UNICEF ECA Regional 
Office, national governments and partners 
with 
a 
critical 
assessment 
of 
the 
key 
adaptations made in UNICEF’s Early Childhood 
Development 
(ECD) 
programmes 
in 
the 
Europe and Central Asia region to meet the 
needs of young children and families in the 
context of COVID-19. The secondary purposes 
were to: (i) generate insight to inform further 
development of the evaluated ECD activities 
and (ii) provide evidence to inform future ECD 
efforts in similar emergencies. The evaluation 
was carried out in four countries, including 
Ukraine. 
Evaluation scope: The evaluation focused on 
interventions that were introduced directly in 
response to COVID-19 or adapted to its 
realities; 
entailed 
capacity 
building 
or 
information support for frontline workers; and 
were viewed by a given UNICEF CO as useful to 
have feedback on for future programming. In 
Ukraine, interventions selected for an in-depth 
assessment relate to mother and child 
healthcare, inclusive education, and early 
childhood 
intervention. 
They 
include: 
(1) 
Trainings for pre-school teachers in Donetsk 
and Luhansk oblasts on inclusive education; 
(2) Developing the capacity of professionals 
and parents for advocacy and provision of 
early intervention (ECI) service; and (3) 
Intervention to strengthen the mother and 
child health care system with integrated 
packages of services, universal-progressive 
home visiting (UPHV) model and promotion of 
safe health care in the conflict-affected areas 
of Ukraine (government-controlled).  
All selected interventions were assessed with 
the view to their relevance, effectiveness, and 
sustainability. They were assessed in the 
context of broader UNICEF ECD and COVID-19 
programming in Ukraine. 
The evaluation took place from November 
2020 to the end of 2021. 
Evaluation methodology  
Evaluation approach: The evaluation process 
followed a twofold approach:  (i) elements of 
developmental evaluation approach due to 
the dynamically changing context of the 
evaluated interventions; and (ii) elements of a 
formative evaluation to highlight how the 
adapted or new initiatives are working. During 
the evaluation, simplified theories of change 
(ToCs) for the three in-depth assessed 
interventions were developed.  
Data collection: The methodology for this 
evaluation was based on rapid cycles of data 
collection and analysis, timely feedback, and 
evaluative synthesis and reflection. A mix of 
qualitative and quantitative research methods 
was used to collect and analyze the data. Desk 
research 
encompassed 
primary 
and 
secondary sources concerning ECD in Ukraine, 
UNICEF’s programme and COVID-19 related 
activities in the country, as well as the three 
evaluated interventions specifically. Three 
cycles of data collection related to the in-
depth assessments were conducted, each 
including: ● a survey with frontline workers; ● 
Key Informant interviews (KIIs) with frontline 
workers, 
Implementing 
Partners, 
selected 
governmental officials, local leaders of public 
services and UNICEF CO’s staff; ● two reflection 
workshops, to discuss findings from Analytical 
Briefs, from which takeaways were recorded.  
Evaluation limitations: The key limitations to 
analysis in Ukraine included limited secondary 
and 
primary 
data 
available 
on 
the 
effectiveness of selected interventions. Within 
the context of COVID-19, collecting “good 
enough” and timely evidence outweighed 
methodological rigor and involvement of 
rights holders in the evaluation process. Online 
surveys may have excluded frontline workers 

/ 6 
 
 
 
 
MULTI-COUNTRY EVALUATION OF THE UNICEF ECD RESPONSE TO  COVID-19 IN THE ECA REGION 
COUNTRY REPORT: UKRAINE 
with few digital skills and equipment from 
participating in the evaluation. Moreover, since 
the UPHV intervention assessed during the 
third rapid assessment cycle was at its initial 
implementation stage, it was impossible to 
measure its effects.  
Key findings 
Relevance 
The evaluation assessed the relevance of 
UNICEF-supported interventions introduced or 
adapted to COVID-19 to the needs of young 
children and their families and frontline 
workers in the three areas of UNICEF service 
provision: (i) access to quality health services, 
(ii) access to early intervention services in the 
case 
of 
developmental 
delays 
and/or 
disabilities, (iii) access to a safe, inclusive 
educational environment. 
The 
evaluation 
found 
that 
the 
UPHV 
intervention for addressing the availability of 
health care services in conflict areas of Eastern 
Ukraine helped increase accessibility with 
telemedicine and supported outreach to the 
most 
disadvantaged 
and 
marginalized 
children with services based on needs. The 
UPHV model applies a child and family-
centered and holistic approach (including 
socio-psychological support), which increases 
its appropriateness to needs.  Further, the 
intervention pays 
increased attention to 
supporting 
vulnerable 
households 
with 
targeted services. The interviewees anticipate 
this 
combination 
of 
home 
visits 
and 
telemedicine will increase the quality of 
services.   
For frontline workers, the UPHV intervention is 
perceived to relieve overburdened primary 
healthcare personnel as it complements the 
services of family doctors or pediatricians and 
targets a limited number of families based on 
an evaluation of their risks and needs. 
The evaluation found that UNICEF interventions 
proved to be highly relevant in responding to 
the parental need for ECI services for children 
with developmental delays and/or disabilities. 
Respondents perceived the ECI training as 
highly relevant to the needs of ECI specialists, 
particularly for improving their communication 
with families on specific household needs, 
cooperating 
with 
other 
specialists, 
and 
addressing the needs of the youngest children 
(from 0 to 3 years). Parents are often unaware 
of typical child development and cannot 
recognize the signs that require attention. The 
pandemic exacerbated this problem, as the 
lockdown further increased families’ isolation 
and suspended face-to-face consultations 
with doctors who were the first specialists to 
follow on the child after birth.  The holistic and 
comprehensive approach to ECI services 
extended beyond the medical approach 
addressed the household needs to receive 
emotional, psychological, and developmental 
support for their child. Consequently, the ECI 
services remained the only service that 
families continued to receive regularly during 
the pandemic due to the engagement of 
parents in the support process. 
The education interventions were relevant to 
increasing pre-school teachers’ awareness of 
inclusive education concepts and addressing 
the needs of different groups of children, 
including children with special education 
needs, during the pandemic context. The 
content of the training that focused on 
establishing learning environments for all 
children in the context of the pandemic was 
also seen by evaluation respondents as highly 
aligned with the current professional needs of 
pre-school 
teachers. 
Moreover, 
the 
intervention was relevant to upgrade parents' 
skills to support children’s learning at home 
and more generally to support the provision of 
pre-school services during the pandemic.  
Some challenges that remain only partially 
addressed by UNICEF interventions concern 

/ 7 
 
MULTI-COUNTRY EVALUATION OF THE UNICEF ECD RESPONSE TO  COVID-19 IN THE ECA REGION 
COUNTRY REPORT: UKRAINE 
psychological support for families during the 
COVID-19 pandemic. Some interviewees and 
survey respondents indicated that the UNICEF 
inclusive education training content did not 
sufficiently address the young children and 
their families’ needs related to psychological 
support. 
Effectiveness 
The early stage of the implementation of UPHV 
intervention limits the effectiveness findings 
with regard to children and families’ needs.  
The survey of frontline workers revealed that 
they felt the training effectively increased their 
knowledge on immunization, breastfeeding 
and healthy nutrition, as well as on advising 
parents on child development milestones. The 
potential positive effects on bringing services 
closer to the most vulnerable families and 
mitigating the negative consequences of 
COVID-19 
lockdowns 
are 
expected 
by 
interviewed stakeholders.  As an indirect 
benefit of the intervention, the programme has 
the potential for setting up a system for 
collecting household-level health data, which 
can support better monitoring and targeting of 
needs. 
UNICEF-supported interventions increased ECI 
practitioners’ 
knowledge 
about 
providing 
family-centered EI, engaging families, and 
understanding their needs and concerns 
regarding child development. According to the 
respondents, 
the 
training 
effectively 
addressed the issue of parents' insufficient 
knowledge 
and 
skills 
to 
support 
child 
development 
using 
the 
family 
routine 
activities. 
Through 
the 
family-centered 
approach, the intervention contributed to 
parents’ engagement and empowerment of 
their parental skills regarding recognition and 
responding to children's needs.  
For early learning, UNICEF interventions were 
found 
effective 
in 
increasing 
teachers’ 
knowledge about providing education to 
children 
with 
special 
education 
needs, 
organization of remote learning, and raising 
their awareness of the importance of inclusive 
education 
in 
general. 
Most 
training 
participants (66%) confirmed applying the 
knowledge and skills gained during the 
training in their daily work. Moreover, more 
remote 
early childhood education (ECE) 
opportunities were created to address the 
children's needs to receive uninterrupted ECE 
during the pandemic. 
Sustainability 
The benefits of the COVID-adapted or related 
interventions are perceived to be useful 
beyond the pandemic. According to the 
evaluation 
surveys, 
inclusive 
education 
training improved the participant's capacity to 
support early learning beyond the COVID-19 
pandemic (89.5%). Moreover, most of the 
survey respondents (87.5%) agreed that the 
skills and knowledge strengthened through the 
ECI training and supervision would be helpful in 
other public emergencies.  
Several mechanisms have been planned to 
increase the sustainability of the achieved 
results after the interventions’ completion. In 
particular, the acquired knowledge and the 
developed 
materials, 
instructions, 
and 
recommendations could be further used for 
training and self-study and part of the 
continuous professional education. All the 
interventions fostered good cooperation with 
government partners at the national, regional, 
and local levels to increase buy-in and 
ownership of approaches. In the case of the ECI 
training, 
an 
online 
course 
on 
ECI 
was 
submitted 
to 
government 
partners 
for 
integration 
with 
in-service 
professional 
development programmes.  
The UPHV intervention included such outputs 
contributing to its sustainability, as i) legal and 
cost-effectiveness modeling analysis, and ii) 
resource training center in Donetsk for primary 
health care for doctors and nurses focusing on 
ECD. Also, discussions are underway 
to 

/ 8 
 
 
 
 
MULTI-COUNTRY EVALUATION OF THE UNICEF ECD RESPONSE TO  COVID-19 IN THE ECA REGION 
COUNTRY REPORT: UKRAINE 
establish 
a 
permanent 
oblast 
training-
resource 
center 
for 
continuing 
medical 
education of doctors and nurses according to 
the programme document. The planned 
development 
and 
adoption 
of 
recommendations on ECD/UPHV for medical 
universities and colleges is expected to 
increase the sustainability of the UPHV in 
Ukraine by ensuring access to continuous 
professional medical education for the UPHV 
staff. 
Several 
issues 
in 
the 
regulatory 
and 
institutional framework concerning ECI affect 
effective ECI service provision in Ukraine. They 
include the need for: i) improving interagency 
cooperation between social, medical, and 
educational services; ii) development 
of 
guidelines 
for 
the 
implementation 
mechanisms of the current legislation/policy 
on ECI services, particularly at the local level; 
and iii) institutionalization of training to ensure 
its quality and sustainability.  
Lessons learned  
Guidance 
for 
organizing 
pre-school 
education using remote technologies must 
address the specific needs of different groups 
of 
pre-school 
children 
and 
the 
ECD 
professionals working with them. Limitations 
in access to technology and equipment, 
particularly for families living in the proximity of 
the contact line, limit the relevance and 
effectiveness 
of 
tele-interventions 
and 
modules of distant learning. In this light, it is 
vital to continue to provide ECD kits and 
learning materials to vulnerable families.  
Effective exchange of experiences between 
COs and ECARO is an essential factor 
contributing to the increased quality of 
planned interventions. Based on lessons 
learned 
from 
counterparts 
from 
other 
countries, the Ukrainian approach to UPHV 
embraced a mix of activities/outputs that 
increases the prospects of sustainability of the 
ECD/UPHV in Eastern Ukraine. It also involved 
both nurses and doctors in capacity building, 
which is a good approach for their future 
cooperation based on a shared understanding 
of the importance of home visiting work.  
Emergency situations, such as the COVID-19 
pandemic, create new needs of children and 
families and frontline workers related to the 
psychological 
and 
emotional 
support 
required.  There is a pressing need to provide 
such support to young children and their 
families to help them deal with pandemic-
related anxieties caused by illness, financial 
troubles, mental health issues, and other 
substantial life challenges which added extra 
layers of vulnerability for children and families, 
especially to those living in Eastern Ukraine. On 
the other side, frontline workers’ trainings can 
also 
address 
these 
issues 
in 
terms 
of 
supporting families in this aspect and self-
care. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

/ 9 
 
MULTI-COUNTRY EVALUATION OF THE UNICEF ECD RESPONSE TO  COVID-19 IN THE ECA REGION 
COUNTRY REPORT: UKRAINE 
Recommendations 
In order to support enabling environment, supply, demand, and quality of ECD interventions in 
Ukraine, it is recommended that UNICEF should: 
Enabling Environment 
1. 
Advocate for the development of a legal and regulatory environment in support of inclusive 
education, with clear delineation of pre-school teachers and teacher assistants’ roles, support 
in the implementation of the Individual Development Programme model, and availability of 
funding for staff remuneration at the oblasts level. 
2. Support the government in developing a comprehensive approach to ECI implementation in 
Ukraine (legislation, guidelines, institutionalization) with the engagement of a broad range of 
stakeholders at different levels. 
Supply  
3. Expand partnerships with governmental stakeholders and educational institutions for the 
development of an educational programme for ‘community nurse’ to ensure capacity-
building of home visitors within the UPHV model and advocate for the introduction of the 
position of a ‘community nurse’ into the qualification framework. 
4. Plan for a future of assessment of the effectiveness and costing of the UPHV intervention and 
advocate for the provision of stable funding for the further institutionalization of this model. 
5. Improve the training content and delivery on providing online/remote ECD/ECI/UPHV services 
and to better prepare specialists to gather information on children at risk. 
Demand  
6. Launch an information campaign on EI as a new social service for the families targeted at 
parents and caretakers supported with networks and coalition-building activities, as well as 
intensify the awareness-raising activities among healthcare workers.  
7. Invest in awareness-raising activities to promote the new ECD/UPHV, including through the 
organization of national-level workshops with guests from other COs to promote the piloted 
UPHV model. 
Quality 
8. Seek synergies between interventions in the different ECD areas in Ukraine, including inclusive 
education, ECI, UPHV, to increase the services’ quality as well as cost-effectiveness, and 
support the government in the development of quality standards in this field, and boost 
intersectoral cooperation. 
 

/ 10 
 
 
 
 
MULTI-COUNTRY EVALUATION OF THE UNICEF ECD RESPONSE TO  COVID-19 IN THE ECA REGION 
COUNTRY REPORT: UKRAINE 
1.0 Introduction 
The COVID-19 pandemic is a multi-dimensional crisis that has profoundly affected the development 
and psycho-social well-being of young children and their caregivers. Evidence from around the world 
clearly shows that the crisis exacerbated existing vulnerabilities and brought on new immediate and 
longer-term challenges to ensuring the well-being of all children. In addition to the pandemic’s 
primary effects such as increased poverty, families with young children have faced an 
unprecedented disruption of essential health, early learning, and social services.   
United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF)’s early childhood development (ECD) teams across the 
Europe and Central Asia (ECA) region have played a critical role in national responses to COVID-19. 
Efforts were recalibrated to address the immediate needs of young children and their families. This 
included re-purposing and strengthening available resources and workforce to provide information 
and services in the circumstances of home confinement, reduced availability of ECD services, and an 
ongoing public health threat.  
Given the novelty of the situation and the imperative to introduce new interventions or adapt existing 
interventions in a timely manner, evidence is needed on their appropriateness and efficiency. Lessons 
learned can inform the development of longer-term recovery plans and budgets for ECD services to 
strengthen the resilience of ECD systems across ECA.  
For this purpose, UNICEF ECA Regional Office (ECARO) commissioned Ecorys to carry out the Multi-
Country Evaluation of the UNICEF ECD response to COVID-19 in the ECA region. A developmental 
evaluation approach was adapted to provide rapid evidence and enable real-time adjustment of 
ongoing efforts. The evaluation entails an in-depth study in four ECA countries: Croatia, Georgia, 
Moldova, and Ukraine, while recognizing lessons learned from the region as a whole. The evaluation 
started in November 2020 and continued until the end of 2021. 
This report presents the findings from the evaluation in Ukraine. It sets out the context of the 
evaluation; a description of the object of the evaluation; its overall purpose, objectives, and scope; 
the methodology; key findings; and conclusions and recommendations. It summarizes the evaluation 
team’s assessment of the relevance, effectiveness, and sustainability of UNICEF’s ECD response to 
COVID-19 in Ukraine.  The findings and recommendations in this report are intended to primarily serve 
UNICEF Ukraine Country Office, UNICEF ECARO, and national governmental and non-governmental 
stakeholders in Ukraine working with young children and families. 
The evaluation team would like to express their gratitude to UNICEF Ukraine Country Office staff for 
their continuous support. We also thank the government of Ukraine, Step by Step Foundation, and 
Early Intervention Institute, and all other stakeholders and the frontline workers who shared their 
experiences and views with us. Finally, we thank the staff from the UNICEF ECARO Evaluation and ECD 
teams for their invaluable inputs, guidance, and management of the evaluation. 
 

/ 11 
 
MULTI-COUNTRY EVALUATION OF THE UNICEF ECD RESPONSE TO  COVID-19 IN THE ECA REGION 
COUNTRY REPORT: UKRAINE 
2.0 Context and purpose of the evaluation 
2.1 
Evaluation background 
2.1.1 
Overview of UNICEF’s ECD programming in Ukraine 
A wave of social, political, and economic changes has transformed Ukraine over the last decade. One 
of the areas where significant progress has been achieved is expanding support for early 
childhood development, through a range of reforms seeking to address critical vulnerabilities and 
reduce inequalities for children in Ukraine. UNICEF Country Programme (CPD) 2018-2022 strives to 
accelerate the pace of the critical reforms needed to ensure that the rights of all children1 are 
steadily realized, and that equity gaps are reduced. As stated clearly in the CPD, “the critical role of 
UNICEF will be to actively engage in efforts to accelerate critical systems reforms, ensuring that the 
best interests of children are a primary consideration, and to prevent any possible reversal in 
children’s and adolescents’ rights during a period of rapid transformations, or arising from the 
conflict”2. 
Six pillars of UNICEF Ukraine (Social inclusion and macro-policies for children; Child protection in all 
settings; All children learn; Early years of healthy life and beyond; Water and Sustainable Environment; 
Independent Child Rights for Results and Accountability) provide a multisectoral foundation for 
achieving the main objectives of the programme. These goals include: (i) strengthening social 
protection intervention; (ii) enhancing the social welfare and justice systems; (iii) expanding 
access to inclusive and quality school education and early learning for all children; (iv) Improving 
equitable access to safe drinking water in conflict-affected areas, reducing exposure to 
environmental risks and improving hygiene; (v) addressing severe gaps in data collection and use 
regarding the situation of children in Ukraine; strengthening independent national institutions for the 
protection and promotion of children’s rights. Additionally, UNICEF will arrange humanitarian 
assistance to internally displaced children in host communities. Support for early childhood 
development is mainstreamed in all areas of the UNICEF Country Programme, rather than being 
categorized as a separate objective. This holistic, cross-sectoral approach allows ECD objectives to 
be pursued in all of the expected outcomes of Ukraine’s Country Programme Document (CPD), 
mentioned above. Based on the analysis of bottlenecks and barriers, early childhood development 
programme interventions in Ukraine put particular emphasis on: 
(i) development of public policies and institutional frameworks serving as a mechanism for 
delivery of ECD packages;  
(ii) advancement of ECD service delivery platforms in terms of access and quality; and  
(iii) promotion of positive parenting, especially as part of the broader support of nurturing care 
and stimulating learning activities.  
 
1 As enshrined in international commitments of Ukraine made under the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of 
Discrimination against Women, the Convention of the Rights of the Child and the Convention on the Rights of Persons with 
disabilities are uphold. 
2 Unicef (2017). Ukraine Country Program Document 2018-2022. 

/ 12 
 
 
 
 
MULTI-COUNTRY EVALUATION OF THE UNICEF ECD RESPONSE TO  COVID-19 IN THE ECA REGION 
COUNTRY REPORT: UKRAINE 
In addition, the development of inter-sectoral collaborations between health, education, social and 
child protection, as well as support of the health system are suggested as two supplementary 
components of ECD programming. These actions constitute essential elements of UNICEF Europe and 
Central Asia (ECA) engagement in the region 
Mainstreaming of ECD into existing CPD outcomes and outputs involves addressing bottlenecks 
under priority actions targeted at different agents and institutions. Six of the priority actions include: 
A. Supporting the Government capacity, at both national and local levels, to design and 
implement an integrated early childhood development policy and institutional framework. 
ECD programme component aims to, inter alia, pursue policy dialogue and advocacy to 
ensure inclusion of ECD in national development goals; conduct sectoral data survey relevant 
to ECD; and conduct study visits in other countries working with UNICEF in the ECA region to 
learn from best practices advanced in diverse sectors. Under Child Rights Monitoring, the 
programme will improve the availability of data, for example, by supporting the government 
to enhance the quality of administrative data and provide disaggregation. 
B. Keeping children and families together. ECD programming in Ukraine seeks to promote 
alternative family-based solutions and transform residential care institutions for young 
children.  
C. Preventing and addressing violence, including gender-based violence. These actions are 
aimed at building the capacity of the caregivers to support optimal child health and 
development, for instance, by empowering parents for positive, non-violent parenting and 
supporting gender equality in childcare. 
D. Providing increased access for children aged 3-6, particularly the most disadvantaged 
ones, to quality and inclusive Early Learning services in selected municipalities by 
promoting quality pre-school education and positive parenting. 
E. Ensuring access to justice for all children. Main targets under this priority action include 
increasing coordination between child protection actors, promoting restorative and social 
service responses in the justice system, as well as enhancing skills and knowledge of 
legislators and law enforcement authorities about child-friendly justice.  
F. Humanitarian response, for instance, providing psychosocial support, mine risk education, 
mine victim assistance, and other protective services to children, as well as expanding 
community-based services to displaced and host communities. 
With the above priorities, UNICEF’s country programme is expected to contribute to the achievement 
of 2030 Sustainable Development Goals of Ukraine3, in particular those leading to the achievement 
of Outcome 2 (“By 2022, women and men, girls and boys, equitably benefit from integrated social 
protection, universal health services, and quality education”)  and Outcome 4 (“By 2022, 
communities, including vulnerable people and IDPs, are more resilient and equitably benefit from 
greater social cohesion, quality services and recovery support”). The specific ECD related indicators 
include: increase of the number of children aged 3-16 in conflict-affected areas who have access to 
ECD and basic education (4.2), decrease the percentage of households with children living below the 
relative poverty line (2.2), decrease in the mortality of children under 5 (2.10), an increase of 
 
3 Ukraine-UN Partnership Framework 2018-2022.