EVALUATION OF THE INCLUSIVE 
AND SPECIAL EDUCATION 
PROGRAMME IN BHUTAN
2010-2020

Published in 2022 by Ministry of Educaiton and UNICEF Bhutan
Permission is required to reproduce any part of this publication. For more 
information on usage rights, please contact thimphu@unicef.org
©️ Text & Photos 2022 UNICEF
All rights reserved

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Evaluation of the Inclusive and 
Special Education Programme in 
Bhutan (2010-2020) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© UNOCT17952 

  
i 
 
Acknowledgements 
The evaluation team would like to express their gratitude to all those who supported and participated 
in this evaluation study: 
 
This evaluation report would not have been possible without the UNICEF Bhutan Country Office 
team's dedicated resources, time, and energy. Special thanks to Ms Dechen Zangmo, Monitoring and 
Evaluation Officer, Mr Bishnu Bhakta Mishra, Education Officer and Ms Pema Tshomo, Education 
Officer for their technical support throughout the evaluation. We are also grateful for the support from 
the UNICEF Regional Office for South Asia, Ms Marie-Consolee Mukangendo, Deputy Representative 
Bhutan and Mr Geert Poorteman, Chief Education Officer. 
 
The evaluation team would like to thank the Ministry of Education for their technical inputs and 
logistical support to the evaluation team. Special thanks to Karma Galay, Director General of the 
Department of School Education, Mr Sherab Phuntshok, Chief of ECCD and SEN Division, Mr Karma 
Gayleg, Programme Analyst of ECCD, and Mr Pema Norbu, Mr Karma Norbu, and Ms Pema Choden, 
Programme Officers at ECCD & SEN Division.  
 
Appreciations to Mr. Pema Chhogyel, the Deputy Chief Program Officer, ECCD & SEN Division who 
has involved throughout in review, coordination and finalization of the study. He has been the core 
member of both the technical and reference group for the evaluation.  
 
Acknowledgement is also due to the members of the Evaluation Reference Group for their time, 
expertise, and invaluable input to this study. Special thanks to the valuable inputs from Mr Phuntsho 
Wangyel, Ms Tshering Yangtsho, and Ms Ugyen Zangmo of the Gross National Happiness 
Commission; Ms Kinley Wangmo of the Ministry of Health, Mr Norbu Wangchuk, Mr Sangay Dorji, 
and M. Tshering Lhamo from the Ministry of Labour and Human Resources; Ms Yeshi Lham from the 
National Commission on Women and Children; Mr Shriman Gurung and Mr Arjun Gurung of BCSEA; 
Mr Wangchuk and Mr Dorji Tshewang of Royal Education Council, Mr Namgay Dorji of Ability Bhutan 
Society, and Mr Sonam Gyamtsho and Mr Dorji Phuntsho of Disabled People’s Organization of Bhutan, 
and Ms Tempa Ragbay from Phensum Parents Support Group. 
  
The evaluation team is grateful to the government, civil society partners, development partners, 
organizations of persons with disabilities, school heads, SEN coordinators, teachers, parents and 
caregivers, and children with and without disabilities, who shared their knowledge, experience, 
reflections, and resources for this evaluation, as well as for their valuable time during a challenging 
period in the middle of the COVID-19 pandemic. 
 
This evaluation study was led by Dr Peter Grimes, Dr Kishore Chhetri, Arlene dela Cruz, Jan Erron 
Celebrado, and Rosalynn Estor from Beyond Education Consultancy. 
 
 
 
 

  
ii 
 
Foreword 
To ensure inclusion and education for all learners, Inclusive Education has been a priority for the 
Ministry of Education for more than four decades. The first special school for children with vision 
impairment was established in 1973. In 2001, a pilot-based programme on the integration of learners 
with disabilities into the mainstream system was started at the Changangkha Lower Secondary 
School, Thimphu. A school for children with deafness and Hard of Hearing was established in Drukgyel 
Lower Secondary School in 2003. With the evolvement of education for children with disabilities from 
special education models to inclusive approaches globally, Bhutan commits to valuing, accepting and 
supporting diversity in schools and ensuring that every child (including children with disabilities) has 
an equal opportunity to learn as per the Standard for Inclusive Education developed by the Ministry of 
Education in 2017. The Ministry of Education has taken concerted efforts to get over 900 children with 
disabilities into 26 inclusive schools (including in two specialized institutes) as of 2022.  Major 
investments have been made in areas of expansion of access to quality inclusive education by the 
Ministry of Education. UNICEF has contributed towards the Ministry’s commitments to leave no child 
behind supporting in the identification and establishment of new schools for inclusive and special 
education programmes; strengthen teacher capacity to deliver quality inclusive education; and 
advocate for rights-based approach to inclusive and special education in Bhutan.  
 
This evaluation of Inclusive and Special Education programme in Bhutan was conducted by 
independent external consultants. The evaluation report points out several success stories of 
improving the lives of children with disabilities through education, protection, and empowerment, 
thereby justifying the relevance of the programme. The report also highlights lessons learnt in terms 
of quality as well as sustainability of the programme. The report recommends strategic shifts to focus 
on quality education, greater access and involvement of wider stakeholders including parents, Civil 
Society Organizations and policymakers to anchor future interventions on the Convention on Rights 
of Persons with Disabilities (UNCRPD). With findings of the evaluation, the relevant agencies will be 
better prepared to confront the misconceptions and develop positive attitudes and services for 
children with disabilities. In particular, the Ministry of Education will be in a stronger position to build 
support for inclusive education within the schools and across the communities.  
 
The Ministry of Education and UNICEF would like to congratulate the ECCD and Special Education 
Division, MoE, the evaluation team and Planning Monitoring and Evaluation Division, and the Education 
Section, UNICEF for successfully undertaking a comprehensive evaluation of Special and Inclusive 
Education in Bhutan.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Karma Galay                                                  
 
 
 
 Dr Will Parks 
Ministry of Education  
 
 
 
 
  
 UNICEF Bhutan    
 
 
 
 

  
iii 
 
Executive Summary  
Introduction  
This is the evaluation of the Inclusive and Special Education Programme in Bhutan, commissioned by 
the Ministry of Education and UNICEF Bhutan and led by Beyond Education Consultancy. Education 
for children with disabilities has long been a priority of the Royal Government of Bhutan. Although the 
concept and practice of inclusive education are relatively new (Bhutan MoE, 2017) and the government 
is yet to ratify the CRPD and establish a national education law, significant strides in legislative and policy 
reforms have been made in recent years toward providing equitable learning opportunities for all children, 
including those with disabilities. Education for children with disabilities has been consistently prioritised in 
national development plans. Bhutan’s focus on the education of children with disabilities has been 
strengthened since the 9th Five-Year Plan which resulted in the establishment of a Special Education Unit 
within the Ministry of Education (MoE) (Bhutan Planning Commission, 2002; Gross National Happiness 
Commission, 2009; Schuelka, 2012). The main strategy of the government was to integrate children with 
disabilities into regular classrooms (Bhutan Planning Commission, 2002).   
  
Object of Evaluation 
The Inclusive and Special Education Programme was the object of this evaluation. It is a programme 
of the Ministry of Education supported by various development partners, aiming to ensure every 
Bhutanese child learn in an inclusive education system that enables participation and supports all 
children to meet their potential. The Programme is being implemented through a three-pronged 
strategy, reflected in the Programme’s reconstructed Theory of Change:  
a) creating an enabling environment (policy) 
b) service delivery (capacity development and supply) 
c) demand creation (awareness and advocacy) 
 
Purpose, Objectives and Scope 
The evaluation aimed to establish whether there have been significant changes in the education of 
children with disabilities within the ten years of Programme implementation. The evaluation also 
aimed to provide baseline data on the Programme which could be used as a basis for monitoring 
progress, setting targets, and evaluating results. It outlines a set of actionable recommendations to 
improve the delivery of inclusive education in the country. The scope covers the implementation 
period 2010 to 2020 in 23 schools1 and 2 Draktsho vocational training centres offering the IE/SEN 
Programme. Sixteen general schools that do not implement the programme were included in the 
sample to generate a comparative analysis in terms of existing knowledge, attitudes, and practices in 
relation to teaching children with disabilities.  
 
Evaluation Design 
The evaluation is a combination of formative and summative approaches. It is formative or learning 
focused as it aims to identify progress, challenges, and opportunities. There is a key focus on the 
 
1 This includes 2 specialized institutes and does not include the 3 IE/SEN schools established in 2021.  

  
iv 
 
processes and the likelihood of such processes to lead to the achievement of target results. The 
evaluation gathered evidence-based lessons to inform the improvement of programme 
implementation. At the same time, the evaluation was summative as it also assessed the achievement 
of outcomes and outputs and measured the extent to which the Programme brought about changes. 
 
A mixed-methods approach was adopted for this evaluation, combining both quantitative and 
qualitative approaches. Data collection methods included a (1) systematic desk review of relevant 
literature, policy documents and programme reports; (2) key informant interviews and FGDs with a 
total of 1,066 individuals including representatives from key government officials, local and 
international development partners; school leaders, SEN Programme Coordinators (SENCOs), school 
leaders, teachers from generals schools and schools with IE/SEN Programme, parents of children with 
and without disabilities and children with and without disabilities; (3) online surveys with a total of 417 
teachers from general schools and schools offering IE/SEN schools; (4) classroom observation in 20 
schools with IE/SEN Programme; and a case study of Draktsho Vocational Training Centre.  
 
Aligned with the TOR, the criteria for evaluation are based on the Organization for Economic Co-
operation and Development (OECD) Development Assistance Committee's (DAC) evaluation criteria: 
relevance, coherence, effectiveness, efficiency, and sustainability. To explicitly address the issues of 
gender, equity and human rights, an additional criterion (cross-cutting issues) was added.  
 
Evaluation Findings 
1. Relevance 
Two key evaluation questions were investigated in this criterion pertaining to (1) alignment of 
programme strategies with international and national policies in meeting the needs of children with 
disabilities and (2) responsiveness of activities and outputs to address national priorities and needs of 
children with disabilities. 
The evaluation concludes that the IE/SEN Programme is relevant to both the national priorities and the 
educational needs of children with disabilities in Bhutan.  
• 
In principle, the programme’s objectives and strategies are aligned with international and 
national policies promoting equity and inclusion. Its main aim of providing equitable access to 
learning for all children reinforces the goals of the CRC, CRPD, and SDG 4 and priorities 
articulated in key national policies. However, there is room for improvement in terms of 
bridging the gap between policy and practice. Limitations in resources and technical capacity 
prevent the programme from being fully aligned with the ideals set out in policies.  
• 
The responsiveness of the programme is mainly made evident by its success in increasing 
access to education for learners with disabilities, owing to the government’s gradual 
establishment of more inclusive schools in the country. Moreover, promising teaching and 
learning practices and in-classroom support are emerging and have been reported to result to 
positive outcomes among learners with disabilities. Although enrolment rates were seen to 
increase over the years, most children with disabilities in the country remain invisible in the 
school system. The government needs to accelerate its efforts to expand the programme, not 
only to significantly increase access but raise the quality of education provisions in the 
classrooms.  
 

  
v 
 
• 
Overall, the situation of children with disabilities in Bhutan, wherein most of them remaining 
marginalized in terms of access and participation, merits the continued commitment to and 
implementation of the IE/SEN programme. 
 
2. Coherence 
In evaluating coherence, the focus of the study was on (1) internal and (2) external policy coherence 
and (3) cross-sector collaboration for disability-inclusive education.  
• 
Broadly speaking, Bhutan’s national policies (i.e., Draft National Policy on Special Educational 
Needs 2012, Draft National Education Policy 2019, and the National Policy for Persons with 
Disabilities 2019) are internally and externally coherent in terms of their fundamental aims. 
Internal policy coherence is evident as the basic principles of inclusion and equity are mutually 
reinforced in domestic policies. Based on the aims of the policy documents, coherence with 
external policies such as the SDGs and the CRPD was found to be strong. All national policies 
are synergized in safeguarding the right of all children to education, without discrimination  
• 
A key finding of the evaluation is the continued reference to language that promotes the notion 
of a specialized or segregated forms of education for children with disabilities. The evaluation 
concludes and recommends replacing outdated terminology with more inclusive alternatives. 
A simple shift in language has the potential to change education practitioners’ thinking around 
disability inclusion. It must be noted that the special educational needs policy was drafted in 
2012 and has informed the development of the education policy but will not be adopted.  
• 
Policy reform initiatives such as the ongoing development of the education policy present an 
opportunity to strongly articulate Bhutan’s commitment to gradually phasing out specialized 
provisions and moving towards building more inclusive schools within the general education 
system.  
• 
The programme has provided a platform for cross-sector collaboration, but it could be 
improved. Horizontal coordination among government units and development partners is 
present but mechanisms to strengthen coordination are needed. For instance, the committee 
for inclusive education must be activated; and CSOs, OPDs and local education offices need 
to be more actively involved in joined-up planning, implementation, and monitoring.  
• 
Community engagement could be strengthened by tapping active parent organisations on the 
ground and nurturing the existing relationships between SENCOs/SEN Team with parents. 
The evaluation highlighted that foundational to effective collaboration within the schools is 
inclusive leadership. School leaders who have had training on inclusive education tend to hold 
more positive attitudes towards inclusive education and are more open to collaboration. The 
existence of organised professional learning communities is an emerging good practice that 
needs to be supported further and replicated in other schools.  
 
3. Effectiveness 
To determine the extent to which the programme achieved its objectives and intended results, the 
evaluation examined five dimensions: access and participation, positive and negative unintended 
results, resources and implementation strategies, advocacy, and gender mainstreaming.  
• 
Access and participation in inclusive and special education have increased significantly since 
the Programme commenced in 2010. However, enrolment data showed significant gender 

  
vi 
 
differences in access, with boys consistently outnumbering girls since 2011. Limited data, 
particularly on learning outcomes and participation rate, hinder the study from assessing and 
determining the extent and quality of participation of children with disabilities. 
• 
The Programme achieved positive results and significant milestones in its ten years of 
implementation. It was instrumental in formulating inclusive education policies, strategies, and 
standards. Through its technical interventions and advocacy efforts, stakeholders reported 
increased access to and quality of education and greater awareness of disability and inclusive 
education in schools and communities. No negative results were reported but a number of 
clear areas for improvement were noted.  
• 
Although substantial inputs were provided to implement the Programme, these were not 
adequate to address long-standing issues and concerns, which include: discrimination against 
children with disabilities, limited understanding of disability issues and inclusive education, 
limited capacity of teachers to facilitate inclusive education, lack of accessible infrastructure 
and facilities, lack of appropriate instruction guides and materials, lack of assistive devices and 
health services from experts, lack of alignment between planning and implementation; lack of 
financial resources and development partners; and lack of EMIS data to aid in decision-making. 
Classroom strategies, such as the Individual Education Plan and push-in and pull-out 
approaches need to be reviewed further to determine their appropriateness and inclusivity.   
• 
Awareness and demand for inclusive education may have increased to some extent, but 
misconceptions, stereotypes, and discriminatory attitudes continue to be barriers to inclusion.  
Responses highlighted the serious need to improve understanding about disability and 
inclusive education to ensure that the Programme can be implemented effectively with the 
full support of all stakeholders.  
• 
Using UNICEF’s gender continuum model, the findings suggest that the Programme falls 
under the gender-aware/sensitive category. While the Programme considers the principles of 
gender equality in its frameworks and implementation strategies and recognizes that the ‘one-
size-fits-all’ approach contributes to the production and reproduction of gender inequalities in 
education, the findings on the gender needs of girls and boys with disabilities suggest that the 
Programme does not actively challenge and address them.  
 
Overall, the Programme is moving in the right direction and has achieved significant progress in its 
ten years of implementation. However, the Programme needs to address gender disparity in access 
and participation, allocate adequate inputs and resources, ensure effectiveness and inclusivity of 
strategies, improve understanding of disability and inclusive education, and address the different 
needs of boys and girls to promote equal educational outcomes.   
 
4. Efficiency 
To determine the extent to which the Programme delivered results in an economical and timely way, 
the evaluation study examined five dimensions: planning, monitoring, and evaluation; financial and 
human resources; implementation strategies; cost-effectiveness; and situation analysis.  
• 
Some mechanisms are in place to plan, monitor, and evaluate the Programme: the MoE 
manages education data using the EMIS and presents relevant indicators through the AES 
reports, schools track their progress through the School Performance Management System, 
and teachers use the Individual Education Plan to record and review students’ academic 

  
vii 
 
achievement and developmental milestones. Though these mechanisms help improve 
programme efficiency, the lack of standardized tools, lack of training on documentation and 
reporting, and lack of dissemination of relevant information hinder stakeholders from using 
data in a strategic and timely manner.  
• 
Substantial resources—human, financial, and technical—have been invested in the 
Programme. However, these are not adequate to properly implement inclusive and special 
education and address the needs of children with disabilities. Among others, the lack of 
teacher training and capacity building has been cited most frequently as an obstacle to the 
successful implementation of the Programme.  
• 
Working in parallel, the strategies of policy formulation, technical capacity-building, financial 
support, and advocacy have facilitated improvements in the provision of inclusive and special 
education. Having a set of standards for inclusive education has also supported efficiency in 
achieving results, although implementation still varied across schools.  On the other hand, the 
limited participation of parents, caregivers, and the community may have lessened 
opportunities for further awareness-raising, better service delivery, and a broader support base 
for the Programme. 
• 
There is a lack of understanding amongst stakeholders about the principles of inclusive 
education and how this can be implemented to benefit all students—those with and without 
disabilities. Though responses acknowledged the complex factors affecting inclusive 
education, some stakeholders believe that including children with disabilities in schools with 
IE/SEN programme is less cost-effective compared to enrolling them in specialized institutes. 
The Programme must dispel the misconception that addressing the needs of children with 
disabilities will adversely impact the learning and development of children without disabilities 
and vice versa.  
• 
Within the Programme, its strengths lie in having solid partnerships and close collaboration 
with other agencies and organizations, expertise in inclusive education amongst stakeholders, 
employment of a twin-track approach to disability inclusion, and institutionalisation of the 
planning and review processes. On the other hand, the Programme needs to address its 
weaknesses which include:  insufficient data on children with disabilities and disability-
inclusive education to inform intervention, absence of a national education law, limited 
government investment, limited understanding of inclusive education, limited capacity to 
implement inclusive education, and limited understanding of how to organize inclusive 
classrooms and plan and teach inclusively. 
• 
As the Programme continues its next phase of implementation, it needs to consider how to 
maximise existing opportunities, including the possibility of establishing more inclusive 
schools (with a focus on whole school approaches to inclusion including inclusive cultures 
environment and practice), improving access and participation of children with disabilities in 
education, and increasing collaboration with organisations of persons with disabilities and 
other agencies. The Programme also needs to mitigate the threats posed by external factors 
including the delay in the ratification of CRPD, lack of development partners (funding partners), 
limited awareness and understanding of the needs of children with disabilities, limited 
awareness and understanding of inclusive education, inaccessible infrastructure and facilities 
in communities and public spaces, and impact of COVID-19 pandemic on learning continuity 
and quality of teaching and learning. 
 

  
viii 
 
Overall, the Programme has taken the initial steps—establish mechanisms, allocate resources, and 
employ strategies—to deliver results efficiently. However, the Programme needs to further integrate 
the planning, monitoring, evaluation mechanisms; analyse, report, and use data in a more strategic 
and timely manner; increase investment in inclusive education; increase parental and community 
engagement; build stakeholder capacity to understand and implement inclusive education; and 
consider the results of the initial situation analysis in refining its overall design and strategy.   
 
5. Sustainability 
The three key evaluation questions in this criterion focus on (1) efforts made to establish an enabling 
environment and measures implemented to sustain the delivery of services, (2) interventions adopted 
to upscale the programme, and (3) strengthening of capacities of different education stakeholders at 
the individual and organisational levels.  
• 
There is evidence of significant efforts that have been made to support the sustainability of 
the programme. The findings of this evaluation study have highlighted the steps that the 
Bhutanese government has taken to sustain and upscale the IE/SEN programme in the 
country. These include establishing an enabling environment through various rights-based and 
disability-inclusive policy frameworks, increasing the financial investments on the whole 
education system, and requiring the commitment of the local government to implement the 
programme. However, these efforts are likely to be hampered by various challenges identified 
by evaluation study participants. These include limited budget dedicated to the programme, 
inadequate disability-inclusive infrastructure, gaps in transitional planning, challenges in 
implementing disability-inclusive curriculum and pedagogy, assessment and learning 
materials. 
• 
There is also evidence that the RGOB has adopted different interventions to expand the 
programme implementation. There is significant progress in expanding the programme to 
reach more general schools to cater for the educational needs of children with mild to 
moderate disabilities, and eventually, young children with disabilities through the ECCD 
programme. Nevertheless, some evaluation study participants stressed the need to urgently 
introduce the programme to other general schools and increase the human resources to reach 
more children with disabilities. Findings also show that the government collaborates with 
external partners such as development partners and national civil society organisations to 
sustain the programme expansion. The government is also utilising disability data through 
national surveys and studies on disability to support the case for investment in IE/SEN 
programme. Moreover, findings reveal that increasing the demand for inclusive education 
through raising awareness on the right to education of children with disabilities contributes to 
the upscaling of the programme. However, challenges remain particularly in influencing the 
parents and communities in supporting the education of children with disabilities. 
• 
The findings of the evaluation study provide evidence that relevant education stakeholders, 
particularly at the school level, were supported through capacity development activities to 
implement the IE/SEN programme. Respondents shared various approaches in building the 
capacity of education stakeholders. For instance, different education colleges in Bhutan offer 
pre-service and in-service teacher training for school heads and teachers. Ministry of Education 
and other external partners provide in-service teacher training programmes that target school 
heads, SEN programme coordinators, and teachers in schools with IE/SEN programme. 
However, evaluation study participants have identified gaps and challenges in this area. First,