EXTERNAL EVALUATION 
KOICA SUPPORTED ACTIVITIES  
“Better Life for Girls: Full Realization of Vulnerable Girls 
and Boys Rights to Health, Protection and Education in Jordan” 
2017-2021 
 
LRPS-2021-9164785 
UNICEF Jordan Country Office 
MENA Region 
2021 
 
FINAL EVALUATION REPORT 
 
 
Submission date 
06/12/2021 
 
 
 Evaluation Team 
Vincent Mudry, Chief Programme Officer / Senior Consultant / Team Leader 
Marie Lefevre Saadoun, Senior Consultant / Team Member 
Marwa Ershaidat, Consultant / Team Member 
Abdulsalam Amoush, Consultant / Team member 

 
1 
 
DISCLAIMER  
The views presented in this report are those of the authors and do not necessarily represent the views 
of UNICEF. 
 
 

 
2 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
 
The evaluation team would like to express their gratitude to those who participated in the evaluation 
process. We would firstly like to thank UNICEF Jordan, the Government of Jordan, the Ministry of 
Education, the Ministry of Health, the Royal Health Awareness Society and the Jordan River Foundation 
for their support and availability during the evaluation and for taking the time to hold discussions with 
Philanthropy Advisors. 
 
A special thank you to the other key respondents, parents and caregivers, school and health staff, for 
sharing their very good insights and overview of the KOICA supported activities. They patiently 
answered our questions and made themselves available for in-person discussions to help us grasp the 
core findings for the purpose of this evaluation. 
 
 
يود فريق التقييم أن يعرب عن امتنانه ألولئك الذين شاركوا في عملية 
 التقييم. نود أوالً أن نشكر منظمة اليونيسف 
 في األردن ، والحكومة 
 األردنية
، ووزارة التربية والتعليم ، ووزارة الصحة ، والجمعية الملكية للتوعية الصحية ومؤسسة نهر األردن على دعمهم و
تواجدهم 
 أثناء التقييم وعلى 
تخصيص الوقت إلجراء المقابالت. 
 
 
شكر خاص للمشاركين الرئيسيين اآلخرين ، أولياء األمور ومقدمي الرعاية ، والعاملين 
 في 
 المدارس والصحة ، لمشاركتهم أفكارهم الجيدة 
واعطائهم نظرة 
 عامة على األنشطة التي تدعمها KOICA. 
 لقد أجابوا بصبر على أسئلتنا  وساعدونا على إبراز النتائج 
 األساس
ية لغرض هذا 
التقييم.
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
3 
 
ACRONYMS 
 
CP 
 
Child Protection   
CHC 
 
Comprehensive Health Centers 
ESC 
 
Evaluation Steering Committee 
ET 
 
Evaluation Team 
FGD 
 
Focus Group Discussion 
FPD 
 
Family Protection Department 
GoJ 
 
Government of Jordan 
KII 
 
Key Informant Interview 
KOICA  
Korea International Cooperation Agency 
IP 
 
Implementing Partners 
JHF 
 
Jordan Humanitarian Fund 
JRF 
 
Jordan River Foundation  
JRP   
 
Jordan Response Plan  
M&E  
 
Monitoring and Evaluation 
MoE 
 
Ministry of Education 
MoH 
 
Ministry of Health 
MoWI  
Ministry of Water and Irrigation  
NGO 
 
Non-Governmental Organisations 
OECD  
Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development 
PCA 
 
Programme Cooperation Agreement 
RHAS  
Royal Health Awareness Society 
SGBV  
Sexual and Gender Based Violence 
ToC 
 
Theory of Change 
ToR 
 
Terms of Reference 
UNEG  
United Nations Evaluation Group  
UNHCR 
 
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees 
UNICEF  
United Nations’ Children Fund 
UNOCHA 
United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs 
 
 

 
4 
 
Table of contents 
1 
Executive Summary 
6 
2 
Introduction to the evaluation 
12 
2.1 
Overview of the Context 
12 
3 
Object of the evaluation 
14 
3.1 
Overview of KOICA supported activities 
14 
4 
Purpose and objectives of the evaluation 
16 
4.1 
Scope of the evaluation 
16 
4.2 
Stakeholders and audience of the evaluation 
16 
4.3 
Governance and management of the evaluation 
17 
5 
Framework of the Evaluation 
17 
5.1 
Logic Model and Theory of Change 
17 
5.2 
Conceptual framework and approach 
18 
5.3 
Evaluation criteria and evaluation matrix 
18 
6 
Methodology of the Evaluation 
20 
6.1 
Phases of the Evaluation 
20 
6.2 
Analysis and Quality Assurance 
23 
6.3 
Ethical Considerations 
24 
6.4 
Risks and Limitations of the Evaluation 
25 
7 
Evaluation Findings 
26 
7.1 
Key findings and rating System 
26 
7.2 
Relevance 
26 
7.3 
Coverage 
30 
7.4 
Effectiveness 
34 
7.5 
Efficiency 
42 
7.6 
Impact 
47 
7.7 
Sustainability 
49 
8 
Conclusions and Lessons Learned 
52 
8.1 
Relevance 
52 
8.2 
Coverage 
52 
8.3 
Effectiveness 
52 
8.4 
Efficiency 
53 
8.5 
Impact 
53 
8.6 
Sustainability 
54 
9 
Recommendations 
54 
10 
List of Annexes 
56 
10.1 
Annex 1: Terms of References 
56 
10.2 
Annex 2: Phases of the evaluation 
56 
10.3 
Annex 3: Stakeholder Matrix 
56 

 
5 
 
10.4 
Annex 4: Evaluation Matrix 
56 
10.5 
Annex 5: Data Collection Tools 
56 
10.6 
Annex 6: Field Mission Agenda 
56 
10.7 
Annex 7: Field Mission PPT presentation 
56 
10.8 
Annex 8: List of respondents 
56 
10.9 
Annex 9: Bibliography 
56 
10.10 
Annex 10: Evaluation Team 
56 
 
 
 

 
6 
 
 
1 Executive Summary 
Context 
Jordan has suffered from the spillover of the conflict in Syria which resulted into a prolonged regional 
crisis and is acknowledged by the United Nations (UN) as the worst displacement crisis of this century. 
The Government of Jordan is confronted with the pressure of maintaining the same quality of services 
for both Syrian refugees and vulnerable Jordanians impacted by the Syria crisis. As of today, Jordan is 
hosting 664,4141 Syrian refugees who are registered with UNHCR and constitute a large community in 
the Jordanian demographics. According to the 2019 Vulnerability Assessment Framework, needs in the 
Health, WASH, Education and Child Protection sectors remain extremely high. With children making up 
a high proportion of refugees2 and being at high risk, they suffer from early marriage, Sexual and Gender 
Based Violence3 (SGBV), dropping out of school, child labor, and this has led to high protection 
concerns. In addition, access to health facilities and services and WASH have also been identified as 
key concerns. Jordan still relies on international funding to respond to the protracted refugee crisis, and 
a large number of actors are involved in the response. For this, the Jordan Response Plan (JRP) which 
is led by the Government of Jordan (GoJ), serves as the main guide providing key principles of a 
coordinated response with a high emphasis on the coordination and partnership between international 
donors, international Non-Governmental Organisations (NGO), Jordanian NGOs and Jordanian 
institutions. The Government of Jordan has developed several plans and programs to address the 
health and socioeconomic impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic, including the launch of the COVID-19 
vaccination program in January 2021. Prior to the pandemic, Jordan made notable improvements in 
narrowing its current account deficit, however the slowing down of the world’s economy following the 
pandemic, seems to have reversed this trend. On the social level, the pandemic had a disproportionate 
impact on women and girls, with the increase of domestic violence4. Those amongst the most deprived 
communities are at greater risk of sexual and gender-based violence (SGBV), with a hindered access 
to sexual and reproductive health services as well. 
 
Object and Scope of the Evaluation 
The Korea International Cooperation Agency (KOICA) invested USD 4.5 million in 2017 to support 
programmes to fulfill the rights of girls and boys in Jordan. Under the KOICA supported activities, 
UNICEF engaged in three core sectors, Health, WASH and Child Protection.5 The following 
interventions were the focus of this evaluation: 
Box 1: KOICA supported activities per sector 
SECTOR 
HEALTH 
WASH 
CHILD PROTECTION 
KOICA supported 
activities 
● 
Integrated School 
Health (ISH) 
Programme; 
● 
Support to Primary 
Health Care Centers 
● 
National Standards for 
WASH in Schools; 
● 
Three Star Approach; 
● 
Environment Action 
Clubs 
● 
Helpline services: 
Counseling & Case 
Management 
 
The key stakeholders of the evaluation were UNICEF, KOICA, the Ministry of Education (MoE), the 
Ministry of Health (MoH), the Family Protection Department (FPD), the Jordan River Foundation (JRF), 
 
1 UNHCR. UNHCR Fact Sheet Jordan, Feb. 2021      
2 46,7% of refugees are children, UNHCR Operational Update October 2021 
3 UNFPA Study on child marriage rising among most vulnerable Syrian refugees, 2017 http://www.unfpa.org/news/new-study-
finds-child-marriage-rising-among-most-vulnerable-syrian-refugees# 
4  Increase in domestic violence, poor access to family planning, Plan International, May 20, 2020, 
https://plan-international.org/news/2020-05-20-covid-19-jordan-domestic-violence-poor-access-family-
planning 
5 Outcome 2 of the project is not covered by this evaluation 

 
7 
 
the Royal Health Awareness Society (RHAS), school directors, teachers, children and their 
parents/caregivers. 
 
Purpose and Objective of the Evaluation  
The main purpose of the assignment was a summative evaluation of KOICA supported interventions 
and activities focused on Health, WASH and Child Protection in Jordan. More specifically, the evaluation 
aimed at understanding (1) how funds were managed, (2) gain knowledge on the programmatic 
achievements to fulfill the needs of children and women providing them with appropriate assistance, 
and (3) how the capacities of government and national actors were strengthened. 
 
In addition, the objectives of the summative evaluation were as follow:  
- 
Accountability: Assess the relevance, coverage, effectiveness, efficiency, sustainability, and 
impact of KOICA supported interventions. 
- 
Lessons learned: Identify good practices and lessons learned from KOICA supported 
interventions (including intended and unintended outcomes) in order to build on general 
knowledge;  
- 
Forward-looking: Inform strategic thinking and provide concrete recommendations that will be 
considered for future UNICEF interventions and its implementing partners as UNICEF moves 
into the new country programme document starting in 2023. 
 
Framework of the Evaluation  
The main approach to the evaluation of the KOICA supported activities was based on the result 
framework “Better life for Girls: Full realization of Vulnerable girls’ and boys’ rights to health, protection 
and education in Jordan” provided by UNICEF to the evaluation team (ET) at the start of the evaluation. 
Based on the revised result framework above and the desk review conducted by the team, the logic 
model implied is a response to the overall protracted refugee crisis and the realization of girls 
and boys rights to health, protection and education in Jordan. According to the original Problem 
and Solution Tree Diagram6, the intervention sought to provide better conditions for girls and women in 
terms of health, WASH and protection, with a strong focus on children with disabilities7 as well as girls 
and women who are at risk of violence and suffering from protection issues. Based on the terms of 
reference for this evaluation focusing on specific KOICA supported activities, the team was able to 
reconstruct the implicit Theory of Change (ToC) that was used as a tool to support the evaluation 
process. The ToC is based on an in-depth review of the programmes and sections’ documents, 
especially the result framework, the logical framework and the Problem and Solution Tree Diagram. 
The implicit ToC was revised and refined by the evaluation team (ET) to create a useful tool to fine-tune 
the assignment and more specifically to assess the sustainability and impact of the intervention. 
 
 
6 KOICA-UNICEF Project Document 2017 Jordan 
7 Outcome 2 of the result framework is not part of this evaluation 

 
8 
 
 
Conceptual framework and approach to the analysis of the relevance  
 
In order to better assess the relevance of the programme against a solid conceptual framework, in 
complementarity with the logic model, the team for the evaluation defined the hereunder a framework 
applicable to the KOICA supported activities. Throughout the evaluation, the ET provided an 
assessment of the relevance of the activities against the indicators and the core principles of the 
framework in the graph below     .  However, this framework does not necessarily prove useful to the 
assessment against the other OECD criteria. The team focused on the extent to which the 
intervention has worked towards achieving an integrated approach that fits with regional and 
international standards. In addition, this approach helped the team contextualise the activities 
implemented and their relevance towards a human rights-based approach. 
 
 
 
 

 
9 
 
Methodology of the Evaluation  
The evaluation of the KOICA supported activities was guided by the purpose, the objectives, the ToC 
and the key evaluation questions to inform what has been achieved, lessons learned and provide 
recommendations. PA’s team used the OECD/DAC evaluation criteria in addition to the UNEG Norms 
and Standards for Evaluation to support the methodology and the process of the evaluation. Throughout 
the assignment, PA ensured the assessment of the relevance, coverage, effectiveness, efficiency, 
impact, and sustainability of the KOICA supported activities. 
 
➢ Relevance: to analyze how the programme was designed in light of the problems it intends to 
respond to then, 
➢ Coverage: to understand if it targets the right beneficiaries. 
➢ Effectiveness: to understand what was effectively delivered. 
➢ Efficiency: to understand how these achievements were made in terms of resource use. 
➢ Impact: to understand the effect it had on the beneficiaries and beyond. 
➢ Sustainability: to understand how these changes are likely to be maintained over time. 
 
PA suggested that the principal and overarching research question of the evaluation is the extent to 
which the KOICA supported activities have contributed to the realization of children’s rights to 
health, protection and adequate school environment. 
 
Findings 
 
Relevance 
The KOICA supported activities benefited from a strong situation analysis supported by UNICEF’s 
presence in Jordan and understanding of the challenges triggered by the Syrian refugee crisis. The 
intervention was relevant to the dire needs of boys and girls but also their families and provided them 
with adequate services in terms of health and child protection, notably in regard to the consequences 
of the COVID-19 crisis. The WASH component enhanced the possibility for children to access a healthy 
school environment and acquire better      hygienic behaviors. Additionally, the intervention was well 
integrated in the national priorities and UNICEF worked towards supporting the Government of Jordan 
in strengthening its strategies and developing policies.  
 
In the midst of the COVID-19 context, UNICEF adapted the intervention with the support to the helpline 
to provide help to isolated mothers and children at risk. However, for health and WASH, the activities 
were for most interrupted. 
 
Coverage 
Despite the high relevance of the activities, gaps were identified in targeting areas and locations that 
were the most vulnerable and left-out. Some supported schools had already been integrated in previous 
similar interventions; and others appeared as being in a fairly favorable environment in comparison to 
other areas in Jordan. The vulnerability of the target location remains debatable and a lack of efforts 
was noted in reaching out to remote areas and schools that did not receive support in the past for the 
Health and WASH interventions. 
 
The KOICA supported activities were fairly compliant with a human rights-based approach (international 
standards, equity, gender equality & participatory approach) and responded adequately to the priorities 
of the Sustainable Development Goals. Efforts were made by UNICEF in mainstreaming gender 
equality,     , and equity through the programme and implementation of the activities. Nonetheless, the 
evaluation showed gaps in “leaving no one behind”, children with disabilities (CWD) hardly benefited 
from the activities, with only a few cases reported. This finding can largely be explained by the 
unfavorable context in public schools in Jordan for the integration of CwD, however this gap was not 
placed at the heart of this specific intervention when working with schools and national authorities. 
Additionally, while the helpline enabled access to remote support for vulnerable children and mothers, 

 
10 
 
it was not designed, from the onset of the programme, to be made available for refugees living in camps. 
This design choice, supposedly addressed by other protection mechanisms within camps, proved 
problematic with the covid-19 related halt of such protection mechanisms. Therefore, refugees in camps 
faced           lack of information, leaving them with important protection concerns, especially during the 
lockdowns     . 
 
Effectiveness 
Based on the programme documents and review, UNICEF effectively worked towards supporting a 
quality health system to meet the needs of the most vulnerable, especially children and supporting a 
protective environment that prevents vulnerable girls, boys and women from exploitation, violence, 
abuse and neglect and responded to their needs. For this, UNICEF and its partners provided services 
to the most vulnerable and bolstered national capacities and pre-existing systems. 
 
Nevertheless, the evaluation showed a lack of clarity in the implementation timeline leading to 
uncertainties on what was achieved in which period. Complementing this, gaps were identified in the 
reports of data on the level of achievement, and results could not be triangulated. Moreover, the  ET 
lacked the possibility to consult a comprehensive results framework based on the actual activities 
implemented. If such tools were designed and used during the lifetime of the programme, their quality 
or granularity failed in informing the ET with a full picture of output and outcome generation. T     his      
le     d to the inability to understand what was effectively delivered.  
 
The effectiveness of the activities was largely impacted by the Covid-19 lockdowns; activities for health  
and WASH implemented in schools were on hold while the ‘project’ was still on-going.  
 
Efficiency 
The results of the intervention were largely made possible with UNICEF’s partnership with national civil 
society organisations, responsible for the direct implementation of the activities. Additionally, UNICEF 
was able to leverage internal inputs and invest in additional human resources when required. 
 
The evaluation showed that the efficiency of the activities were affected by the lack of an      ‘overall 
project manager’ assigned to the KOICA activities or fund. Indeed, the intervention rather functioned as 
a set of different activities undertaken by different programme sections and was not able to mutualise 
or articulate some of the activities (for instance school interventions for WASH and Health) to enhance 
its coherence and thus its efficiency. This has led to considerable gaps in assessing how funds were 
used against the generation of outputs, as the necessary information was not all made available.  
 
Impact 
The evaluation showed that the intervention had a direct impact on children: providing them with health 
services, enhancing their well-being, contributing to a safer and hygienic school environment. Parents 
and caregivers largely reported that their children have a better awareness of the school environment, 
coupled with hygiene knowledge and new hygiene habits. However, the evaluation highlighted  
weaknesses in the monitoring system regarding the choice and design of relevant and measurable      
qualitative indicators able to inform on and capture the outcomes. Therefore the monitoring system 
failed at measuring the real       impact of the provided services. 
 
Sustainability 
The sustainability of the intervention is supported by the engagement of national partners, civil society 
and authorities that were  fully engaged in the activities. Both have built strong ownership over the three 
sectors supported by KOICA, i.e. health, WASH and child protection. UNICEF supported the national 
strategies and policies, now adopted by the relevant ministries, but also the technical capacities of its 
partners, creating a stronger system in place that will lead future national priorities and responses 
 
While Jordan is well-equipped to maintain the strategy of the KOICA supported activities at a larger 
scale, the limited financial resources at national level may hinder the capacity of GoJ to pursue the 

 
11 
 
intervention. Jordan still relies largely on international funding and this raises concerns over the 
sustainability of an intervention, funded by international donors or agencies. 
 
Conclusion 
The KOICA supported activities were strongly in line with UNICEF’s strategy in Jordan, providing 
services to the most vulnerable children and bolstering national capacities. The intervention provided 
children with the necessary means and opportunities to enhance their rights to health and protection in 
response to long existing needs in Jordan. The activities have also worked towards reinforcing the 
national existing system for access to health and hygiene in schools, and the national child protection 
system. The intervention benefited from partnering with strong national NGOs that are well established 
among the communities with strong ties to the Government of Jordan that could be leveraged in the 
future to pursue the work in favor of children’s rights and well-being.  
 
The evaluation showed that large targets can be achieved reaching vulnerable children and their 
families, however the intervention would have benefited from a stronger centralized programme 
management team, to better inform on the activities implemented, strengthen accountability, and 
measure the impact. 
 
Recommendations 
PA’s team developed a detailed set of recommendations that are strategic, programmatic and 
operational. These are provided in the evaluation report and include the assigned entity as well as 
priority of the action. The overarching strategic recommendations are proposed here:  
 
1. KOICA and UNICEF  should sustain financial support to nationally owned and 
implemented programmes  (by the GoJ through relevant Ministries) and, for sustainability 
purposes, all stakeholders should be involved in the identification of future long-term 
funding through diversifying the financing landscape including development banks, the 
Jordanian private sector  and other philanthropic actors. 
 
2. KOICA and UNICEF should continue to technically support the GoJ in fully owning and 
implementing programmes that are aligned and supported by national policies for full 
realization of intended results.  
 
3. For the programmes features fully embedded into the routine activities of the MoE and 
MoH within schools, KOICA should consider, with careful monitoring and accountability 
mechanisms, transitioning the funding of operational activities to bilateral support  to 
reinforce ownership and sustainability on national strategies.  
 
4. The donor community  and the implementing actors should align and enhance synergies      
in the Health and WASH sectors for better  coherency and coverage, to avoid duplication 
of activities (and efforts), transparency and accountability and thus allowing for 
comprehensive school interventions rather than siloed sectoral interventions.