Disclaimer 
The information and views presented in this report are the responsibility of the author and do not necessarily reflect 
the official opinion of UNICEF. Neither the institutions and bodies of the United Nations nor any person acting on their 
behalf may be held responsible for the use that may be made of the information presented here. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
July 2022 
 
Implemented by Dr. rer. pol. Eduardo Wirthmann Ferreira with support of movimentar GmbH – Project Management and Data Science 
 
E-mail: support@movimentar.eu  
Tel: +49 421 67 32 52 99  
Web: https://www.movimentar.eu 
 
 
movimentar GmbH – Project Management & Data Science  
 
Technology Bremen 
Anne-Conway-Str. 1 
28359 Bremen, Germany 
 
Commercial Register at Bremen Local Court 
Commercial register no.: HRB 34102 HB 

 
 
 
iii 
Acknowledgements 
This evaluation was implemented by the international consultant Dr. rer. pol. Eduardo Wirthmann Ferreira with 
support of German research and consultancy firm movimentar GmbH, involving local senior evaluators, a team 
of trained phone interviewers based in Tajikistan, and the movimentar staff in Germany. Youth representatives 
were involved at all stages of the evaluation including the design of the inception report and data-collection 
tools; some of them also took part in field visits.  
This report was only possible through the dedicated work of the programme team, youth reference group, and 
partners both in the design of the study and the collection and analysis. The involved team included staff from 
the youth reference group (Farahnoz Lafizova, Javohir Mirmastov, Jonibek Arabov, Madamin Ochilboev, Manzura 
Mirzoxonzoda, Quvvatbek Zkuvat, and Shahrom Azimov), UNICEF Tajikistan (Farida Karimova, Ruslana Sirman, 
Saidahmad Ikromov, Salohiddin Shamsiddinov, Saltanat Rasulova, Shukufa Ibodova, Stephen Grant, Tetyana 
Nikitina, and Zamira Komilova) and movimentar GmbH (Ajeeb Almamari, Annalena Oeffner Ferreira, Carolina 
Clemens, Eduardo W. Ferreira, Ilkhom Makhkambaev, Jailson Fulgencio de Moura, Lola Babakhanova, Saúl 
Gámez, and Usman Ahmed). Local interviews were conducted by Naimova Sharifamo, Murodova Markhabo, and 
Khursheda Kurbonalieva. 
 
 
 

 
 
 
iv 
List of abbreviations and acronyms 
C4D 
Communication for development 
CAE 
Centres for Additional Education 
CBR 
Community-based rehabilitation 
CFCI 
Child-Friendly Cities Initiative 
CO 
Country office 
Covid 
Coronavirus disease 
CP 
Child protection 
CRC 
Committee on the Rights of the Child 
CRIA 
Child-Rights Impact Assessment 
CRPD 
Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities 
CRU 
Child Rights Units 
CSO 
Civil society organisation 
DAC 
Development Assistance Committee 
EQ 
Evaluation questions 
ERG 
Evaluation’s Reference Group 
FCSC 
Family and Child Support Centres 
GBV 
Gender-based violence 
GDPR 
General Data Protection Regulation 
GEROS 
UNICEF’s Global Evaluation and Research Oversight System 
GIS 
Georeferenced information systems 
GmbH 
Gesellschaft mit beschränkter Haftung (Limited Liability Company, in German) 
hCTP 
Humanitarian Cash Transfer Programme 
IM 
Inception mission 
IR 
Inception report 
J4C 
Justice for Children 
JS 
Juvenile support 
LNOB 
Leave no one behind 
M&E 
Monitoring and evaluation 
MOES 
Ministry of Education and Science 
MOHSPP 
Ministry of Health and Social Protection of Population 
MoJ 
Ministry of Justice 
MoIA 
Ministry of Internal Affairs 
MoH 
Ministry of Health 
NGO 
Non-governmental organisation 
O4CR 
Ombudsman for Child Rights 

 
 
 
v 
OECD 
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development 
OPD 
Organisation of People with Disabilities 
OSCE 
Organisation for Security and Co-operation in Europe 
PE 
Protective environment 
PPSW 
Paraprofessional social worker 
QA 
Quality assurance 
RBA 
Rights-based approach 
RCI 
Residential care institutions 
ROM 
Results-oriented monitoring 
SAHU 
Social Assistance at Home Units 
SGBV 
Sexual and gender-based violence 
SMR 
Strategic moment of reflection 
SWOT 
Strengths, weaknesses, opportunities, and threats 
ToC 
Theory of change 
ToR 
Terms of reference 
UNCRC 
The United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child 
UNEG 
United Nations Evaluation Group 
 
 
 

 
 
 
vi 
Table of contents 
Acknowledgements 
iii 
List of abbreviations and acronyms 
iv 
Table of contents 
vi 
List of figures 
vii 
List of tables 
vii 
Executive summary 
viii 
1 
Introduction 
1 
1.1 
Context and intervention 
1 
1.1.1 
Intervention logic 
3 
1.1.2 
Purpose of the evaluation 
5 
1.2 
Evaluation scope 
5 
1.2.1 
Evaluation use and audience 
6 
1.2.2 
Evaluation Objectives 
6 
1.2.3 
Key questions 
7 
2 
Methodology 
9 
2.1 
Data sources, methods, and sampling strategies 
9 
2.2 
Limitations 
11 
2.3 
Ethical considerations and confidentiality 
12 
3 
Evaluation findings 
12 
3.1 
Relevance 
14 
3.2 
Coherence 
21 
3.3 
Effectiveness 
27 
3.4 
Efficiency 
32 
3.5 
Impact 
36 
3.6 
Sustainability 
42 
4 
Conclusions 
49 
5 
Lessons learnt and best practices 
53 
6 
Recommendations 
55 
7 
Annexes 
57 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
vii 
List of figures 
 
Figure 1: Children’s safety and protection issues (phone interviews). ................................................................. 15 
Figure 2: Relevance and appropriateness of the programme to the needs of the target group (online survey). 16 
Figure 3: Text network plot of relevance to the needs of vulnerable children (KIIs and FGDs). ........................... 21 
Figure 4: Opinions about the capacity of the programme to adapt to major factors (online survey). ................. 30 
Figure 5: Text network of factors influencing the achievement of objectives and results (KIIs and FGDs). ......... 30 
Figure 6: The level of implementing earlier evaluations into the programme. .................................................... 31 
Figure 7: Utilised budget by PE programme component. ..................................................................................... 33 
Figure 8: Assessment of the extent outputs were delivered on time (phone interviews).................................... 34 
Figure 9: Participant opinions on extent to which programme objectives and results have been achieved. ...... 38 
Figure 10: Text network plot of impacts achieved by the PE programme (KIIs and FGDs). .................................. 38 
Figure 11: Text network plot of contribution to child rights and a protective environment (KIIs and FGDs). ...... 41 
Figure 12: Satisfaction of beneficiaries (phone survey). ....................................................................................... 43 
Figure 13: Extent in which the changes are lasting in the beneficiaries’ lives (phone survey). ............................ 44 
Figure 14: Opinions about the ownership of partners (online survey). ................................................................ 45 
Figure 15: Text network plot of continuation of benefits after the implementation (KIIs and FGDs). ................. 46 
Figure 16: Text network plot of main suggestions for improvement (KIIs and FGDs). ......................................... 46 
Figure 17: Text network plot of main lessons learnt (KIIs and FGDs). .................................................................. 48 
 
 
List of tables 
Table 1: Assessment criteria and scoring for the evaluation................................................................................... 9 
Table 2:  Overall scores by evaluation criteria and source. ................................................................................... 13 
Table 3: Score for the criterion ‘relevance’ by the evaluation team...................................................................... 14 
Table 4: Protective Environment outcome and changes to outputs. .................................................................... 17 
Table 5: Score for the criterion ‘coherence’ by the evaluation team..................................................................... 22 
Table 6: Score for the criterion ‘effectiveness’ by the evaluation team. ............................................................... 27 
Table 7: Score for the criterion ‘efficiency’ by the evaluation team. ..................................................................... 32 
Table 8: Score for the criterion ‘impact’ by the evaluation team. ......................................................................... 37 
Table 9: Score for the criterion ‘sustainability’ by the evaluation team. ............................................................... 42 
 
 

 
 
 
viii 
 
Executive summary 
This report presents the results of the formative and summative evaluation of UNICEF’s Protective Environment 
(PE) programme in Tajikistan over six years from 2016 to 2022. The PE programme had a total planned budget 
of USD 7.7 million (USD 6.4 million allocated, USD 5.6 million [88%] of which were utilised by April 2022). The 
programme was designed around three main outputs: O1) Social protection and social work [48% of the utilised 
budget]; O2) Alternative care [25% of the utilised budget]; and O3) Justice for children and preventing VAC 
(violence against children) [27% of the utilised budget]. The programme aimed to create necessary mechanisms 
to enable policy, legal, and operational environments to ensure that the rights of all children, with a focus on the 
most marginalised, are upheld. For that, it supported systems to ensure that child victims of violence, children in 
contact with the law, children affected by migration, children with disabilities, and children living in institutions 
are protected, have access to social and rehabilitation services, are not discriminated against, and live in a safe 
and supportive family setting1. 
The purposes of this evaluation were to 1) generate sound and credible evidence with a focus on whether the 
PE programme is contributing effectively and efficiently to ensuring sustainable protective environments for the 
most vulnerable and marginalised children and on reasons for success or failure (accountability), 2) best 
practices, gaps, and barriers in the applied approaches and programmatic and strategic choices made in its design 
and implementation, and 3) lessons to be considered for shaping the future engagement of UNICEF in Tajikistan. 
In this sense, the evaluation analysed not only the PE programme’s success achievements (expected and 
unexpected) and good practices but also its gaps and challenges faced, identifying lessons learnt and providing 
recommendations for future programming. The evaluation’s specific objectives were to: 1) provide an 
independent assessment of approaches, strategies, and interventions within UNICEF’s Protective Environment 
programme, 2) assess UNICEF’s strategic positioning and programmatic choices made, given the government’s 
priorities, the changing socio-economic and political context, and the Covid-19 challenge, 3) identify good 
practices which contributed to the achievement of intended results and draw lessons on challenges, gaps, and 
barriers that hindered the progress, 4) provide forward-looking recommendations on how to accelerate actions 
towards reaching the child-protection related targets. The evaluation audience includes primary stakeholders 
(e.g., state bodies, civil society organisations, and UNICEF) and secondary ones (e.g., multilateral and bilateral 
donors as well as other UN agencies).  
The evaluation was conducted from October 2021 to May 2022 and used a mixed-methods approach, including 
quantitative and qualitative data, both for its collection and analysis, allowing methodological triangulation from 
the use of different data-collection methods. To provide a quick overview of the results, the evaluation used a 
simple scoring system2 for each of the key questions which ranged from very good (score 5, grade A) to very poor 
(score 1, grade E). The evaluation used a theory-based approach to assessing the PE programme and its three 
core strategic outputs and activities based on its theory of change (ToC) as well as complementary documentary 
evidence such as yearly output and outcome statements and country reports. In addition, the evaluation included 
a primary data collection, aimed at understanding and assessing the contribution of the programme to the 
expected short-term outputs and medium-term outcomes as well as towards longer-term impacts and 
sustainability. The evaluation followed the UNEG ethical standards3, and the inception report and questionnaires 
as well as informed consent/assent forms and protection protocols went through an external ethical review 
commissioned by UNICEF from an independent contractor.  
Data collection took place in January and April 2022 and included the following sources: a) document review, 
including programme documents (e.g., PE work plans, programmatic reviews, ToC, annual reports, and other 
reference documents); b) phone survey with 203 participants from school staff, beneficiaries (children, youths, 
and young adults), parents, community representatives, local authority representatives, and NGO 
representatives; c) 24 key-informant interviews and 8 focus-group discussions (a total of 63 people) that took 
place remotely and in two selected regions (Panjakent, Sughd province and Kulob, Khatlon region) and included 
the following stakeholders: ministry representatives (11)4, local authority representatives (4), NGO 
representatives (4), UNICEF staff (5), youths aged 14-17 years (12), parents/guardians of minors aged 17 and 
younger (23), school staff (2), and children aged 13 years and younger (2); d) an online survey involving 15 
 
1 UNICEF Country Office Annual Report 2018. 
2 This scoring system and key evaluation questions are based on EuropeAid’s methodology of Results Oriented Monitoring. EuropeAid (2012) 
ROM Handbook. Available at: https://europa.eu/capacity4dev/rom/. 
3 UNEG (2020) Ethical Guidelines for Evaluation. Available at http://www.unevaluation.org. 
4 As from UNICEF feedback, According to UNICEF's feedback on the draft report, in the list of interviewees none of the interviewed persons 
can be categorised as a "representative" of a ministry. They are either representatives of ministry sub-structures or local authorities. 
Additional information is available in the section 2.2 (limitations). 

 
 
 
ix 
 
participants, among them UNICEF staff (6), NGO representatives (5), local authority representatives (2), ministry 
representatives (1), and other public international/regional organisations (1).  
The summary of the main findings is presented below by evaluation criterion. The scores were calculated from 
the evaluative scale-based questions in the phone interviews and online surveys. The evaluation scores by the 
evaluation team were based on the assessment of the overall quantitative and qualitative findings, considering 
all primary and secondary sources: 
Relevance and design (4.3 – ‘good’): The programme was highly relevant due to its sound intervention logic and 
theory of change, which have been informed by an analysis of the needs of vulnerable children and youths, 
including the geographical distribution of vulnerabilities. The programme addressed explicitly the most 
vulnerable, including children in contact and conflict with the law, children at risk of institutionalisation, children 
from war-affected zones, and children and women with disabilities. The programme’s implementation strategy 
was relevant due to its focus on an evidence-based approach supporting changes at system level by 
strengthening policy and legal frameworks for child protection and providing technical assistance for the revision 
and development of policies. The 2018 revision of the ToC helped the programme to stay relevant, according to 
the progress made at that time and changes in the context. The reviewed key programme documents and annual 
reports suggest that the programme design followed a Right-Based Approach (RBA) and Leave-No-One-Behind 
(LNOB) principles. Gender aspects seem to have been mainstreamed, and there are activities focused on 
girl/women empowerment. In line with the recommendation 2, A specific gender action plan for the PE 
programme, coordinated by the Gender Focal Point, can help to guide the programme in developing specific 
activities to track and address specific gender-related protection issues, in line with the recommendations of the 
Country Programme Evaluation (2020) and the Gender Programmatic Review (2019). The results of the 
multivariate regression analysis5 model indicate that additional focus on the specific needs of girls and young 
women6 could help to improve the future performance of the programme. Improvements could also take place 
to address the issues of child labour related to housekeeping among female children and adolescents as well as 
hooliganism (e.g., prevention of violence at community level). Additional cross-sectoral work can help to address 
some of the most-frequently mentioned needs, which suggest synergy opportunities with health and education 
sectors. Addressing emerging topics which have been identified among the key protection needs such as 
guidance on digital protection, including the appropriate and safe use of mobile phones and internet, could 
contribute to increased outcomes and impact. Healthy use of technology is becoming a key source of 
intergenerational conflict, which is highly relevant for child protection and prevention of violence against 
children7, and helps children to be safe online and make the most of new media and technology8.  
Coherence (4.4 – ‘good’): The programme successfully generated significant policy and system level changes that 
helped to improve policies at national and local levels and support a better protective environment for children. 
UNICEF’s evidence-driven advocacy of policy revision resulted in concrete contributions to national and 
institutional policies based on a strong partnership with the Government of Tajikistan (e.g., revision of two 
important provisions in the Criminal Procedure Code and amendment to the Code of Administrative Offences to 
introduce administrative punishment for parents and/or caregivers for using or threatening to use violence 
against children). There is evidence of synergy with other child protection-related interventions (e.g., work with 
migrants with the Ministry of Labour as well as issuance of legal documents with the Ministry of Justice) that 
support the PE programme, and vice versa. Internal coherence is high with evidence of synergies and 
interlinkages between the PE programme and other interventions carried out. There is a high consistency of the 
PE programme with the relevant national and international policies, norms and standards (e.g., National 
Development Strategy 2030, Mid-term Development Programme, draft National Programme for Children 20309). 
The evaluation results suggest a very high external coherence. The programme’s cross-sectoral and integrated 
approach offers concrete examples of the benefits, which were critically important to ensure that vulnerable and 
marginalised groups had better access to services that respond to their needs. While the programme took 
 
5 Multivariate regressions explore the relationship between multiple variables in datasets (see: https://movimentar.co/3FYt4Se). 
6 This can include additional efforts around monitoring differences based on violence against girls and boys; their domestic and paid work 
roles; access to services; activities promoting equal and peaceful relations between boys and girls; negotiation of gender promotion with 
family and community; steps to reduce the risk of sexual violence and exploitation in public and private settings; strengthening of protection 
complaints mechanisms (see more at https://movimentar.co/genderinchildprotection).  
7 
See: PEW 
Research 
Centre 
(2020) 
Parenting 
approaches 
and 
concerns 
related 
to 
digital 
devices. 
Available 
at: 
https://www.pewresearch.org/internet/2020/07/28/parenting-approaches-and-concerns-related-to-digital-devices/  
8 
See: 
Harvard 
University 
(2020) 
Experts 
offer 
advice 
on 
how 
to 
become 
a 
‘connected 
parent’. 
Available 
at: 
https://news.harvard.edu/gazette/story/2020/12/how-parents-can-manage-children-and-their-technology-use/  
9 The programme contributed to SDGs 1 (end poverty in all its forms everywhere), 4 (ensure inclusive and equitable quality education and 
promote lifelong learning opportunities for all), 5 (achieve gender equality and empower all women and girls), and 16 (promote peaceful and 
inclusive societies for sustainable development, provide access to justice for all, and build effective, accountable, and inclusive institutions 
at all levels). 

 
 
 
x 
 
sufficiently into account vulnerability assessments in its design and implementation, the use of objective 
consistent vulnerability criteria is not fully in place due to data-access issues. A methodology note exists 
describing an office-wide child-vulnerability index, which attempts to answer the recommendations from the 
CPE 2020 and uses a composite approach without weights with indicators including on PE at district level, while 
violence against children and nutrition indicators exist at a provincial level. The PE programme had a good 
alignment with the SDGs 1, 5, and 16, with important synergies with other programmatic areas of the CO (e.g., 
education sector as well as with the programme on data and evidence for children. The results suggest that the 
PE programme had sufficient complementarity, harmonisation and coordination with development partners and 
other UN agencies, adding value while avoiding duplication. For example, under the UNICEF-UNHCR Coalition on 
Every Child’s Right to a Nationality, in 2021 over 1,250 children at risk of statelessness and affected by migration 
from 26 districts and cities received birth certificates. In coordination with the World Bank, the PE programme 
and the UNICEF CO supported inclusion of low-income families with children under 7 years of age into the 
emergency COVID-19 hCTP cash-transfer programme, which is another example of coordination of support and 
synergies between development partners. 
Effectiveness (4.4 – ‘good’): Considering the challenge related to COVID-19, the programme demonstrated a 
good achievement of its objectives and results. From its 14 indicators, nine have been met or exceeded, while 
the rest were considered as partially achieved. For two of the achieved indicators, the programme delivered two 
to three times higher figures than the initial targets (indicator 1.1 with 271% of the target and indicator 3.1 with 
251%). From the five indicators which had not met targets, two demonstrated progress of at least 70% of their 
targets. The results suggest that the programme integrated well the three main programmatic areas (alternative 
care of children, justice for children, and preventing violence against children) with other components of 
children’s rights, for example, education and nutrition. There is strong evidence that the PE programme 
successfully adapted to major factors influencing the implementation during the evaluation period. UNICEF’s 
liaison with the government offered examples of best practices, which led to a strong partnership from 2019 
onwards. UNICEF recognised and reacted to the new context posed by the COVID-19 pandemic, showing very 
good capacity of the PE programme to adapt the context while leveraging resources for the achievement of its 
objectives and results. A narrative analysis of the data related to internal and external factors that influenced the 
implementation of the programme suggests a very good cooperation between all parties involved, including with 
the governmental institutions. There are examples of concrete new partnerships (e.g., work with migrants with 
the Ministry of Labour; facilitation of issuance of legal documents by the Ministry of Justice; and dialogue with 
key development partners for raising USD 5.4 million, which benefited the PE programme and other country 
office programmes), which are consistent with the answers from both UNICEF and government respondents. 
Since 2019, the RAM reports have started to include a specific section on ‘Evaluations’, which was a very good 
decision and places emphasis on UNICEF’s evidence-driven approach. Documentary evidence indicates that 
UNICEF has implemented recommendations from earlier evaluations. In the 2021 RAM report, the 
implementation of 8 of the 16 actions from the 2020 CPE recommendations had been reported to be completed. 
From the response matrix, it is difficult to assess its current implementation as it is relatively recent and focuses 
on the whole country programme. However, in the online survey (institutional stakeholders), the 
implementation of the recommendations of earlier evaluations was among the aspects that received the lowest 
scores (3.4 – regular). The overall results suggest that this is an area for improvement. There is strong evidence 
that the PE programme has been making progress towards its objectives, considering the results and progress as 
from the narrative annual reports and evidence from the primary data collection. For instance, in the online 
survey and phone interviews, most of the participants (67%, 15 participants) rated positively the extent to which 
the programme objectives had been achieved (see Annex 10 for details). It is clear from the responses to the 
KIIs/FGDs with beneficiaries that the support received was helpful to their lives. 
Efficiency (4.4 – ‘good’): The evaluation did not include a cost analysis (how costs compare to similar 
interventions or standards). However, it asked questions around efficiency, which help to assess the programme 
performance in this regard. The PE programme had a very good management quality and efficiency, considering 
the challenges of the COVID-19 pandemic. By April 2022, the PE programme had utilised 88% of the USD 6.4 
million planned since 2016. Output 1 (Social protection and social work) was the largest one throughout the 
period, with the exception of 2018, when Output 2 (Alternative childcare) saw a higher allocation in support of 
the conversion of baby homes to family and child-support centres. The largest budget allocation and utilisation 
was in 2019, when also Output 3 (J4C and VAC) reached its peak, at higher values than Output 2. This budget 
allocation remained similar between 2019 and 2022, following a reduction in the budget allocation for alternative 
childcare considering the successful transformation from baby homes to family and child-support centres as from 
2019. Despite the low budget compared to other country programme components, PE programme successfully 
achieved its planned outcomes. The programme had sufficiently detailed two-year work plans. However, it is 
unclear since when this started. The joint work planning with government partners added value and is a good 

 
 
 
xi 
 
practice, especially considering that the PE programme had diverse and broad range of partners. The work plan 
for 2021-2022 included activities, sub-activities, geographical coverage by sub-activity, implementing partners, 
timeline by quarter, and budget information such as amount funded and funds to be mobilised. However, the 
work plan did not contain information on outputs for all sub-activities, which can be improved to ease results-
oriented management. The evaluation team did not have access to the internal corporate systems (e.g., Etools). 
The results indicate that The programme has a highly functional, sufficient, and goal-oriented management 
system, grounded on UNICEF’s procedures. Improvements may include the use of a more granular, specific 
commercial digital/cloud project-management information system to coordinate the PE programme intervention 
tasks internally and with external implementation partners and for improved tracking and visibility of results in 
terms of short-term outputs beyond intermediate and long-term changes highlighted in the ToC and RAM 
reports. More systematic use of the RBA (rights-based approach), namely building stakeholder interest groups 
to define representatives to participate in yearly planning and review workshops, particularly involving 
beneficiary and government representatives, can help to improve the opinions about transparency and 
accountability, while supporting increased local ownership. 
Impact (4.3 – ‘good’): There is strong evidence that the PE programme had a good performance against its pre-
defined indicator targets, considering the COVID-19 challenges. Primary data show positive opinions among 
beneficiaries and other key stakeholders about impact performance. By April 2022, four out of nine outcome-
level indicators (44%) had been fully achieved. Among the five outcome indicators that had been partially 
achieved, three had achieved at least 70%. At the output level, the best performance in indicator achievement 
was seen in the alternative care component, followed by social protection and social work. Component 3 (J4C 
and VAC) showed the most areas for improvement in achieving output targets. The PE programme’s advocacy of 
policy revision and cooperation with the government resulted in important policy and institutional changes that 
advanced children’s rights in Tajikistan. Such changes include various policy revisions in the J4C system, the 
transformation of baby homes to child and family support centres, improved focus on children with disabilities, 
and capacity-development actions that concretely improve institutional responses to violence against children 
and emergencies. Opinions from key stakeholders about the programme’s contribution to children’s rights are 
very positive and contained requests for the continuation of the support. Key impact areas from the multiple 
evaluation sources include: 1) development of capacities of social service staff to improve assistance to 
beneficiaries including home visits, psychological and legal support; 2) increased awareness (also among 
children) and support related to children’s rights, gender issues, and special needs of children with disabilities in 
the centres; 3) production of documented knowledge about the situation of the most vulnerable families; 4) 
equipment and training support to FCSCs. A government representative mentioned a “real change” in terms of 
“regular involvement and support of children with special needs in the centres that were not [present] in the 
past”. Some responses from multiple stakeholder categories to this and other questions above suggest that the 
programme can contribute to reducing criminality and violence (e.g., reduced bullying), which could be assessed 
in future impact assessments. Answers from parents suggest an integrated and comprehensive approach, 
including improved knowledge of legal processes (e.g., steps to obtain documents) and cross-sectoral support in 
terms of job skills and professional orientation (e.g., car repair and electricians) delivered by other interventions. 
The results show awareness of UNICEF staff that impact assessment requires further analysis after some time 
(e.g., 2-4 years) after the support has been delivered to beneficiaries. Responses from local authorities 
mentioned that the programme helped the government to do its job better and faster and made certain local 
institutions focus on the rights of CWDs. NGO representatives pointed out that the local culture and parents’ 
attitudes limit the advancement of gender issues and children rights. According to UNICEF staff, gender 
mainstreaming needs improvement. The analysis of the answers suggests some areas for improvement  such as 
1) increased duration of programme support and 2) increased focus on gender issues. 
Sustainability (4.3 – ‘good’): The programme has successfully influenced local, regional, and national policies and 
public services. Considering evidence from primary data, public representatives and families clearly identify child 
protection policies as a public responsibility. The opinions of beneficiaries are very positive, with 97% of the 203 
beneficiaries in phone interviews highly satisfied with the programme and over 87% considering that the 
programme delivered long-lasting results. Views from institutional stakeholders contrast with the positive views 
from the beneficiaries in the phone survey. There are concerns about the sustainability of the support, also in 
terms of dependency on the support for the continuation of some benefits. Considering the primary evidence, 
the results suggest that implementing partners (institutional stakeholders) assessed the ownership of the 
programme as ‘regular’, and this is one of the main areas for improvement. Although there is evidence of a very 
good relationship with the state institutions, the evaluation did not identify documentary evidence of kick-off, 
planning or review meetings during the implementation with the participation of key stakeholders such as 
representatives of beneficiaries. As mentioned in the key finding 4.i (see section 3.2.4 on efficiency), building 
stakeholder interest groups to define representatives to participate in yearly planning and review workshops, 

 
 
 
xii 
 
particularly involving beneficiaries (e.g., children, youths, parents, community leaders, PWDs, and implementing 
partners) and government representatives, can help to improve the opinions about local ownership, 
transparency, and accountability. It is clear from the phone survey and FGDs that beneficiaries and their families 
identify a sustainable effect on their lives (see also answers to EQ20). There is enough documentary evidence 
that government structures (local, regional, national) will continue to benefit based on outputs such as system 
and policy changes (see EQ5 and Annex 12), studies/assessments, capacity building, and material support (see 
EQ20) provided by the PE programme, particularly in the justice system, SAHUs (Social Assistance at Home Units), 
FCSCs (Family and Child Support Centres), and schools. The opinions from key stakeholders indicate a high 
likelihood of continuation of the generated benefits but raise concerns about the resources and technical 
capacity to maintain such benefits in the long term. The programme strengthened the structures and capacities 
of its partners from a long-terms perspective. Opinions from institutional stakeholders about the programme 
contribution to building local capacities show a high level of satisfaction but also areas for improvements. The 
programme has no formal exit strategy prepared with the involvement of representatives of beneficiaries and 
other key stakeholders. The participatory development of an exit strategy is a good practice for sustainability 
and can contribute to improving the programme performance in this sense. 
For concision, the key recommendations of high priority are presented below. A full list is available in chapter 
5. lessons learnt and best practices are presented following the conclusions in chapter 6. 
• Recommendation 1 (Responsible: UNICEF / Priority: High) – Develop narrative descriptions to complement 
current programme documents where objectives, intervention logic, planned activities, cross-cutting 
approaches, related SDGs and monitoring mechanisms (targets and indicators) are mentioned and explained. 
• Recommendation 2 (Responsible: UNICEF and National Government / Priority: High) – Develop a specific 
gender-action plan for the programme including specific activities and targets/indicators to track progress. We 
recommend explicit reference to the specific cross-cutting issues in the theory of changes of future 
programmes, to clarify which aspects they intend to address, including specific activities (inputs). 
• Recommendation 3 (Responsible: UNICEF and Government at all levels / Priority: High) – There is an emerging 
need for introducing a proper case-management system at the ground level, which the programme can 
contribute to. We recommend seizing this opportunity to introduce more detailed beneficiary registration 
forms, in line with the recommendations of the CRC concluding observations of 2017 around data collection.  
• Recommendation 4 (Responsible: UNICEF / Priority: High) – Consider using administrative data or 
commissioning primary data collection at household and district level to independently build composite 
vulnerability indexes (specific related to protection indicator and ideally including also standard development 
indicators such as the poverty probability index, life-satisfaction index or coping strategy index). Data collection 
can be eased with tools such as RapidPro, which UNICEF has been successfully using worldwide to build 
nationally scalable mobile applications. This can help to build capacities of government partners while 
validating/triangulating official data, helping to improve vulnerability targeting and disaggregation of data by 
multiple demographic and geospatial variables (e.g., village, jamoat, district and province levels).  
• Recommendation 5 (Responsible: UNICEF / Priority: High) – We recommend to improve / scale up the 
programme outreach to remote villages compared to urban areas. Adaptations to the needs of those 
participants in rural areas (e.g., additional focus on households whose livelihoods depend on cattle raising, 
which may be more vulnerable to child labour), can help to improve the programme performance.  
• Recommendation 6 (Responsible: UNICEF / Priority: High) – We recommend additional focus on the needs of 
primary-grade participants (e.g., age specific materials and contents) as it could help to improve the 
programme performance, particularly considering that this group represents most of the respondents, and 
lower educational levels are usually correlated with higher vulnerability. 
• Recommendation 7 (Responsible: UNICEF / Priority: High) – We recommend scaling up activities related to 
building capacities and raising awareness for prevention of violence against children. The output 3 (Justice for 
children and preventing VAC) was the programme component with the lowest budget share [27% of utilised 
budget]). In addition, the outcome indicator 5 (“Percentage of parents who consider physical punishment of 
their children acceptable under given circumstances”) saw an increase from 16% in 2017 to 16.4% in 2021 as 
from the RAM reports.  
• Recommendation 8 (Responsible: UNICEF / Priority: High) – Develop an explicit exit strategy in a participatory 
way that describes how the programme intends to end its support, ensuring that the achievement of 
programme goals (assistance or development) is not compromised and that progress towards these goals 
continues. The participatory development of an exit strategy is a good practice for sustainability, and can 
contribute to improve the programme performance in this sense.