Itad  
24 November 2022 
 
  
 
 
 
UNICEF Ethiopia Adolescent Nutrition-
WASH-Education Joint Programme 
Evaluation  
Midline Process Evaluation Report                    
(Oct 2021 – Jan 2022) 
Date: Revised 24 November 2022 
Authors: Jennifer Leavy & Catrin Hepworth 
Regions Covered: Southern Nations Nationalities and Peoples’ Regional State 
(SNNPR), Somali, Oromia. 
Submitted by Itad 
In association with MMA 

Itad  
24 November 2022 
 
i 
 
Acknowledgements 
The evaluation team would like to thank all the adolescents and their families for taking the time to speak 
to us about their lives. We are also grateful for the support of UNICEF Ethiopia programme staff, as well as 
everyone whose assistance made this study possible: community leaders, officials and liaison people in all 
eight regions. 
The field research was carried out on behalf of Itad by MMA (MMA Development Consultancy), to whom 
we are extremely grateful. This report, of course, draws heavily on their data, reports, transcripts and other 
contributions. We would particularly like to highlight the contributions of Mesay Kebede and Siseraw Dinku, 
with excellent oversight from Mohammed Mussa. We were supported also by Ruth Edmonds (Kore Global), 
who provided excellent qualitative training to the team. 
The transcripts were coded by Catrin Hepworth. The report was authored by Jennifer Leavy and Catrin 
Hepworth. The data collection activities and evaluation protocol have all undergone ethical clearance 
through the Ethiopia Public Health Institute (EPHI). 
The ethical clearance certificate for this evaluation can be found in Annex G. 
The midline has been peer reviewed by Rebecca Calder (Kore Global) and the Project Director Philippa 
Tadele (Itad). 
Disclaimer 
The views expressed in this report are those of the evaluators. They do not represent those of UNICEF or of 
any of the individuals and organizations referred to in the report. 
‘Itad’ and the tri-colour triangles icon are a registered trademark of ITAD Limited. 
 

Itad  
24 November 2022 
 
ii 
Contents 
List of illustrations 
iv 
List of acronyms and abbreviations 
v 
1 Executive summary 
1 
Methodology 
2 
Summary Findings 
2 
Context 2 
Implementation 
3 
Change Pathways 
4 
Conclusions and Recommendations 
6 
2 Introduction 
7 
2.1 
Purpose of the process evaluation at midline 
7 
2.2 
Context for the programme 
8 
2.2.1 
Intervention approach and target groups 
8 
2.2.2 
Intended results and summary theory of change 
9 
2.3 
Process evaluation framework 
9 
2.3.1 
Conceptual framework 
9 
2.3.2 
Key functions of process evaluation at the midline 
10 
2.3.3 
Process evaluation questions 
11 
2.4 
Overview of methods 
12 
2.4.1 
Qualitative data collection 
13 
2.4.2 
Secondary data 
14 
2.4.3 
Ethical approval and quality control 
15 
2.5 
Limitations and challenges 
15 
3 Midline process evaluation findings 
16 
3.1 
Implementation: programme activities 
16 
3.2 
Impact of context on implementation 
17 
3.2.1 
How do the contexts in the regions/nationally/locally enable or inhibit implementation?
17 
3.2.2 
Programme responses to context 
22 
3.3 
Implementation processes 
28 
3.3.1 
Targeting 
28 
3.3.2 
Coherence 
32 
3.3.3 
Coordination 
33 
3.3.4 
‘Do-no-harm’ 
34 
3.3.5 
Good practice and sustainability 
36 
3.4 
Change pathways 
39 
3.4.1 
Knowledge and attitudes 
39 
3.4.2 
Access and use of services 
45 
3.4.3 
Programme perceptions 
49 

Itad  
24 November 2022 
 
iii 
3.4.4 
Explanatory factors 
54 
4 Conclusions 
57 
5 Lessons Learned and Recommendations 
59 
5.1 
For UNICEF’s programme implementation 
60 
5.2 
For UNICEF’s programme monitoring 
61 
5.3 
For further evaluation rounds 
61 
Bibliography 
61 
ANNEX A: UNICEF Joint Programme summary and theory of change 
62 
Programme summary 
62 
UNICEF Ethiopia joint programme theory of change 
64 
Voice and agency 
64 
Assets and services 
65 
Enabling environment 
66 
ANNEX B: Evaluation matrix 
69 
The original evaluation matrix for the evaluation is presented here. The process evaluation that replaced 
the midline evaluation developed its own set of process evaluation questions that included EQs from 
the original matrix below. These are referenced against the PE questions in the main report. 
69 
ANNEX C Timeline for the Evaluation 
74 
ANNEX D: Data collection deployment plan 
75 
ANNEX E: Coding framework for UNICEF Ethiopia Joint Programme 
79 
ANNEX F: Ethical approval from EPHI (revised for midline) 
83 
ANNEX G: Terms of Reference 
85 
 
 
 

Itad  
24 November 2022 
 
iv 
List of illustrations 
Table 1: Case study interviews by location ................................................................................................... 13 
Table 2: Overview of UNICEF Joint Programme components ....................................................................... 16 
Table A.1: Core components of the UNICEF Joint Programme ..................................................................... 64 
Table A.2: UNICEF Joint Programme target woreda by region ....................................................................  66 
 
Figure 1: Analytical framework for the midline process evaluation ............................................................. 10 
Figure A.2: Programme Theory of Change ……………………………………………………………………………………………….70 
 
 
 

Itad  
24 November 2022 
 
v 
List of acronyms and abbreviations 
ADGs 
 
Adolescent girls 
BMI  
 
Body mass index 
CINuS  
Comprehensive integrated nutrition services 
EPHI 
 
Ethiopia Public Health Institute 
FAO 
 
Food and Agricultural Organization 
FGD 
 
Focus group discussion 
FGM 
 
Female genital mutilation 
FMoH  
Federal Ministry of Health 
HH 
 
Households 
IFA 
 
Iron folic acid 
KAP 
 
Knowledge, attitudes and practice 
KII 
 
Key informant interview 
MHH 
 
Menstrual health and hygiene 
MMA  
Mohammed Mussa Associates Development Consultancy 
MoAG  
Ministry of Agriculture 
MoH 
 
Ministry of Health 
OOS 
 
Out of school 
PSNP 
 
Productive Safety Net Programme 
PTSA 
 
Parent-Teacher Student Association 
RHB 
 
Regional Health Bureau 
SBCC 
 
Social Behaviour Change Campaign 
SNNPR  
Southern Nations Nationalities and Peoples’ Regional State 
UNICEF  
United Nations Children’s Fund 
WASH  
Water, sanitation and hygiene 
YFHS 
 
Youth-friendly health services

Itad  
24 November 2022 
 
1 
1 
Executive summary 
The overall objective of the UNICEF Ethiopia Joint Adolescent Nutrition-WASH-Education Programme is 
to demonstrate and provide evidence on how a scalable programme can provide immediate and long-term 
nutrition and health benefits to adolescent girls (age 10-19) across 100 targeted Woredas in Ethiopia1. The 
programme focuses on adolescent malnutrition, through providing the resources, facilities and soft skills 
required to meet immediate needs surrounding malnutrition and ill-health, while also providing a range of 
support functions aiming to address some of the underlying issues facing adolescents in Ethiopia. This will 
better equip adolescent girls to make positive life choices, resulting in long-term improvements in their own 
health and nutrition, as well as that of their future infants and children.  
In order to do this, UNICEF Ethiopia, with the support of Global Affairs Canada, is implementing a five-year 
project (2018-2022) originally valued at CAD 14.8 million, CAD 18.5 million (USD 14.7 million) including 2020 
top-up. As of 31st January 2022, USD 10,836,832.90 had been utilised.2 The mixed package of interventions 
includes a number of different activities aiming to:  
 influence and improve knowledge, perceptions and outcomes in nutrition and menstrual health 
and hygiene (MHH); and  
 improve access to and use of health and nutrition-related goods and services, through building 
the self-esteem and agency of adolescent girls.  
The programme’s implementing partners are: the Ethiopian Federal Ministry of Health (FMoH), Regional 
Health Bureaus (RHB), Schools, Regional Water Resources Bureau, Regional Education Bureau, the 
Population Media Centre and the Girl Effect, to support the Yegna health radio show. 
This process evaluation of UNICEF Ethiopia’s Joint Adolescent Nutrition-WASH-Education joint 
programme was carried out at midline from October 2021 through to January 2022, across three of the 
eight regions where the UNICEF Ethiopia Joint Programme is being implemented: Southern Nations 
Nationalities and Peoples’ Regional State (SNNPR), Somali, Oromia. Originally, we envisaged a midline that 
would have both qualitative and process evaluation components. Due to implementation challenges, and 
given the stage in implementation achieved thus far, we shifted in emphasis to favour the process element, 
encompassing a qualitative focus on experiences of programme implementation from implementer and 
participant perspectives. This additionally enables an explanation of whether and how activities are forming 
the stepping-stones towards achieving higher level outcomes further down the line, by capturing any early 
outcomes. 
The key objectives of this round of evaluation research were to: 
 understand the extent to which the programme is achieving its objectives and provide measures 
of attribution for the programme where possible; 
 unpack how and why the programme is or is not working as planned; and 
 understand how and why the changes have occurred, to identify course correction during the 
implementation of the programme and to provide recommendations for scaling up the 
programme. 
Midline process evaluation questions are grouped into three domains, guided by the conceptual 
framework, with sub questions and prompts to guide and structure the data collection and analysis. 3 
 
1 The Joint Programme intervention areas have been selected to align with woredas receiving comprehensive integrated nutrition 
services (CINuS), a programme implemented by the FMOH and UNICEF to provide community-based nutrition interventions. 
2 UNICEF (2022). Improving the Reproductive Health and Nutritional Status of Adolescent Girls in Ethiopia: Progress report prepared for DFTAD 
Canada. March 2022. 
3 Relevant OECD-DAC Criteria are in parentheses. 

Itad  
24 November 2022 
 
2 
1. Context questions consider the contexts in which the Social and Behavioural Change Communication 
(SBCC) – Adolescent WASH Nutrition Education Joint Programme operates, including the enablers and 
barriers to implementation and the contextual relevance of the programme to the local context. [Relevance] 
2. Implementation process questions explore the SBCC – Adolescent WASH Nutrition Education Joint 
Programme approach and its governance and how this plays out in practice during implementation. 
[Relevance; Effectiveness; Sustainability]. 
3. Change pathways questions look specifically at the activities/interventions, considering how they have 
been operationalised and the experiences and perceptions of community members and other 
stakeholders (such as implementers and government). [Relevance; Effectiveness; Impact] 
Methodology 
The Midline Process Evaluation primarily drew on qualitative data collection methods and tools and 
secondary data (document) analysis to explore experiences of programme implementation and to uncover 
how and why change is happening along key change pathways, for whom and in what contexts. This helped 
to capture emerging changes – anticipated and unanticipated - in implementation and in early stages of 
causal pathways. The overall evaluation approach is theory of change- based. The process evaluation 
component focused on the programme’s implementation, and how it could be improved to enhance impact 
at endline. It is developmental in the sense that the findings are intended to assist the programme 
implementers to adjust operations to enhance the overall impact of the programme. To this effect, process 
evaluation is an inward-looking reflective exercise, focused on the activities level of the theory of change 
with some exploration of outputs and early outcomes. 
Summary Findings 
The midline process evaluation finds more evidence of important positive changes and outcomes associated 
with the programme than one would expect given the stage of implementation and the challenges faced by 
the programme to date. The interviews with girls and guardians present powerful testimonies to the 
importance of the programme in providing a service so desperately needed in communities. This refers not 
only to the provision of sanitary pads, but the combination of programming including messaging about 
harmful practices and gender equality more broadly delivered through the gender clubs.  Here we 
summarise the main findings of the midline process evaluation structured by the three domains in the 
conceptual framework: 
Context  
• 
A number of external contextual factors have impeded implementation, including the COVID-19 
pandemic and civil conflict, insecurity and political instability. A knock-on effect of these have been 
budget cuts and reallocations that have also affected implementation. Other important contextual 
factors highlighted in the midline process evaluation include challenges related to environmental 
factors and remote locations. 
• 
The COVID-19 pandemic caused major disruption to implementation, due to restricted movement and 
school closures, and this had a significant effect on girls accessing and benefitting from the programme. 
COVID-19 restrictions affected school attendance, which interviewees described as persisting once 
schools had reopened. 
• 
Lockdown and closure of schools, with absences prolonged even after restrictions have been lifted, may 
have increased girls’ vulnerability to child marriage.   
• 
Water scarcity acts as a serious barrier to effective implementation and uptake of WASH activities, and 
other activities that depend upon access to water, as well as being a ‘push’ factor, displacing people 
and fuelling school absenteeism.  

Itad  
24 November 2022 
 
3 
• 
The Programme is relevant to the local context: In its focus on raising awareness of gender equality, the 
midline process evaluation found the programme to be relevant to the inequities faced by women and 
girls and to addressing damaging gendered socio-cultural norms and practices in the communities.  It 
also directly addresses the lack of affordability of and access to sanitary protection. 
• 
The main changes to the programme in response to contextual factors have been adaptations to 
respond to COVID-19, including pausing implementation.  
• 
Closure of schools due to COVID-19 meant that gender clubs could no longer run, and the main access 
point to the programme was removed. Since schools reopened, finding enough space to run gender 
clubs has been challenging due to restricted numbers of people permitted to gather and social 
distancing rules. 
• 
Budget reductions either due to redirection of funds for COVID-19 response, or a shift in UNICEF 
budgets to deal with displaced communities due to the war in Northern Ethiopia have reportedly 
diverted resources away from the programme, with overall budget constraints leading to incomplete 
programming. 
Implementation 
Targeting 
• 
Key informants from all stakeholder groups were unanimous in understanding and confirming the value 
of the programme to the target group. Implementers felt the programme was targeted appropriately, 
seeing a wide range of positive impacts on adolescent girls who participated, including greater 
empowerment, and better access to information. 
• 
Many implementers expressed concern that large groups, such as out of school adolescent girls, who 
would likewise benefit from the programme, were excluded. Some boys were included in relevant 
gender club activities, though this was not widespread practice. Out of school adolescent girls, and 
those who attended school part time, or at weekends, were excluded from the programme. Both 
implementers and adolescent girls highlighted this as a significant issue during interviews. The 
production of the OOS guide had been delayed by 8 months due to  COVID-19, but some progress has 
been reported in the recent annual report to DFTAD Canada (March 2022). 
• 
The gender clubs were designed to be attractive, engaging places for adolescent girls to be, employing 
a range of different activities to encourage participation. Community sensitisation was also considered 
at the design stage, based on the knowledge that parental and community approval would be a key 
factor in encouraging girls’ engagement.  
• 
The influence of three key groups of people – peers, teachers, and families – emerged as crucial to 
encouraging and increasing engagement.  Tangible, material benefits are effective in increasing 
engagement. Girls’ improved self-confidence, and enjoyment of new learning and understanding built 
through the gender club was also key to maintaining their engagement over time. 
• 
The most commonly cited barrier to engagement was the impact of cultural beliefs and community 
attitudes to gender. A reported lack of engagement of influential leaders at the local level in Oromia 
was seen as a missed opportunity by some interviewees to engage community members and overcome 
social and cultural barriers or resistance to some elements of the programme. Another key barrier was 
the lack of necessary infrastructure, and resourcing to support implementation of the project. 
• 
Implementers found that having an effective network of professional support was vital. When 
professionals across sectors worked together as a team, and were committed to implementing the 
programme, respondents saw a positive impact on engagement.  
Coherence 
• 
There was a strong consensus from informants that the combination of WASH, nutrition and education 
elements in the programme respond to the needs of the target groups effectively, and to the contexts 
in which they operate. Interviewees reflected that the elements of the programme were not only 

Itad  
24 November 2022 
 
4 
complementary but necessary to approach together. The chief concern expressed by implementers 
were that coordination issues and other barriers prevented different interventions being implemented 
together coherently. Coordination challenges varied from region to region, and woreda to woreda, with 
no clear pattern emerging. Reasons reported for breakdown in coordination included: staff turnover or 
missing key staff members, tensions between sector offices over the choice of focal point and 
committee leaders, variation in levels of engagement between different sector office, lack of 
engagement and motivation at woreda or zonal level. 
Coordination  
• 
Issues with coordination were among the most commonly cited barriers to effective programme 
implementation. These varied from region to region, and woreda to woreda, with no clear pattern 
emerging. A joint programme of this type has lots of moving pieces, requiring a lot of coordination. 
There are therefore many different places where coordination may break down, depending on the 
particular context, and it is vital that UNICEF plays a strong role in coordinating across the programme. 
‘Do No Harm’ 
• 
Do no harm principles were put in place by UNICEF from the programme design stage - including policies 
both for preventing and responding to harms – and interviewees described clear processes to report 
potential and actual harms, including early marriage and gender-based violence. Respondents detailed 
coordinated measures – education, gender, health, legal and police departments working together to 
respond to reports of early marriage or gender-based violence. Some participants in gender clubs from 
the 14-19 age bracket were also familiar with reporting processes for girls at risk of harm. They reported 
having received training on risks of early marriage, and gender-based violence. They knew how to report 
any harm and were able to share this information with their friends.  
• 
One important issue arising from the data was that 8 out of 20 implementers interviewed had no 
apparent knowledge of ‘do no harm’ as a concept, even though they were from woredas where other 
implementers confirmed do no harm policies being in place. It seems likely that they use other language 
to describe these processes and any future evaluation or research work should bear in mind differences 
between terminology used by the programme and language on the ground.  
• 
There was a clear acknowledgement across implementer interviews that some components of the 
programme directly challenge prevailing cultural norms and practices around gender equality, early 
marriage and Female Genital Mutilation (FGM), as well as cultural taboos around discussing 
menstruation. There was some variation from region to region in the impact of these attitudes, and the 
scale of the challenge this posed to programme implementation.  However, a majority of implementers 
also felt that this demonstrated that the programme was responding to contextual issues. They 
discussed the risks and harms posed to adolescent girls by existing attitudes to gender and saw the 
programme as a necessary intervention based on accurate analysis of the context. 
Good practice and sustainability 
• 
There was consistent feedback that all the main elements of the programme were good practice and 
should be replicated. Implementers were clear that the gender club model was effective and should be 
continued and expanded where possible. In particular, they mentioned the provision of sanitary pads, 
soap and underwear as important. While ultimately lack of and provision of these items is a policy issue 
for government, requiring advocacy, in the meantime the programme needs to provide materials 
essential for clubs to operate and programme uptake. Many implementers described the benefits they 
saw for adolescent girls in terms of improved knowledge and understanding of menstruation, and some 
emphasised the improved self-confidence and happiness among participant girls.  
• 
Implementers especially found the combination of the three aspects of the programme – education, 
nutrition, and WASH – to be an effective approach, highlighting how interlinked these areas are. Within 
this, two elements were emphasised as crucial: investment in water supply to schools to improve the 

Itad  
24 November 2022 
 
5 
quality of toilet and washing facilities, and provision of iron supplements. Participants’ feedback echoed 
that of implementers in confirming that the package of gender club interventions was good practice.  
Change Pathways 
Knowledge and attitudes 
• 
Interviews with implementers, girls and guardians all point to positive outcomes already in terms of 
improved knowledge and understanding of MHH, by both girls and their families, as well as the impacts 
of harmful practices such as early marriage, FGM and heavy domestic work on children. This is through 
girls participating in gender clubs and directly sharing this information with family members. 
• 
Girls’ improved understanding about what is happening when they menstruate also appears to 
contribute towards greater confidence to ask for things like toilet breaks, sanitary pads or pain relief, 
so that their needs are met. 
• 
Overall, improved knowledge and understanding of menstruation appears to be contributing towards 
the more supportive environment for girls in schools. There also is emerging evidence for some shifts 
in attitude, with ridiculing girls about menstruation becoming less acceptable. 
• 
Girls who participate in gender clubs feel it is important to share the knowledge they have gained with 
non-participants. This includes not only their peers who are not attending school, but also their mothers 
and other female family members. Guardians reported improved knowledge and understanding of 
impacts of early marriage on girls’ health as well as the needs of girls during menstruation. 
• 
Reported improved communication in families related to menstruation has led to greater 
understanding and increased wellbeing overall, and improved family relations. 
• 
There is some evidence for increased support to daughters to prioritise their homework and studying 
over domestic chores. Alongside parental support, girls’ also reported that they themselves were more 
focused on their studies, and perceived improvements in academic performance and attitude as a 
result.   
• 
Increased awareness of what constitutes abusive behaviour by men towards females was reported by 
younger and older girls.  
• 
One interviewee, however, described a potential backlash against girls who do things differently, with 
some tension between girls who attend gender club and those who do not. This may be minimised by 
increasing programme coverage and including all girls (and boys) in a school. 
• 
At the Community level there is some increased awareness and understanding of specific nutritional 
needs of women, but this is still at an early stage of implementation and there is still some way to go. 
Access and use of services  
• 
Gender clubs work well as a point of access for young people (girls) to youth-friendly health services. 
Access to sanitary pads and health benefits from taking deworming tablets and iron supplements have 
had positive impacts on girls’ wellbeing. 
• 
Much understanding is gained or reinforced through watching the Yegna drama – but this is hampered 
by lack of access to televisions and/ or electricity. 
• 
The most serious impediment to being able to follow through on activities and practices encouraged by 
the programme is the lack of continuous water supply. Access is also constrained by lack of space in 
schools to be able to provide adequate safe spaces. 
• 
Interviewees reported early signs that the provision of safe spaces for girls, where available, as well as 
menstrual pads have already reduced absenteeism, (SNNPR, Somali). This sounds promising but needs 
to be backed up by monitoring data and in subsequent evaluation.   
Programme perceptions 

Itad  
24 November 2022 
 
6 
• 
Involvement in gender clubs was linked to improved commitment and focus at school. Adolescent girls 
and their caregivers also reported marked changes in their knowledge of gendered vulnerabilities they 
face since participating in gender clubs.  They described a better understanding of the risks of early 
marriage and pregnancy, and of sexual and reproductive health. They also outlined improved awareness 
of different forms of gender-based violence, and knowledge of how to report any incidents they or 
others experienced.  
• 
Participants were able to articulate their own changing ideas about gender, their greater belief in 
equality between men and women, and the ways this made them reflect on their families’ and 
communities’ attitudes and treatment of girls and women. 
• 
Many girls also felt a growing sense of confidence to communicate their feelings and opinions, and to 
share the things they had learned from gender clubs. 
• 
The impact of girls’ improved confidence, happiness and ability to communicate often spilled over into 
other areas of their lives, improving the quality of key relationships. 
Explanatory Factors and Programme Relevance 
• 
Interviewees (implementers, guardians, girls) widely recognise that the programme addresses an 
important unmet need of women and girls, with the potential to be life-changing. 
• 
Programme relevance means that so far there has been strong commitment from a wide range of 
stakeholders to the programme, from parents to teachers in schools, to woreda staff 
• 
Support from active, committed teachers is key to making sure the school environment is conducive to 
programme success. 
• 
Students and implementers are encouraged by demonstrated positive impacts of the programme, with 
high teacher and student engagement in the interventions. 
• 
Family support is a crucial enabler for engagement with and participation in the programme, especially 
in gender club. 
Conclusions and Recommendations 
For UNICEF’s programme implementation 
• 
There is a need for greater investment in school infrastructure to support programme delivery. 
Improved water supply and toilet facilities were mentioned most frequently. Greater investment is 
needed in building extra rooms for safe spaces, and gender club meetings, it would be hard to expand 
the programme without these. 
• 
The programme needs to explicitly design for and mitigate against water scarcity as a priority. The 
WASH component is foundational for many programme activities. Effectiveness is limited by lack of 
water, limiting the benefits girls derive from safe spaces and female only toilets.  
• 
Interviewees gave clear feedback that the programme should be scaled up in its current form and 
expanded where possible to include currently excluded groups. The out of school component could 
have proved indispensable during the school closures and should be up and running as soon as possible.  
• 
Educating boys on menstruation and gender equality issues is needed as a next step to improving the 
school and community environment for girls.  
• 
Gender club heads are a vital bridge between girls (their peers) and leadership. We advise that gender 
club head should be a rotating office, giving ALL girls a chance to feel special and to build their leadership 
skills.  
• 
There needs to be a continued and increased focus on influential community figures such as religious 
leaders and community elders. Investing in changing community perceptions would also help to close 
the any gaps between participants’ own knowledge of gender equality issues, gained through the 
programmes, and ideas about gender in the community.