Formative Evaluation of UNICEF Three Star Approach for WASH in Schools in the Pacific
1
Final Report
FORMATIVE EVALUATION OF UNICEF 
THREE STAR APPROACH FOR WASH 
IN SCHOOLS IN THE PACIFIC
FINAL REPORT
PACIFIC MULTI COUNTRY OFFICE
December 2021

Formative Evaluation of UNICEF Three Star Approach for WASH in Schools in the Pacific
2
Final Report
Formative Evaluation of UNICEF Three Star Approach for WASH in Schools in the Pacific
© United Nations Children’s Fund, New York, 2021
United Nations Children’s Fund
Three United Nations Plaza
New York, New York 10017
December 2021
The purpose of publishing evaluation reports produced by the UNICEF Pacific Multi Country Office is to fulfil 
a corporate commitment to transparency through the publication of all completed evaluations. The reports 
are designed to stimulate a free exchange of ideas among those interested in the topic and to assure those 
supporting the work of UNICEF that it rigorously examines its strategies, results and overall effectiveness.
The contents of the report do not necessarily reflect the policies or views of UNICEF. The views expressed 
in this report are those of the evaluators. The text has not been edited to official publication standards and 
UNICEF accepts no responsibility for error. The designations in this publication do not imply an opinion on the 
legal status of any country or territory, or of its authorities, or the delimitation of frontiers.
The copyright for this report is held by the United Nations Children’s Fund. Permission is required to reprint/
reproduce/photocopy or in any other way cite or quote from this report in written form. UNICEF has a formal 
permission policy that requires a written request to be submitted. For non-commercial uses, the permission
will normally be granted free of charge. Please write to the Pacific Multi Country Office at the address below 
to initiate a permission request.
For further information, please contact:
Pacific Multi Country Office
United Nations Children’s Fund
3rd Floor, FDB Building
360 Victoria Parade
Suva, Fiji
suva@unicef.org
Cover photo: ©️ UNICEFPacific/2021/Stephen

Formative Evaluation of UNICEF Three Star Approach for WASH in Schools in the Pacific
3
Final Report
CONTENTS
LIST OF TABLES	
4
LIST OF FIGURES	
4
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS	
5
ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS	
6
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY	
7
1. 	INTRODUCTION	
10
	
1.1	 Context	
10
	
	
1.1.1 Global and Regional Context	
11
	
	
1.1.2 WASH Bottlenecks in Evaluation Countries	
11
	
	
1.1.3 Country Contexts	
12
	
1.2 	Object of the Evaluation	
16
	
1.3 	Implementation in the Pacific	
17
2. 	PURPOSE, OBJECTIVE AND SCOPE OF EVALUATION	
21
	
2.1 	Purpose of the Evaluation	
21
	
2.2 	Objective of the Evaluation	
21
	
2.3 	Scope of the Evaluation	
22
3. 	METHODOLOGY	
23
	
3.1 Evaluation Approach	
23
	
3.2 Sampling Criteria	
25
	
3.3 Data Analysis	
27
	
3.4 Ethical Considerations and Safeguards	
27
	
3.5 Limitations and Mitigation Strategies of the Evaluation	
28
	
3.6 Quality Assurance	
28
4. 	FINDINGS		
29
	
4.1 Relevance	
29
	
4.2 Coherence	
41
	
4.3 Efficiency	
43
	
4.4 Effectiveness	
47
	
4.5 Sustainability	
50
5. 	CONCLUSIONS	
54
6. RECOMMENDATIONS	
56
REFERENCES 	
60

Formative Evaluation of UNICEF Three Star Approach for WASH in Schools in the Pacific
4
Final Report
Annex I: Terms of Reference	
63
Annex II: Theories of Change	
70
Annex III: Draft Integrated Programme Logic	
73
Annex IV: Evaluation Matrix	
74
Annex V: Original and Revised Evaluation Questions	
86
Annex VI: Data Collection Tools (including consent scripts)	
101
Annex VII: Maps of Implementation Areas	
119
Annex VIII: Scripts for Institutional Clearance/Authorization	
122
Annex IX: Ethics Review Feedback	
127
Annex X: Documents Consulted	
138
Annex XI: List of Interviewees	
142
Annex XII: Extended Stakeholder List	
143
List of Tables 
Table 1: Country Context - Fiji	
13
Table 2: Country Context - Kiribati	
14
Table 3: Country Context - Solomon Islands	
14
Table 4: Country Context - Federated States of Micronesia	
15
Table 5: Country Context - Vanuatu	
15
Table 6: Overview of Kiribati Three Star Approach for WASH in Schools	
17
Table 7: Overview of the Solomon Islands Three Star Approach for WASH in Schools	
18
Table 8: Overview of the Vanuatu Three Star Approach for WASH in Schools	
18
Table 9: Overview of the Fiji Three Star Approach for WASH in Schools	
19
Table 10: Overview of the FSM Three Star Approach for WASH in Schools	
20
Table 11: Evaluation Objectives	
21
Table 12: Overview of Evaluation Questions	
24
Table 13: OECD DAC Definitions and Working Definitions	
24
Table 14: Sampling Criteria	
25
Table 15: Number of key informant interviews (KIIs) and school visits carried out	
26
Table 16: Best Practice and Challenges within the Three Star Approach Theories of Change	
34
Table 17: Design of Three Star Approach and Relevance to Dimensions of WASH	
36
List of Figures 
Figure 1: Oceania WASH in School Data	
11
Figure 2: Service Levels for WASH in Schools in Evaluation Countries	
13
Figure 3: Overview of the Three Star Approach for WASH in Schools	
16
Figure 4: Periods of Implementation of the Three Star Approach	
17
Figure 5: Data Collection, Analysis and Triangulation Process	
27
Figure 6: Sustainable Development Goals 6 and 4 	
30
Figure 7: Alignment of UNICEF Pacific Programme with UNICEF Strategic Plan	
32
Figure 8: Illustration of the ‘logic’ of the logical framework	
33
Figure 9: Inclusive Access to WASH 	
40
Figure 10: Recommendations from formative evaluation	
56

Formative Evaluation of UNICEF Three Star Approach for WASH in Schools in the Pacific
5
Final Report
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The evaluation team would like to sincerely thank 
all of the contributors to this synthesis evaluation 
report for sharing information and documentation 
by email, completing evaluation questionnaires or 
providing insights through key informant interview 
and for taking their time and resources to check 
references to their work in the first drafts of the 
reports and providing comments and suggestions. 
Additionally, the team would like to express their 
gratitude to the many UNICEF staff, members of 
government, non-government organisations and 
other stakeholders of the Solomon Islands, Fiji, 
Federated States of Micronesia, Vanuatu, and Kiribati 
for their generous contributions of time. Contributors 
came from the following organizations and partners 
are acknowledged: 
Governments: i.e. government officials working at 
the Ministry of Education and or Health, i.e.  Paul 
Amao – National WASH Coordinator, Ministry of 
Education and Franco Rodie – Permanent Secretary, 
Ministry of Health (Solomon Islands), Christine-Anne 
Garoleo – Provincial SIO Coordinator, Ministry of 
Education and Training Penama Province (Vanuatu), 
Reetina Katokita - Director, Policy, Planning and 
Development Unit, Ministry of Education and Arboro 
Henry - Senior Health Promotion Officer, Ministry of 
Health and Medical Services (Kiribati), Deanne Aizawa 
– Chief, Planning and Development Division, Dept 
of Education MJ Martin – Mental Health Specialist, 
Department of Health (FSM) and Serupepeli Udre – 
Ministry of Education and Relenshni Karan - Ministry 
of Education, Heritage and Arts and Mr Suliasi 
Batikawai - Environmental Health officer (Fiji). 
National / International NGOs – Fiji Teachers 
Association and CBM Nossall (Fiji) , Save the Children, 
Live and Learn, Engineers Without Border, Mamma’s 
Laef, Live and Learn Vanuatu, Wan Smolbag 
(Vanuatu), World Vision International, Live and Learn 
Environmental Education (Solomon Islands), NZ 
Institute for Environmental Science and Research 
(ESR), Live and Learn Environmental Education, 
Kiribati Women’s Federation (AMAK) (Kiribati) 
UNICEF National Committees / Donor government – 
Department for Foreign Affairs and Trade (DFAT), 
Government 
of 
Australia, 
UNICEF 
National 
Committees of Australia and New Zealand and 
German Cooperation for International Cooperation 
(GIZ) (FSM)
UNICEF – which included UNICEF Country Offices: 
Jeffery Ing – WASH Specialist, Quennie Amor - 
WASH Consultant, Helen Piana (WinS Consultant) 
and Cromwell Baraza – Chief of Field Office UNICEF 
(FSM), Mamita Bora Thakkar – WASH Specialist, 
previously Solomon Islands, Zelalem Taffesse – Chief 
of Field Office, UNICEF Solomon Islands, Abigail 
Tevera – WASH Specialist, Frederick Saeni – WASH 
Officer and Tai Ring Te – WASH Specialist (Solomon 
Islands), Emily Rand and Jake Ward – WASH 
Specialist (Vanuatu), Waqairapoa Tikoisuva – UNICEF 
WASH lead for Kiribati, George Quifada - Sector 
Coordination TA, UNICEF and Brucetta Toatu - WASH 
in Schools TA, UNICEF (Kiribati and Fiji); UNICEF New 
York/HQ  (Irene Imongin and Silvia Gaya) and UNICEF 
East Asia and Pacific Regional Office (EAPRO) with 
contributions from Evariste Kouassi-Komlan, Brooke 
Yamakoshi and HanChul Kim.
Special note of appreciation is extended to Education 
colleagues Iosefo Volau – Education Specialist and 
Anna Smeby - Chief of Education for the Pacific 
Multi-country education programme (Fiji), and to 
Ivan Scott - Evaluation Specialist, and Koorosh Raffii 
- Evaluation Adviser at the UNICEF EAPRO. A special 
vote of thanks is also to the WASH team in Suva, Ro 
Iva Namela, Milika Nabulivula and James Robertson 
for their support throughout the evaluation. 
The evaluation team would like to express thanks to 
UNICEF Pacific for their help and support throughout 
the engagement of this assignment. In particular, the 
evaluation team would like to thank Chander Badloe 
(Chief - Water, Sanitation & Hygiene, UNICEF Pacific 
Multi-Country Office) and Ali Safarnejad (Multi-
Country Evaluation Specialist, UNICEF Pacific Multi-
Country Office) for their oversight and guidance 
throughout the evaluation process. 
This evaluation report was prepared by the IOD 
Parc evaluation team, which included Jerry Adams – 
Principal Associate and Evaluation Lead, Kate Alliott 
– Senior Consultant and Stuart Kinsella – Consultant. 
Many thanks go to Talanoa Consulting, without 
whom fieldwork in a COVID-19 landscape would 
have been extremely difficult. 
The evaluation team thanks the parents, teachers 
and school leadership involved in conducting 
the fieldwork and providing their insights on the 
Three Star Approach. The evaluation team would 
like to thank the students and young people who 
participated in the fieldwork, lending their voices 
and expressing their views of how to improve water, 
sanitation and hygiene for all children and young 
people across the Pacific region. Particular thanks 
is given to colleagues who gave up their valuable 
time and expertise to undertake a comprehensive 
review the first drafts of the country reports and the 
overall synthesis report whom also went the extra 
mile to share additional documents or information 
and answer questions as part of the review process, 
over and above what was expected.
It is hoped that the outputs of this evaluation 
contributes to the country, regional and global 
knowledge base around WASH in Schools and it is 
hoped they will provide additional motivation for the 
continued learning and progress on WASH in Schools 
across the Pacific region.

Formative Evaluation of UNICEF Three Star Approach for WASH in Schools in the Pacific
6
Final Report
ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS 
AUD 	
Australian Dollar 
CLTS 	
Community-led total sanitation 
DFAT	
Australian Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade
DFID 	
United Kingdom Department for International Development 
EAPRO 	
East Asia Pacific Regional Office 
EMIS	
Education management information system 
EMT 	
Evaluation management team 
ESR 	
Environmental Science and Research Limited
FEMIS 	
Fiji Education Management Information System
FGDs	
Focus group discussions
FSM 	
Federated States of Micronesia 
GDP	
Gross domestic product 
GIZ 	
German Corporation for International Development
ICT	
Information, communication and technology 
INGO	
International non-government organization
KIIs 	
Key informant interviews
KIRIWATSAN 	
Kiribati Water and Sanitation in Outer Islands
KWAS 	
Kiribati WASH from the Start 
KWIS	
Kiribati WASH in Schools 
LLEE	
Live and Learn Environmental Education 
MCPD 	
Multi-country programme document  
MFAT	
New Zealand Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade 
MHM 	
Menstrual Hygiene Management 
NGO	
Non-government organization 
NZD 	
New Zealand Dollar 
O&M 	
Operations & maintenance 
OECD DAC 	
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development Assistance Committee 
SDGs	
Sustainable Development Goals
SIBLE	
Solomon Islands Better Learning Environment
SIEMIS 	
Solomon Islands Education Management Information System 
TC	
Tropical Cyclone 
ToR	
Terms of Reference
UN 	
United Nations 
UNDP	
United Nations Development Programme 
UNICEF 	
United Nations Children’s Fund 
Van-WASH in Schools	
Vanuatu Water, Sanitation and Hygiene in Schools
VEMIS 	
Vanuatu Education Management Information System
WASH	
Water, sanitation and hygiene
WASHBAT 	
Water, sanitation and hygiene bottleneck analysis tool 
WHO 	
World Health Organisation 
WinS	
Water, Sanitation and Hygiene in schools

Formative Evaluation of UNICEF Three Star Approach for WASH in Schools in the Pacific
7
Final Report
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
Water, sanitation, and hygiene (WASH) are critical 
dimensions of the health and safety of people in 
the Pacific, made even more so by the impact of 
the COVID-19 pandemic and climate change. 43% 
of the Pacific population lacks access to basic water 
services (World Health Organisation and UNICEF, 
2021b) and pressing threats such as increasing 
numbers of natural disasters are exacerbating 
pre-existing vulnerabilities (McLeod & Bruton-
Adams, 2019). Access to WASH services is far from 
equitable, with women, people with disabilities 
and rural communities suffering worse outcomes, 
particularly 
when 
these 
categories 
intersect 
(WaterAid, 2016). Schools across the region face a 
lack of suitable WASH infrastructure and awareness, 
resulting in continuing practice of open defecation, 
spread of disease and student absenteeism during 
menstruation, amongst other public health risks. 
THE THREE STAR APPROACH 
The Three Star Approach was designed to be a 
“simple, scalable and sustainable” method to 
address WASH issues in schools, with a particular 
focus on hygiene and behaviour change. Schools 
are rated from a scale of zero to three stars based 
on the WASH infrastructure and behaviours 
exhibited by students (UNICEF & GIZ, 2013). It is 
an incremental approach, centred on strengthening 
the capacity of schools to identify their own needs 
and empower children to become agents of change 
in their communities through their improved WASH 
knowledge. It looks to address the bottlenecks 
that block the effectiveness and expansion of 
current WASH in Schools programmes. Additionally, 
the Three Star Approach works to encourage 
governments to create an enabling environment 
through the commitment of policy, legislation and 
financing for effective WASH in schools. 
PURPOSE 
The purpose of this evaluation is to generate 
evidence to inform replicability and scalability 
of the Three Star Approach for WASH in Schools. 
It is designed to foster learning and improvement 
of the approach, and identify priority focus areas 
for government partners, donors and UNICEF. The 
intended audience is UNICEF Pacific, education 
and health ministries in host governments (along 
with other relevant ministries), WASH programme 
implementing partners and donors. Based on the 
evaluation’s formative purpose, the objectives 
were centred on assessing progress to date and 
identifying lessons from the way in which the Three 
Star Approach has been implemented in the five 
target countries. These lessons are intended to 
inform UNICEF Pacific’s WASH agenda, as well as 
the UNICEF Pacific Multi-Country Programme. 
SCOPE 
This evaluation is concentrated on the Three Star 
Approach across its countries of implementation 
in the region, which are currently Fiji, Solomon 
Islands, Vanuatu, Kiribati, and Federated States 
of Micronesia (FSM). Fiji was the first country to 
implement the Three Star Approach for WASH in 
Schools in 2014. Kiribati was the second country 
of implementation in the Pacific in 2015. This was 
followed by the Solomon Islands in 2016, then larger 
Fiji and Vanuatu implementation in 2017. Advocacy 
work and baseline surveys began in FSM in 2018. 
This evaluation focuses on the years between 2015 
– 2018, however research stretched from 2011 to the 
present day (2021).
METHODOLOGY 
This evaluation was centred on the principles of 
utility and realism, ensuring that the products 
are of use to UNICEF, national governments and 
WASH partners. The evaluation matrix is built around 
relevance, coherence, efficiency, effectiveness and 
sustainability. The evaluation methods included 
extensive 
secondary 
document 
review 
from 
global to local resources; primary data collection 
through key informant interviews with UNICEF, 
government, non-government organisations and 
other stakeholders in all five countries; and fieldwork 
in schools and communities of implementation, 
with interviews and transect walks with students, 
parents, teachers and school leadership in four 
countries (FSM was excluded by UNICEF due to 
status of implementation).  
The evaluation underwent some modifications 
due to the onset and ongoing nature of the 
COVID-19 pandemic, however this in no way 
compromised the integrity or quality of the 
evaluation. As a result of travel restrictions, the 
evaluation was initially delayed, and a revised 
inception report and methodology proposed in 
November 2020. In the revision, the team partnered 
with Pacific-based Talanoa Consulting. Talanoa 
and evaluation team recruited and trained highly 
experienced data collectors to conduct the fieldwork 
in their local communities. The data collectors went 
on to contribute to the analysis and development of 
the findings. 

Formative Evaluation of UNICEF Three Star Approach for WASH in Schools in the Pacific
8
Final Report
KEY FINDINGS 
RELEVANCE
The objectives of the Three Star Approach for 
WASH in Schools are aligned with and respond 
to most of the changing policies and priorities 
at a global level, specifically in relation to the 
Sustainable Development Goals and UNICEF’s Global 
WASH Strategy.  A critical weakness is the lack of 
detail on resilience. Strong government buy-in to the 
approach, as evidenced in evaluation countries, is 
testament to the importance and relevance of taking 
a demand-driven approach. Whilst the rights-based 
element is present and progress is being made, a 
strong inclusion focus regarding disability is not clear. 
The primary challenge with programme relevance 
is to ensure that alignment is sufficiently 
detailed. The prime indicators of this lack of detail 
are seen in the regional- and country-level Theories 
of Change and their accompanying programme plans 
and results frameworks. A gap exists within these 
documents between the intermediate outcomes 
and the assumptions, risks and mitigating strategies. 
Additionally, they lack localised nuance which limits 
their capacity to act as a foundation for plans that 
promote and support effective, inclusive and 
sustainable change.
COHERENCE 
There are important examples of governments 
institutionalising WASH in schools in line with 
the Three Star Approach which is a significant 
achievement. Generally, this is tied into strong 
buy-in from different ministries. This includes some 
governments requesting roll-out nationwide, a key 
opportunity to improve WASH for thousands of 
children. Communities and schools broadly do not 
have name recognition of the Three Star Approach, 
and whilst they are eager to improve WASH 
standards, they do not have the financial capacity to 
do so. 
Development partners and other actors in the 
WASH sector have a general understanding of 
the Three Star Approach and mostly work in line 
with it. Strategic, capacity-informed partnerships 
have not been witnessed, with international non-
government organisations and other stakeholders 
in the region used more as implementing bodies. 
Questions around ‘why’, ‘who’, and ‘how’ seem to 
be rarely considered when working with partners. 
EFFICIENCY
Whilst resources for the WASH in Schools 
programme have been adequate for the initial 
phase of the programme, there are serious 
challenges to the quantity, level, quality and 
timeliness of resourcing, implementation, and 
management of activities to ensure that gains can 
be sustained and built on.
Systemic weaknesses due to limited capacities 
and supply and resource chains seriously impact 
the programme and both weaken and damage 
the areas of strength in approach and buy-in from 
government, schools and communities.  Addressing 
these weaknesses starts with the theoretical 
underpinning 
of 
the 
programme 
at 
regional 
and country levels. There is a clear challenge of 
budgeting for operations and maintenance (O&M), 
with a need to embed financing of school facilities 
and infrastructure into the cost of improvements for 
schools. Systemic and structural challenges need 
to be considered in programme planning with due 
attention paid to threats and challenges to efficiency.
EFFECTIVENESS 
There is clear evidence that pilot schools have 
experienced improvements in their star ratings, 
reflecting an improvement in WASH behaviours, 
and this has also been seen within gender-related 
WASH outcomes. Additionally, there has been 
significant policy reform and improvements in the 
enabling environment that bolster WASH in schools. 
The lack of WASH infrastructure at both school and 
community level however is a major constraint to 
further improvement.
There has been little progress responding to 
the unique needs of children with disability, 
due to many stakeholders holding a simplistic view 
of disability - guidance notes on the Three Star 
Approach reflect this (e.g., exclusively referring to 
people in wheelchairs). Monitoring and reporting 
across the Three Star Approach are not adequate, 
which hinders data-informed decision making and 
building intra-regional learning on what works in the 
Pacific context. 
SUSTAINABILITY 
The Three Star Approach for WASH in Schools 
in the Pacific contains sustainable elements, 
however a more targeted strategy is required 
in order to ensure that gains do not revert 
back, particularly considering the pace of roll-
out. Components that do reflect sustainability 
are the development of ‘change makers’ in host 
governments, progress within advocacy for improved 
menstrual hygiene management (MHM) and the 
simplicity inherent in the design itself. One concern 
for sustainability is around the lack of detailed 
strategy for wider roll-out, particularly in Vanuatu 
and Kiribati, as vast amounts of finances, technical 
capacity and human resources will be needed to 
make the implementation a success.  
Challenges are caused primarily by supply-side 
constraints, as communities, students and schools 
are seen as largely incapable of self-advocating 
effectively to improve WASH infrastructure. There 
are some good examples of U Report, UNICEF’s 
social messaging and data collection tool, being 

Formative Evaluation of UNICEF Three Star Approach for WASH in Schools in the Pacific
9
Final Report
used to mobilise community ‘voice’, and this could 
be strengthened further along with other community 
reporting mechanisms. Vulnerable children, parents 
and their communities with limited resources often 
prioritise other needs. Whilst the approach is robust 
and well-situated, further thinking is required to build 
sustainability to ensure its ongoing impact. 
RECOMMENDATIONS 
Construct practical and robust Theories of Change 
in which assumptions, context and partnerships 
are well-grounded. 
This evaluation recommends that new Theories 
of Change should be developed that reflect best 
practice and are based on WASH Bottleneck 
Analyses conducted at both regional and country 
levels. Specific focus should be paid to programme 
risks and assumptions that are then tested in an 
iterative manner and updated as necessary.  
Develop 
sufficiently 
detailed 
and 
relevant 
programme 
indicators 
and 
ensure 
timely 
monitoring and reporting against them. 
These should be derived from and explicitly linked to 
the Theories of Change. Increasing the requirements 
for formal internal monitoring and reporting in a 
consistent manner across the Pacific will improve 
data-informed programming and build a greater 
evidence body on the Three Star Approach for 
implementing Pacific Island countries and other 
stakeholders. 
Build research base and develop a UNICEF-
specific approach to the ‘scale up’ process of the 
Three Star Approach. 
This recommendation is critical for all programming 
but is particularly pertinent for Vanuatu and Kiribati 
(as they aim for national roll-out). This evaluation 
recommends 
that 
UNICEF 
robust 
outcome 
harvesting approaches to build an understanding of 
what works in scale up the Three Star Approach in the 
Pacific and where possible advocate for larger pilots 
and more rigorous testing for further refinement of 
tools and strategies.
Centre the importance of disability as a key 
priority and continue progress being made on 
gender-related WASH.  
Develop training for Three Star Approach stakeholders 
on the diversity of disability and accommodations 
and adjustments that can (and should) be made to 
further support inclusion. Continue advocacy efforts 
for improvements to gender-related standards and 
MHM education and infrastructure. Consider further 
research into options for the provision of MHM 
supplies, including school budgetary requirements 
and culturally appropriate sustainable alternatives. 
Share good practice on O&M and consider 
mandatory 
requirements 
for 
them 
to 
be 
embedded in school management. 
Continue to amalgamate contextualised examples 
of strong O&M in practice and support the 
development of alternative approaches to O&M 
during the design phase, including consideration for 
more expensive facilities that may have lower O&M 
costs in the longer term. Continue to advocate to 
government partners for either i) the provision of 
budgetary support for O&M or ii) if not possible then 
provide increased trainings for school management 
committees on how to budget for O&M. 
Build local ownership and sustainability through 
maximising the voice of rights holders. 
Build recognition and usage of UNICEF’s social 
messaging and data collection tool U-Report and 
develop analogue ways of collecting and responding 
to feedback from children and young people. Utilise 
teachers, parent teacher associations and other 
school community-based groups to push initiatives 
and collect and respond to their feedback on the 
implementation of the Three Star Approach. 

Formative Evaluation of UNICEF Three Star Approach for WASH in Schools in the Pacific
10
Final Report
1. INTRODUCTION
This is the final evaluation report for the 
formative, theory-based evaluation of the Three 
Star Approach for Water, Sanitation and Hygiene 
(WASH) in Schools in the Pacific region. The 
Three Star Approach was launched in 2013 with 
the publication of a Field Guide to its application 
(UNICEF & GIZ, 2013). The approach aims to address 
bottlenecks that obstruct the effectiveness and 
expansion of WASH in Schools programmes in 
particular countries, so that all schools can meet the 
applicable national WASH standards. In the Pacific, 
UNICEF, with its implementing partners, has rolled 
out the approach in Fiji, Solomon Islands, Vanuatu, 
Kiribati and Federated States of Micronesia (FSM). It 
is designed to be “simple, scalable and sustainable” 
and can be tailored for implementation in different 
contexts to advance the effectiveness of hygiene 
behaviour change programmes (UNICEF & GIZ, 
2013).
This final evaluation report sets out the evaluation 
context, purpose, scope, methodology, findings, 
conclusions and recommendations. 
1.1 Context 
1.1.1 Global and Regional Context
Five years into the Sustainable Development 
Goals (SDGs) and the world is not on track 
to achieve WASH-related targets 6.1 (drinking 
water) and 6.2 (sanitation and hygiene) (WHO, 
2021). This situation is reflected in the Pacific, as the 
current rate of progress will be too slow to achieve 
the targets by 2030 (World Health Organisation and 
UNICEF, 2021c). 43% of the Pacific population lack 
access to basic water services and large disparities 
exist within the region (World Health Organisation 
and UNICEF, 2021b). For example, 90% of Tonga’s 
population has access to basic or safe water 
services in comparison to only 45% of Papua New 
Guinea’s population (World Health Organisation and 
UNICEF, 2021a). Inequalities within countries are 
also present, with significant distinctions between 
remote, rural and urban areas and across ethnic and 
social-economic divides (World Health Organisation 
and UNICEF, 2021c). Women, people with disabilities 
and indigenous groups are all more likely to face 
barriers to adequate WASH, presenting significant 
intersectional equity issues (WaterAid, 2016). 
Pressing threats such as natural disasters 
and increasing impacts of climate change are 
exacerbating 
pre-existing 
vulnerabilities 
in 
the region. Freshwater resources are becoming 
rarer across the Pacific (McLeod & Bruton-Adams, 
2019), and the spread of disease such as the 
COVID-19 has demonstrated the vital importance 
of robust hygiene practices (Centers for Disease 
Control and Prevention, 2020). The impact on the 
health and education of children costs Pacific 
Island countries dearly in foregone Gross Domestic 
Product (GDP) and restricts their ability to achieve 
the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) (World 
Health Organisation, 2015). A range of challenges 
are present in Pacific Island countries in relation to 
improving WASH in schools, including geography, 
restricted government capacity and insufficient 
infrastructure as is further explored in Section 1.1.2 
(Love et al., 2020). 
UNICEF supports governments in accordance 
with its mandate to advocate for the protection 
of children’s rights. To strengthen WASH for 
children, schools are a logical entry point. WASH in 
Schools is directly linked into the SDGs, specifically 
Targets 4.a, 6.1 and 6.2. Children spend a significant 
portion of their day at school, where WASH services 
can impact student health, learning and dignity. 
Therefore, UNICEF’s support has a strong focus 
on strengthening WASH in schools. The Three 
Star Approach for WASH in Schools has been 
developed to address context-specific challenges 
and bottlenecks to strengthening WASH in schools, 
and also empower children to be agents of change 
in their homes and communities. The report further 
details the framework of the approach Section 1.2.  
The COVID-19 pandemic has severely impacted 
the Pacific, as with the rest of the world. On the 
11th of March 2020, the World Health Organisation 
(WHO) declared a global pandemic due to the SARS-
CoV-2 respiratory illness (COVID-19). At the time 
of writing, 4.5 million people have died globally as 
a result. Throughout 2020, thanks to its relative 
geographic isolation, the Pacific Islands remained 
relatively unscathed through a series of strict national 
lockdowns and major travel restrictions (Pryke, 
2021). This has come at significant economic cost 
to Pacific Island countries, with tourism and exports 
suffering greatly. 
The COVID-19 context in the Pacific is changing 
rapidly at the time of this report (August 2021). 
Towards the end of 2020, Vanuatu declared its first 
case which resulted in the main island going into 
lockdown (The Pacific Community, 2021). In March 
2021, Papua New Guinea reported a significant 
surge in cases. In May 2021, a growing cluster of 
cases on the island of Viti Levu, Fiji (where capital 
Suva is located) pushed the Fijian Government 
to declare a lockdown (Movono, 2021). Solomon 

Formative Evaluation of UNICEF Three Star Approach for WASH in Schools in the Pacific
11
Final Report
Drink Water
• No service
• Insufﬁcient data
• Limited
• Basic
Sanitation
• No service
• Insufﬁcient data
• Limited
• Basic
Hygiene
• No service
• Insufﬁcient data
• Limited
• Basic
Drinking Water
Coverage (%)
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
Sanitation
Hygiene
Islands, Kiribati and FSM have been impacted by 
regional lockdowns through the loss of tourism 
and export trade but are yet to report a death 
from COVID-19 (The Pacific Community, 2021). 
Economists predict the pandemic-related economic 
recession will last several years and will invariably 
place a squeeze on bilateral and multilateral aid to 
the region (Brown, 2021). Public health specialists 
predict that herd immunity through vaccination could 
take several years to cover the diverse and dispersed 
Pacific population (Natalegawa & Bismonte, 2021). 
As the vaccination roll-out continues in the Pacific, 
it remains critical to bolster hygiene practices to 
prevent the spread COVID-19 (Centers for Disease 
Control and Prevention, 2020).
1.1.2 WASH Bottlenecks in Evaluation 
Countries 
Efforts to improve WASH in the Pacific face a 
range of challenges, including the geography 
of the region. The region is made up of multiple 
groups of islands and/or atolls spread across vast 
stretches of ocean.  Typically, the population is 
concentrated on one or more “core” islands, which 
usually contain the national capital and are the most 
urbanized areas, with the highest concentration of 
employment and educational opportunities (Levine, 
n.d.). This creates distinct difference between urban 
and rural populations with children growing up in 
highly contrasted environments. Land area tends to 
be very limited and space for school infrastructure is 
often limited. Many Pacific Island territories exceed 
1,000,000 square kilometres, bringing considerable 
transport hurdles. The widely dispersed nature of 
many Pacific Island countries makes the delivery 
of core government services challenging, including 
WASH. 
As evidenced in Figure 1, basic / sufficient WASH 
in Schools is far from widespread, with 43.84% 
of students in Oceania1 having no access to 
hygiene at school. Access to basic levels of drinking 
water and sanitation at school are relatively equal, 
with 48.34% and 47.07% respectively. Hygiene in 
schools is comparatively behind, with 16.97% of 
the population having basic access at school. Some 
bottlenecks / challenges to universal WASH in schools 
are listed below, however the list is not exhaustive. 
Lack of access to drinking water at schools is 
common in the Pacific region. 43.48% of schools 
report no water service (as seen in Figure 1) (UNICEF 
& WHO, 2021). Access to improved drinking water 
is higher at the household-level (57.35%), however 
the irregularity / inequity of access impacts children’s 
health due to increased likelihood of drinking 
contaminated water, which is linked to illness 
and death (UNICEF Pacific, 2017c). Children at 
schools without improved water sources are more 
likely to get their water from surface water, rivers, 
lakes, unprotected dug wells and ponds. This is a 
significant issue, as evidenced by diarrheal diseases 
being the sixth most common cause of death in 
Solomon Islands (Asian Development Bank, 2019). 
Water scarcity at school has been identified by World 
Vision as a key cause for student absenteeism (due 
to illness) as well as student dropout rates  (World 
Vision, 2021). 
Weather events and the increasing impacts of 
climate change is negatively impacting WASH 
outcomes, including in schools. Maintaining 
progress in WASH in schools is negatively impacted 
through extreme weather events resulting in 
damaged and destroyed facilities (toilets and 
Figure 1: 	 Oceania WASH in School Data (UNICEF & WHO, 2021)
	
School data - SDG regions - Oceania - 2019 - Service Levels
1	 SDG regions = Oceania is the Pacific without Australia and New Zealand, which are reported on separately.

Formative Evaluation of UNICEF Three Star Approach for WASH in Schools in the Pacific
12
Final Report
rainwater catchment facilities). Communities have 
limited resources to repair damage, which has 
significant impacts in countries like Solomon Islands 
where the majority of schools are community-built 
and maintained. The effects of climate disasters on 
fragile freshwater resources are especially critical. 
Kiribati’s capital Tarawa has limited freshwater 
resources and combining with increased climate 
variability has resulted in increased threat of water 
scarcity, putting pressure on schools’ ability to 
provide water for both drinking and handwashing 
(World Bank, 2019). Most of Vanuatu’s islands have 
little permanent freshwater, and lower-lying islands 
are dependent on groundwater, harvested rainwater 
or freshwater lenses, all likely to be disrupted by 
changing rain patterns (Future Directions, 2019). 
Access to adequate sanitation is limited due 
to insufficient infrastructure. Open defecation 
is still reported to be practiced amongst 44.79% 
of households in Solomon Islands (UNICEF & 
WHO, 2021). A recent outbreak of cholera in 2020 
on Pohnpei Island in FSM affected approximately 
3,500 people and was the result of poor wastewater 
management (Pacific Water, 2020). Significant 
disparities exist between rural and urban populations 
(Anderson et al., 2019). Handwashing stations with 
soap for regular handwashing are available in only 
26% of schools in Solomon Islands (UNICEF & WHO, 
2021). WHO has linked poor sanitation in schools 
with reduced well-being, social and economic 
development and lost educational opportunities for 
students (WHO, 2019). 
Girls face significant challenges to manage 
menstruation effectively with dignity at school, 
which contributes to absenteeism. A study 
conducted by the Burnet Institute identified pervasive 
taboo surrounding menstruation across the Pacific, 
including ongoing beliefs of it being ‘dirty’ which 
creates ongoing stigma resulting in poor hygienic 
management and feelings of humiliation from girls 
(Mohamed et al., 2017). Schools in the region can 
be inadequate to meet menstruating girls’ needs, 
including lack of toilets, safe disposal options, soap 
and water (Mohamed et al., 2017). In Fiji, girls report 
a lack of understanding of menstruation, and report 
that menstruation reduces their participation in class 
and attendance at school (Francois et al., 2017). This 
absenteeism, amongst other negative impacts of 
stigma around menstruation, poses a threat to girls’ 
educational attainment (Benshaul-Tolonen et al., 
2020). 
Supply, transport and topography are key 
elements to improving WASH in schools in the 
Pacific. Countries such as Fiji and Kiribati are made 
up of a large number of small islands and navigating 
the logistic and financial constraints to delivering 
improved WASH infrastructure cannot be ignored. 
Modes of transport, including inadequate road 
connections and the need for boats, make logistics 
difficult for critical water infrastructure across the 
region, as transporting items such as water tanks 
needed for schools can be extremely challenging. 
Access to markets and supply chains in the Pacific 
region is costly due to the geographic disparity of 
the countries and this impacts schools’ access and 
affordability of WASH infrastructure and maintenance 
(Anderson et al., 2019). 
Regional economic and governmental factors 
are linked with lack of universal safe WASH in 
schools. The Pacific region has small economies, 
as evidenced by low GDPs throughout the region 
(Worldometer, 2020). This negatively impacts on 
available finances to improve WASH infrastructure 
and embed operations & maintenance practices. 
Adequate WASH in schools relies heavily on 
government funding, policies and guidance. Funding 
allocations for WASH from central governments 
across the region have largely been inadequate (Asian 
Development Bank, 2020). The Pacific region has a 
frequent lack of (i) sector policies and regulations for 
schools to provide WASH infrastructure and (ii) clearly 
defined roles and responsibilities of government 
agencies to address WASH, including WASH in 
schools (WASH Reference Group, 2020). 
Knowledge and information around WASH acts 
as a limiting factor on quality WASH in schools. 
WASH practices and menstruation have been 
included in many Pacific Island school curriculums, yet 
teachers report feeling ill-equipped or uncomfortable 
around teaching these topics (Anderson et al., 2019). 
Widespread knowledge around the importance of 
handwashing and sanitation relating to the spread 
diseases is an ongoing gap across Pacific Island 
populations (MacDonald et al., 2017). Capacity 
constraints across all levels of governance have 
been identified by the WASH Reference Group as 
a critical challenge to overcome to improve WASH 
in the Pacific (WASH Reference Group, 2020) and 
this is further exacerbated by high staff turnover 
(Secretariat of the Pacific Regional Environment 
Programme, 2021). 
1.1.3 Country Contexts 
The Three Star Approach has been implemented by 
UNICEF in Fiji, Kiribati, Solomon Islands, Vanuatu 
and the FSM. These are the five focus countries 
for this evaluation. The most up-to-date information 
regarding the country WASH contexts are included 
in Tables 1, 2, 3, 4 and 5 (World Health Organisation 
and UNICEF, 2021c) and their Human Development 
Indexes (United Nations Development Programme, 
2020). WASH in Schools data from each target 
country is included in Figure 2.